VASUBANDHU POUSSIN PRUDEN
ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYAM
ADP
AEDTZ|
KOSA
BHASYAM
OF
VASUBANDHU
TRANSLATED INTO FRENCH BY LOUIS DE LA VALLÉE POUSSIN
ENGLISH VERSION BY LEO M. PRUDENAbhidharmakośabhāṣyam
Volume IAbhidharmakośabhāṣyam
of Vasubandhu
Volume I
Translated into French by Louis de La Vallée Poussin
English Version by Leo M. Pruden
ASIAN HUMANITIES PRESS
[An imprint of Jain Publishing Company]
Web Site - www.jainpub.comASIAN HUMANITIES PRESS
Asian Humanities Press offers to the specialist and the general reader alike the best in
new translations of major works and significant original contributions to enhance our
understanding of Asian religions, cultures and thought.
Vasubandhu.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
[Abhidharmakośabhāṣya. English]
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam / [translated] by Louis de La Vallée Poussin; English
translation by Leo M. Pruden. Berkeley, Calif.: Asian Humanities Press, 1988-
1990.
4 v.; 23 cm.
Translation of: Abhidharmakośabhāşya.
Includes bibliographies.
ISBN 0-89581-913-9 (set).
1. Vasubandhu. Abhidharmakośa. 2. Abhidharma. I. La Vallée Poussin,
Louis de, 1869-1938. II. Title.
BQ2682.E5P78 1988
294.3'824-dc19
87-71231
AACR 2 MARC
Copyright 1991 by Asian Humanities Press. All rights reserved. No part of this book may
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the written
permission of Asian Humanities Press except for brief passages quoted in a review.CONTENTS
A Brief Biography of Louis de La Vallée Poussin
Translator's Preface
The Abhidharma:
The Origins, Growth and Development
of a Literary Tradition
by Leo M. Pruden
1. Origin and Growth of Abhidharma
2. Abhidhamma as "higher dhamma"
3. Abhidhamma alone
4. Abhidhamma-kathā
5. Traditional Explanations of Abhidhamma
6. Abhidharma in the Mahavibhāṣā
7. The Abhidhamma Pitaka
8. The Mātikā
9. Mātikā and Abhidharma
10. Abhidharma in the Agamas: the Religion of the Agamas
11. The Agamas and the Nikāyas
12. Abhidharmic Tendencies in Extant Agamas:
Numerical Categories, Samyuktas, and Vibhangas
13. Sarvāstivādin Āgamas
14. Samathadeva's Commentary
15. Sarvāstivādin Abhidharma Literature
16. Origin of the Abhidharma
17. The Second Period of Early Sarvāstivādin Literature
18. The Jñanaprasthāna
19. The Vibhāṣās
20. Development of the Literature After the Vibhāṣās
21. The Abhidharma-hṛdaya
22. The Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam
23. Sanskrit Remains of the Abhidharma
XV
xxi
XXX
xxxi
xxxiii
XXXV
xxxvi
xxxvi
xxxvii
xxxviii
xxxix
xl
xli
xlii
xliii
xlv
xlvi
xlvi
xlix
li
lii
liii
liii
liv
lv24. The Sanskrit Kośabhāṣyam
25. Translations of the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam
26. Commentaries on the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam
27. The Tibetan Kośabhāṣyam
28. Translations of the Kośabhäsyam and the Vyākhyā
29. Indexes to the Kośabhasyam
Footnotes
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam of Vasubandhu
by Louis de La Vallée Poussin
Introduction
I. Bibliography of the Kofa
A. Additions to the Bibliography, by Hurbert Durt
II. The Date of Vasubandhu. The Former Vasubandhu
III. The Seven Canonical Treatises of the Abhidharma
A. The Jñanaprasthāna
B. The Prakaraṇa of Vasumitra
C. The Vijñākāya
D. The Dharmaskandha
E. The Prajñāptisastra
F. The Dhatukāya
G. The Samgitiparyaya
IV. Some Masters of the Vibhāṣā
A. Vasumitra
B. Ghosaka and the Abhidharmāmṛtaśāstra
C. Buddhadeva
D. Dharmatrāta
E. The Bhadanta Dharmatrāta
V. Some Schools of the Vibhāṣā
A. Daaṣṭānitkas and Sauträntikas
B. Vibhajyavadins
C. Yogācārins
VI. The Sariputrābhidharma
VIII. The Abhidharmasara
Footnotes
lvi
lvii
lvii
lviii
lix
lix
lxii
1
7
12
13
17
17
20
21
23
24
27
28
28
28
31
32
32
33
35
35
38
41
42
44
49General Introduction
Chapter One: The Dhātus
A. Homage to the Buddha
1. The Three Qualities of a Buddha
B. Definition of Abhidharma
1. Absolute Sense of the Word
2. Conventional Sense of the Word
C. Definition of Abhidharmakośa
D. Purpose of the Abhidharma
E. Authors of the Abhidharma
I. The Division of the Dharmas
A. The Defiled Dharmas
B. The Undefiled Dharmas
C. The Unconditioned Dharmas
1. Discussion of the Two Types of Disjunction
2. Is Disjunction Single or Multiple?
D. Conditioned Dharmas
1. Synonyms of "Conditioned"
2. Synonyms of "Defiled"
II. The Five Skandhas, the Twelve Ayatanas,
and the Eighteen Dhātus
A. Rüpa Skandha
1. Visible Matter
2. Sound
3. Taste
4. Odor
5. Tangible Things
B. The Relationship between the Five Consciousnesses
and the Five Visayas
C. Avijnaptirupa
D. The Four Primary Elements
E. The Definition of "Rūpa"
F. The Ten Ayatanas and the Ten Dhātus
G. The Vedanā, Samjñā, and Saṁskāra Skandhas
55
55
55
56
56
56
57
57
58
58
59
59
59
59
59
61
61
62
63
63
64
65
66
888
66
66
868RNN
66
67
70
72
72H. The Vijñāna Skandha and the Mana Ayatana
I. The Seven Dhātus
J. The Manodhatu and the Eighteen Dhātus
III. The Threefold Classification of the Dharmas
A. The Threefold Classification of the Dharmas
B. The Nature of the Eighteen Dhātus
C. The Definition of “Skandha,” “Ayatana,” and “Dhātu”
D. Their Provisional Existence
E. The Reason for the Threefold Classification
F. Distinctions between Vedana and Samjñā
G. The Five Skandhas and the Unconditioned Dharmas
H. The Order of the Five Skandhas
I. The Order of the Ayatanas and Dhātus,
with Reference to the Six Indriyas
IV. Some Problems Raised by the Threefold Classification
A. The Rūpa Ayatana and the Dharma Ayatana
B. Inclusion in Other Skandhas, Ayatanas, and Dhātus
C. The Eighty-four Thousand Dharmaskandhas
D. The Dimension of a Dharmaskandha
E. The Characteristics of the Skandhas and the
Threefold Classification
F. Vijñānadhātu and Ākāśadhātu
V. Classification of the Dharmas in the Eighteen Dhātus
A. Visible and Invisible Dharmas
B. Resistant and Non-Resistant Dharmas
C. Good, Bad, and Morally Neutral Dharmas
D. The Eighteen Dhatus and the Three Realms
E. Pure and Impure Dhātus
F. Vitarka and Vicāra
V
G. Vitarka, Vicara, and the Five Sense Consciousnesses
H. Discussions
1. How many Dhātus Serve as an Object?
2. How many are Non-Appropriated
to Living Beings?
XXX POP FR 8ãã
74
74
75
76
76
76
77
79
80
81
81
82
83
85
85
86
86
86
87
88
90
90
90
90
??
95
96
97
98
98I. Primary and Derived Elements
J.
Discussion
1. Can the Atoms be Accumulated?
2. How many of the Dhatus Cut or are Cut?
Burn or are Burned? Weight or are Weight?
3. How many of the Dhatus are vipāka?
Accumulations? Outflowings?
4. How many of the Dhatus are Real Substances?
5. How many of the Dhatus are Momentary?
K. Possession of a Dhatu versus a Vijñānadhātu
L. Internal and External Elements
M. Sabhāga and Tatsabhāga
N. How are the Dhatus Abandoned?
O. How many of the Dhātus are "View?"
VI. Subsidiary Discussions
A. Are Visible Things Seen by One or Two Eyes?
B. Do the Indriyas and the Visayas Touch?
C. The Dimension of the Organs and their Visayas
D. Atoms within the Organs
E. Are Atoms Sabhāga or Tatsabhāga?
F. Time and the Support of the Consciousnesses
G. Why are the Organs, and not the Object,
the Support of the Consciousness?
H. How are the Different Consciousnesses Named?
I. The Body, the Organ of Sight, Visible Things,
and the Consciousness, and their Relationship
to the Different Bhūmis
J. Which Dhātu is Discerned by Which Consciousness?
K. How many of the Dhātus are Eternal?
L. How many of the Dhatus are Indriyas?
Footnotes
99
101
102
103
105
105
106
107
108
111
113
118
118
119
122
123
123
124
125
125
126
129
130
130
131I. The Indriyas
A. Definition
Chapter Two: The Indriyas
1. Objection
B. General Explanation
II. The Twenty-two Indriyas
A. A Different Definition
B. The Organs of Sensation
1. The Saint
C. Pure and Impure Indriyas
D. Vipāka and Non-Vipāka Indriyas
Discussion: Prolonging and Shortening Life
Discussion: Jivita and Ayus
E. How Many Indriyas have Retribution
F. Their Moral Nature
G. The Indriyas in the Three Dhātus
H. Abandoning the Indriyas
I. How Many Indriyas are initially possessed
in each Dhātu?
J. How Many Indriyas perish at Death
K. Indriyas and the Stages of the Religious Life
1. The Quality of Arhat
L. Possessing the Indriyas
M. The Smallest Number of Indriyas
N. The Largest Number of Indriyas
Discussion: The Atom
III. The Mental States
A. Definition
B. The Mahābhūmikas
C. The Kusalamahābhūmikadharmas
Discussion: Praśrabdhi
Discussion: Equanimity
D. The Kleśamahābhūmikadharmas
1. A Different List
153
153
155
155
158
159
160
162
163
165
166
167
171
171
172
173
174
176
177
179
180
183
183
184
188
189
189
190
191
192
193
1942. Is a Mahābhūmika also Kleśamahābhūmika?
194
E. The Akusalamahābhūmikadharmas
195
F. The Parittakleśikadharmas
196
G. The Number of Mental States that can Arise Together 196
H. Differences between Mental States
200
1. Disrespect versus Absence of Fear
200
2. Affection versus Respect
201
3. Vitarka versus Vicāra
202
4. Pride versus Pride-Intoxication
204
I. Synonyms
205
IV. Dharmas not Associated with the Mind
A. Definition
B. Präpti and Aprāpti
C. The Time Periods
D. How is Prapti Abandoned?
E. Types of Aprāpti
F. How does Aprāpti Perish?
Discussion: Prāpti and Anuprāpti
G. Genre (Sabhāgatā)
H. The Dharma of Non-Consciousness
1. The Absorption of Non-Consciousness
I. The Absoption of Extinction
J. The Differences between the Two Absorptions
Discussion: How is a Mind produced after Absorption?
Discussion: Do the Two Absorptions exist as Real
Substantial Entities?
K. The Vital Organ
Discussion: Warmth, Consciousness, and Life
Discussion: How does Death take place?
Discussion: Premature Death
L. Characteristics of Conditioned Dharmas
1. Primary and Secondary Characteristics
2. Arising
M. Words, Phrases, and and Phonemes
1. Voice
206
206
206
212
213
215
217
217
219
221
223
225
229
230
232
233
233
235
235
238
239
247
250
251N. Other Dharmas not Associated with the Mind
V. The Six Causes
A. General Comments
B. Reason for Existence
C. Coexistent Cause
Discussion: The Sauträntikas Criticize the
Doctrine of Coexistent Causes
D. Similar Casuses
1. Definition
2. Objections
3. Similar Causes and the Path
E. Causes through Association
F. Universal Causes
G. Retributive Causes
1. Definition
2. Skandhas as Results
3. Ayatanas as Results
H. The Time Periods
I. Causes and their Results
Discussion: Disconnection
Discussion: Are Unconditional Things Real Entities?
Discussion: Is Extinction or Nirvāṇa Real?
J. The Five Results
1. Their Characteristics
2. The Time Periods
K. A Different List of Results
L. How Many Causes produce the Different Dharmas?
254
254
255
255
257
260
262
262
264
267
272
273
274
275
275
276
277
278
280
280
281
286
288
291
295
295
VI. The Four Conditions
296
A. General Comments
296
B. Equal and Immediately Antecedent Conditions
297
C. Objects as Conditions
302
D. Predominating Conditions
303
E. The Time Periods
304
F. How Many Conditions Cause the Different Dharmas? 305Discussion: The Impossibility of a Single Cause
G. The Relationship between the Primary Elements
and Derived Matter
H. The Arising of Mind and Mental States
1. The Twelve Minds and the Three Dhātus
2. The Twenty Minds and the Three Dhātus
3. Acts of Attention
I. The Number of Mental States Acquired in
the Twelve Minds
Footnotes
306
308
310
310
314
323
323
326A Brief Biography of Louis de La Vallée Poussin
Louis de La Vallée Poussin, born in Liége on the 1st of January, 1869, was of
French origin through his father's side of the family. His grandfather, Étienne-
Pierre-Rémy de La Vallée Poussin, took part in the last Napoleonic campaigns
and in 1832 was one of a group of French officers charged, under the direction of
Marshall Girard, with the organization of the Belgian army at the request of King
Leopold I. He married Marie-Thérèse de Cauwer in Namur, with whom he had
four sons. The second, Gustave, was born in La Rochelle in 1829 and died in Paris
in 1910; he married Pauline de Monge de Franeau, who was born in Liége in
1845. The eldest of the four children born of this marriage was Louis de La Vallée
Poussin.
Orphaned from his mother at the age of 7, Louis, as well as his two brothers
and his sister, were raised in Liége by his maternal grandparents. He was an
outstanding student at the College Saint-Servain, in Liége, and in 1884 he entered
the University of Liége where, four years later, he received the docteur en
philosophie et lettres. His reading of Charles Lyall's Asiatic Studies awakened in
him a desire to pursue Oriental studies, and it was at Louvain, under the direction
of Charles de Harlez and Philippe Colinet, that he learned the elements of
Sanskrit, Pali, and Avestan. He then went to Paris where he enrolled, from 1890
to 1893, at the Sorbonne and in the courses of Sylvain Lévi at the École pratique
des Hautes-Études.
In 1892 he published a timid essay, a translation of Buddhist tales, in
collaboration with Godefroy de Blonay. But as early as this same year there
appeared in Muséon an academic study, Le Bodhicaryāvatāra de Çāntideva, a first
indication of his tendency to research "the Saint and Sanctity in Buddhism" which
marks all of his work; a first stage in this enormous task of investigating this
theme pursued throughout the various Buddhist schools and the canons of
scriptures.
In 1893-1894, he studied Buddhist Sanskrit and Sanskrit poetical meter "at
the feet" of the great Orientalist H. Kern.
At the beginning of his activities as a Sanskrist, Louis de La Vallée Poussin was
attracted by the curious and still unexplored doctrines of Tantrism. His Note sur le
Pañcakrama (1894) as well as his edition of this text (1896), “an authoritative
summary of the nihilistic doctrines of Nagarjuna" and Une pratique des Tantras
(1897) prepared the way for his first great work which is already the work of a
master: Bouddhisme, Études et Matériaux, published by the Royal Academy ofxvi
A Brief Biography of Louis de La Vallée Poussin
Belgium (1898). This is a capital work which studies, with the method of an
accomplished scholar, the relationship between Indian asceticism and the left-
handed rituals. In spite of the tact and finesse with which he treated this topic, the
subject let loose the righteous indignation of the great Rapson who, in a long
review article, protested with severity against this exposure of "the Tantric
infection". This English scholar, imbued with the theories current in his period-
theories which have not yet completely disappeared-would consider that
Buddhism is only a pure philosophic system, whose only true literature are the
words of the Buddha, and he openly manifested his dislike for such a subject of
study as Tantrism. His criticism must have been cruelly felt by the young scholar
since he did not hesitate to justify himself publically. He showed in fact, in his
Tantras, that for Rapson Buddhism is only the doctrine preached by Śakyamuni,
whereas for him Buddhism is the general state of beliefs which have condensed
around the name of the Buddha. The Tantras are the inheritors of all the forms of
Indian religions and their study is necessary to that which de La Vallée Poussin
called Buddhism.
One would have thought that after this lively reaction against formalism, his
works on the manifestations of popular Buddhism would have continued to
occupy a large place in the activity of the young master, but he did nothing more
with respect to Tantrism, with the exception of a study published in 1901, The
Four Classes of Buddhist Tantras, the documents of this type, a new and living
sphere of study, no longer formed the object of his publications. Following upon
this excursion into the Indian jungle if badly viewed by traditionalist scholars,
Louis de La Vallée Poussin returned to monastic Buddhism, never to leave it.
It was then, in full possession of Tibetan, he did not hesitate-at more than
forty years of age-to also learn Chinese. He continued the editing of enormous
scholastic texts: Prajñākāramati, Śāntideva's commentary on the Bodhicaryavatāra
(1901–1905, 605 pages) of which he published the annotated translation; an
edition of the Tibetan translation of the Madhyamakāvatāra of Candrakirti
(1907-1912, 427 pages); and the Mūlamādhyamakakārikā of Nāgārjuna with the
commentary of Candrakirti (1903-1913, 658 pages). Taking refuge in Cambridge
during the war of 1914, he edited the Mahāniddesa (in collaboration with E. J.
Thomas) and the third chapter of the Abhidharmakośa of Vasubandhu
(1914-1918, 368 pages).
In mentioning these voluminous editions which come to a total of hundreds of
pages, we do not pretend to evaluate his work in terms of its weight. But these
figures are eloquent for anyone who has edited with the same scruples as has
Louis de La Vallée Poussin, if not with the same mastery, only several pages ofA Brief Biography of Louis de La Vallée Poussin xvii
Sanskrit text for which one must always have recourse to the Tibetan and Chinese
versions. These enormous works would suffise to fill several lives and yet how
much research has sprung out of his work, and how much has been enriched by it!
Such are the over fifty articles in Hastings' Dictionary of Religion and Ethics, his
studies on the doctrine of Karman (La négation de l'âme et la doctrine de l'Acte,
1902), on the concatenation of the Twelve Causes (La theorie des Douze Causes,
1913), on the Three Bodies (The three bodies of a Buddha, 1906; Note sur les
Corps du Buddha, 1913); and his constructions of the theory of Nirvāṇa. All of the
presentations of dogma that he developed, and by the approval that they
received as well as by the reactions that they generated, have brought about the
progress of Buddhist exegetical and philosophical studies up to the point where
we find it today, that is, based on texts scrupulously established and patiently
collated.
In the course of his long career filled with immense labor, the curiosity of
Louis de La Vallée Pousin was brought to bear on all of the forms of Buddhism
and on the principal aspects of Indian civilization, but the subject to which he
returned most spontaneously in conversation and in his writings was Buddhist
philosophy, or more precisely Buddhist scholasticism. Whereas Western phi-
losophy is always more or less systematic, Indian scholasticism strives less to
combine and to construct, than to set up an evaluation of the mind and of the
universe by defining, enumerating, and classifying concepts. Louis de La Vallée
Poussin found in this a field of study conforming to his spontaneous and to his
well considered aspirations, for never was there a mind less systematic. This
characteristic manifested itself not only in his choice of subjects but in his research
and in the manner in which he presented the results of this research. One of his
most important works, Bouddhisme, has the subtitle Opinions sur l'histoire de la
dogmatique (“Opinions on the History of Dogma”). He recalls in the Introduction
(p. xii) that, according to the Buddha, the ignorant "recognize only a part of things
and imprudently judge the whole". He always applied all of his efforts in seeing
the different aspects of doctrines. For him, Buddhist ethics is not a collection of
principles which direct the conduct of humans, but adapts them to the social
milieu and evolve in parallel fashion to this milieu. He presents it rather as a
jurisprudence, as a selection of prohibitions.
One of the most useful books that he wrote, L'Inde au temps des Mauryas, is
above all a presentation of contradictory thesis in which modern erudition appears
to be swallowed up: he however always maintains an equilibrium, a lucidity, an
admirable patience, and facts which in another author would appear fastidious,
taking under his pen taking on color, relief, and the intensity of life. "A book to bexviii A Brief Biography of Louis de La Vallée Poussin
written"" one has said of this work. In fact, no literary anxiety if not that of clarity
appeared in this work; precise facts, indisputable documents and their interpreta-
tion are also extricated from any artificial bonds that the author judged
detrimental to the pure instruments of his work.
The desire to see the opposite aspects of problems never left him. One day he
said to one of us who complimented him on one of his books, "There are some
footnotes at the bottom of the pages which contradict the text . . .” He had us
understand by this willfully paradoxical remark that he had chosen to place in this
work opposing points of view, one after the other. From this we can see that he
had a sometimes surprising method of expressing his ideas: he would advance in
zigzags. He proceeded often through juxtaposed remarks. His style never brought
about a change in the cohesion or in the unity of his thought. He did not seek to
create any illusion either for the reader or for himself. Probity and sincerity were
his masterful qualities, and he had a small bit of affectation to his sincerity.
But no one was less dogmatic than this specialist in dogmas. Very frequently at
our pleasure, he would avoid anything that in a conversation, be it broached and
directed by the speaker in a scientific direction, would appear to be tinged with
pedantry, anything that would lead one to believe that he took himself seriously.
The same worry is found in the numerous letters addressed to one of us where the
serious answer solicited is bracketed with sudden changes having an irresistible
comic effect. This attitude on several occasions led one to suppose that his
religious convictions led him to mistake the various thesis that he presented. Was
it not rather, himself whom he judged unworthy of attention? Better than
elsewhere his character appeared in the numerous and valuable review articles
which marked his work on Buddhism that appeared during almost a half century.
Reviews, criticisms, controversies, are proposed and maintained in a fine,
perceptive, and infinitely courteous manner. The well-chosen word takes the place
of a long phrase; it is often unforeseen if not unforeseeable, but always precise.
One might ask if his aversion with respect to a systematic spirit did not come
from that which, being ultimately impassioned, he mistrusted himself more than
any other of the bonds of this passion. In politics and in religion, as in his
relationship with his friends and those close to him, he was also so distant that
one could
say that he was the
very soul of indifference and of lukewarmness. His
sensibility explains the role that the criticism of his peers played in his academic
career. And those that were acquainted with him know that the clash of ideas
which followed the war of 1914 echoed sadly in his conscious and doubtlessly
contributed to the ruin of his health by causing him to lose any peace he may have
enjoyed.A Brief Biography of Louis de La Vallée Poussin xix
After many years we saw him decline physically at a slow but unchanging
pace; he became more and more thin and frail. And yet up to his last moments he
maintained a fine and lucid mind and his scientific activity. He concluded the
publication of two monumental works of scholarship: the Siddhi of Hsüan-tsang,
and the Abhidharmakośa of Vasubandhu; he supervised the editing of the
Mélanges chinois et bouddhiques to which he abundantly contributed; our
Bibliographie bouddhique which he supported and sustained from its beginnings
was always the object of his attentions. In the summer of 1936, he explained to
one of us, in order to gain us over to his project, his last academic project the
enormity of which did not alarm him: to establish an index of Buddhism which
would be at one and the same time both literary and archaeological. One
year later, in Switzerland, he pointed out with serenity to this same visitor
that he had no more than a few weeks to live. Six months later, he would have
reached the age of 69.
At the present, our duty is to contribute to the better knowledge and to the
utilization of his work. As soon as circumstances permit, we shall publish in the
Bibliographie bouddhique his analytic bibliography which is now finally ready.
Our Master himself had the aid of one of us in completing it, but on the condition
that he not see it published.
Marcelle Lalou
Jean PrzyluskiTRANSLATOR'S PREFACE
he Sanskrit word "Abhidharma" means the systematic philosophy
of Buddhism. From the time of the Buddha onward, the Buddha's
disciples, and many later generations of his followers studied, analyzed,
and re-classified the teachings of the Buddha, and in the process created
a unique field of study which has come to be known as the Abhidharma. The
development of Buddhist philosophy, the Abhidharma-has continued to be
developed up to the present day, especially within the field of Tibetan Buddhism.
The early part of this Abhidharma literature,-dating from the death of the
Buddha to approximately the 5th century A.D.—is today preserved in Chinese
translations, translations carried out largely by Hsuan-tsang in the mid-7th century;
and the bulk of the later Abhidharma literature-dating from the 5th to the 12th
century-is largely preserved in Tibetan translation. Only a small but important
portion of this literature has been preserved in its original Sanskrit: Vasubandhu's
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam, and its commentary, Yasomitra's Vyākhyā. The student
of the Abhidharma is therefore obliged to develop a reading ability in Buddhist
Chinese, Tibetan, and of course, Sanskrit and Pali.
A significant Abhidhamma literature exists in the Pali language, a very close
dialect of Sanskrit (the word "Abhidharma" is Sanskrit, the word “Abhidhamma" is
Pali). In this Pali tradition of Theravada Buddhism (the predominant form of
Buddhism in Ceylon, Burma, Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia), the Abhidhamma
forms one of the Baskets (Pali: Pitaka) of canonical Buddhist scriptures, and so
assumes the role of canonical authority. Even though the Pali Canon, the Tipitaka,
was closed at the Third Council of the Theravadins held in approximately 237 B.C.,
Abhidhamma works continued to be composed after this date, although with less
frequency. Theravadin scholar-monks continued to study the Abhidhamma, and
this tradition gave rise to a subcommentarial literature composed in both Pali and
the regional languages of South and Southeast Asia (Singhalese, Burmese, Thai,
etc.). Much of this later, post-canonical Pali Abhidhamma literature remains
unpublished, and almost all of it remains untranslated into any Western language. ¹
1
So too only a small portion of the Sanskrit language Abhidharma literature
exists in English translation, although at the present time slightly more exists in
French.
Although English language materials for the study of the Abhidharma
literature are quite limited, especially when viewed in comparison with the bulk
of the extant literature of this tradition, there are some excellent books which may
be read with profit by the beginning student of Buddhist philosophy.
-xxii
Translator's Preface
The student would do well to read the excellent essay by Chogyam Trungpa
Rimpoche, Glimpses of the Abhidharma (Boulder, Prajna Press, 1978) which
distills the essential message of Buddhist scholasticism and demonstrates the
importance of the Abhidharma to the sadhaka of the still vital Tibetan Buddhist
tradition.
Another excellent work of great benefit to the student of Abhidharma is Prof.
Herbert V. Guenther's Psychology and Philosophy in the Abhidharma (New Delhi,
Motilal Banarsidass, Ist edition, 1970, and many subsequent editions) which gives
the author's presentation and analysis of the content of both the Northern or
Sanskrit Abhidharma tradition with that of its Southern or Pali cousin.
It may not be out of place here to say a few words, by way of a nidāna, concerning
my involvement with the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam.
In the years 1964 to 1966 I was enrolled in Tokyo University, in the Department
of Indian and Buddhist Studies, where I studied the text of Gyönen's Risshū-kōyō²
under the direction of Prof. Akira Hirakawa. After I had finished my studies on this
text, I asked Prof. Hirakawa what he would recommend I study next. He asked me if
I wanted to continue with Vinaya studies, Prof. Hirakawa's specialty,-but I
replied that I should like to study another field of Buddhism. Prof. Hirakawa then
recommended that I begin the study of Buddhist philosophy in the traditional
manner, that is, with the study of Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam (in
Japanese, the Kusharon). ³ I replied that this would be a fine idea, and so in token of
my new direction in study, Prof. Hirakawa gave me a set of books dealing with the
philosophy of the Kusharon, the ten volume set, Kusharon-kōgi (“Lectures on the
Kusharon"), a work which is the compilation of a series of 238 lectures given on the
Kusharon by one Rev. Hōrei Sakurai (1861–1923). Rev. Sakurai was a cleric of the
Higashi Honganji Tradition of Jodo Shin Buddhism, and was the incumbent
(jūshoku) of the Hakutōji temple, Fukuoka Prefecture, Kyushu.4 Rev. Sakurai gave
these lectures in Kyushu in the last decade of the 19th century, and they were
published in 1898 (Meiji 31) by the Shisōkan, Kyoto: the set of Sakurai's lectures
that Prof. Hirakawa gave me had in turn been given to him by his teacher, Prof.
Shōson Miyamoto (1893-1984) and so contained the annotation of both of these
scholars.
Sakurai's book is a very useful scholarly tool, since his lectures were based on the
text of the Kusharon (in Hsuan-tsang's Chinese translation) and the Chinese
commentaries on this work by Fa-pao and P'u-kuang, two masters who had workedTranslator's Preface xxiii
directly with Hsüan-tsang. I began reading Sakurai's work in June of 1966 and
completed it several months later. My reading of Sakurai's work taught me two
things: 1) the commentaries of Fa-pao and P'u-kuang are both valuable sources of
information about the contents of the Kusharon as seen through the eyes of two
eminent Chinese scholar-monks, since they record the oral teaching of Hsüan-tsang
concerning many of the philosophical positions presented in the Kusharon; but 2)
for a thorough understanding of the Kusharon, it would be desirable, and in many
places necessary to read the text of this work in its original language, Sanskrit.
At approximately this same time (the middle of 1966) a xerox copy of the
Romanized Sanskrit text of the First Chapter (the Dhatunirdeśa) of the
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam began to circulate privately among the students in the
Department of Indian and Buddhist Studies at Tokyo University. I was told that this
copy was typed out from photographs secretely taken of a manuscript copy of the
Abhidharmakośabhasyam discovered by Rahula Samkṛtyāyana at the Sa-lu
Monastery in Tibet in May of 1934. The photographs were taken of the manuscript
which was then kept at the K. P. Jayaswal Research Institute, Patna; the desire of the
Japanese to see the original text of the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam was so great, and
the publication of this text had been delayed so long, that “drastic means" were
called for, and, I was later told, a Japanese nun had secretely taken pictures of the
manuscript and brought them back to Japan. In any case, I now had the First
Chapter of the Sanskrit text of the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam in my hands, and,
upon my return to the United States, I began to study the text in earnest.
To aid my study and my subsequent teaching, I translated portions of Louis de
La Vallée Poussin's French translation of the Abhidharmakośabhasyam (Brussels,
Institute Belge des Hautes Études Chinoises, 1923 - 1931; reprint edition, 1971)
into English. I began with the Ninth Chapter (the Pudgala-pratiședha) and not
with the First Chapter, holding to the Asian superstition that one will never finish
a work if one begins on its first page; I also Romanized the Sanskrit text of the
Ninth Chapter, by now available in Prof. P. Prahdhan's first edition (Patna, K. P.
Jayaswal Research Institute, 1967), and for two years I taught this Chapter as part
of a Seminar in Reading Buddhist Texts at Brown University (Providence, Rhode
Island).6 Reading and teaching this Chapter reinforced my earlier thought,
namely that the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam can best be understood from its
Sanskrit original.
I then translated the First Chapter from the French of de La Vallée Poussin,
and compared it with the original Sanskrit of Pradhan, and so began my work on
a full translation from the French of de La Vallée Poussin, collated with the
Sanskrit original of the text.xxiv
Translator's Preface
De La Vallée Poussin's annotation is based on three major sources. First, the
greater part of his commentary, both in his footnotes and frequently in the body
of the text itself, is based on the commentaries of Fa-pao and P'u-kuang: these
Chinese masters are responsible for determining the filiation of many of the
philosophical positions, objections, and.replies ("The Vaibhāṣikas maintain", "The
Sautrāntikas object", etc) in the text. Likewise Fa-pao and P'u-kuang were
responsible for supplying most of the references to passages quoted from the
Agamas, the Jñanaprasthāna (and its related pādaśāstras, the Prakaraṇapāda, the
Vijñānakāya, etc.), the Vibhāṣā, and the works of Samghabhadra. In their
commentaries, Fa-pao and P'u-kuang also traced the development of many of the
Abhidharmakośabhasyam's ideas into later Chinese Mahāyāna thought.
In 1869 (Meiji 2), the eminent Japanese scholar-monk, Kyokuga Saeki
(1828-1891) published his edition of the Kusharon, the so-called Kandō edition
of the Kusharon, or simply, the Kandō-bon Kusharon.7 Saeki's edition is rich with
annotation placed at the top (or “crown", kan-) of the page of text. In his
Kandō-bon edition of the Kusharon, Saeki gives all of the various references first
found by Fa-pao and P’u-kuang: he gives the name of the source, its volume and
page number, and in the marginal notes to the text, Saeki also gives the filiation of
thought ("The Vaibhāṣikas maintain", etc., as above) first traced out by Fa-pao and
P'u-kuang.
Louis de La Vallée Poussin translated the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam from the
Sanskrit as preserved by Yaśomitra, and from the Chinese of the Kandō-bon
edition of the Kusharon. In fact, almost all of de La Vallée Poussin's references to
the Vibhāṣā and his marking of the filiation of the thought in the body of the text,
are taken directly from the work of Saeki. In those instances where the attribution
of a philosophical position is not in the body of the Sanskrit text, but is based on
de La Vallée Poussin's reading of Saeki, I have kept the attribution, but have
enclosed it in [square brackets] in the body of the translation. And when in his
footnotes de La Vallée Poussin refers to "the Japanese editor", he is refering to
Kyokuga Saeki.
In all instances, I have kept de La Vallée Poussin's footnotes, since they are a
valuable guide to the philosophy of the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam, and to its roots
in earlier literature; my only addition to his work is that I have searched out the
Taishō Canon references to these works, since de La Vallée Poussin did not have
the Taishō Canon at his disposal when he was working on the Abhidharma-
kośabhāṣyam. (He did however have the Taishō Canon at his disposal when he
was working on the Vijñapti-mātratā-siddhi of Hsuan-tsang, cf. his Le Siddhi de
Hiuan-tsang). In the few instances where I was unable to find the Taishō CanonTranslator's Preface
XXV
references, I have kept the annotation as given by de La Vallée Poussin.
Also in many places in the text de La Vallée Poussin added a great deal of
explanatory material: this I have also kept, since without it many important
passages in the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam would remain unintelligible. Also, since
de La Vallée Poussin did not have a Sanskrit copy of the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam
as an integral text, but only as it was quoted in the body of Yasomitra's Vyākhyā,
he grouped many of the padas of the Kārikās into single Kārikās (as did Hsüan-
tsang). The Sanskrit manuscript of the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam however divides
various Karikās into five or six different padas: I have divided these Kärikäs into
their various padas to match the structure of the Sanskrit original.
In fact, it was my original intention to publish this work with the English
translation on the right facing page, and the Romanized Sanskrit on the left.
facing page, and much work by me and my assistant, the Bangladeshi Bhikkhu,
Ven. Lokananda, went into preparing the text in this manner. Unfortunately due
to the high cost of publishing this work, this format had to be abandoned, but
I hope that some day the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam may be reissued in this
format.
A second concern of de La Vallée Poussin was to give the original Sanskrit of
the Kārikās and to reconstruct those passages in the Bhāṣyam which were of
special importance or difficulty: since the Sanskrit of the Abhidharmakośa-
bhasyam is now widely available, I have omitted all of these footnotes with the
mention that in almost all cases, de La Vallée Poussin was correct in his
reconstructions!
***
A third source for de La Vallee Poussin's references was this great Belgian
scholar's encyclopediac knowledge of Indian Buddhist literature: these footnotes
have of course also been kept, and it is they that stand as perhaps our greatest
legacy from Louis de La Vallée Poussin.
Back in the United States, one day I happened to meet an old friend, the Rev.
Hōryū Itō (1911-1985), who was at that time and for many years previous the
Rimban of the Higashi Honganji Betsuin in Los Angeles. He asked me what I
was studying, and I told him of my work on the Kusharon. He asked me what
commentaries I was using, and I told him about the work of Hōrei Sakurai.
Rimban Itō asked me how this work was regarded in Japan, and I told him of the
praise that it had received from both Prof. Miyamoto and Prof. Hirakawa, and
that a copy of this work was used by them as a symbol of the traditional study ofxxvi Translator's Preface
was my
the Kusharon. Rimban Itō's eyes clouded over, and he said softly, “Hōrei Sakurai
father." From that time on Rimban Itō maintained a close interest in my
work on the Kusharon, and it is sad that he did not live to see the completion of
this work, a work which owes its very inception to the work of Hōrei Sakurai.
At this point I should like to thank a number of persons who contributed
much to the completion of this work: first, Mrs Sara Webb, who has helped me
much in translating the finer points of de La Vallée Poussin's French; her aid has
been and remains invaluable. I should also like to thank Mr Jean-Louis d'Heilly,
who typed much of the translation of the Abhidharmakośabhāsyam into the
computer of the University of Oriental Studies, who rendered me great assistence
in making sure that the text was understandable, and who successfully urged me
to translate into English the vast bulk of the technical Sanskrit terms kept by de
La Vallée Poussin in the body of his text.
I should also like to express my gratitude to my parents, Olivia Maude
(Arwedson) and Dr. L. Leo Pruden for their continued support of my studies both
in America and in Japan: it is a source of regret that neither of them lived to see
the completion of this work.
This work must be dedicated however to the small but eminent band of
Japanese scholars whose work on the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam has kept alive the
flame of traditional Buddhist scholarship in the 20th century, scholars such as
Prof. Akira Hirakawa and Prof. Ken Sakurabe. May the merit of this publication
accrue to their health and long life.
Los Angeles
June 1986
Leo M. PrudenTranslator's Preface xxvii
1. For example, Prof. Kōgen Mizuno lists some four major and sixteen minor Pali language
commentaries to the Abhidhammatthasangaha, a work composed in tenth century Ceylon by the
Elder Anuruddha; eighteen of these commentaries were composed in Burma. See Kōgen Mizuno,
general editor, and U. Vepunla and Tadashi Toda, translators, Abidammattasangaha: Nampō-
bukkyō tetsugaku kyōgi gaisetsu, p. 16, published by the Abidammattasangahakankōkai, 1980,
privately printed. See also Mrs. Mabel Bode (=Mabel Haynes Bode), The Pali Literature of
Burma, London, Royal Asiatic Society, 1909.
2. Our work on the Risshū-kōyō was published in the Kokuyaku-issaikyō: Wakan-senjutsu-bu, vol.
97, p. 1-72, Tokyo, Daitō-shuppan-sha, 1970.
3. According to an account preserved in the 1321 work, the Genkō-shakusho (compiled by Kōkan
Shiren, 1298-1346), the Far Eastern student of Buddhist philosophy is traditionally supposed to
study the Kusharon (=the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam) for eight years, and then follow this with a
three years' study of the Jo-Yuishikiron (=the Vijñapti-matrata-siddhi). In the words of the adage,
yuishiki sannen, kusha hachinen; (the sequence is reversed for reasons of syllable count).
4. Much information concerning the life and career of Rev. Hōrei Sakurai was given to me by
Mrs. Kazuko Itō, the widow of Rimban Hōryū Itō, and their son, the Rev. Noríaki Itō. I wish to
express my appreciation for their aid.
5. Fa-pao, whose dates are unknown, worked with Hsuan-tsang on the translation of the
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam in 654; he also worked with Hsuan-tsang on his translation of the
Vibhāṣā in 659, and in this latter instance he is reported to have objected to Hsuan-tsang's
addition of sixteen additional characters to the text for purposes of elucidating an obscure point.
Fa-pao is counted, together with P'u-kuang, as one of Hsuan-tsang's major disciples. After
Hsuan-tsang's death in 664, Fa-pao is recorded to have worked with I-ching from 700 to 703;
under I-ching, Fa-pao served as the proof-reader (ch'eng-i) for some twenty works. See
Mochizuki, Bukkyō-daijiten, V.4661.
P'u-kuang, also an early disciple of Hsuan-tsang, worked on the translation of the
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam, and in addition is reported to have worked with Hsuan-tsang on his
translation of the Mahā-Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra in the period 656 to 663. His dates are also
unknown. See Mochizuki, op. cit., V.4408.
6. I began my teaching of the Abhidharma—more specifically readings from the text of the
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam—in the academic year 1970 - 1971 at Brown University, and I have
continued this teaching at both the Nyingma Institute (Berkeley, California), and at the
University of Oriental Studies (Los Angeles). When I first taught at the Nyingma Institute in the
summer of 197 I prepared a draft translation of my Introduction ("The Abhidharma: The
Origins, Growth and Development of a Literary Tradition") for the benefit of the students, to
serve as an introduction to the historical process that led to the growth of the Sanskrit tradition of
Abhidharma literature. The first part of the essay is a free translation of the introductory section
(pages 13 to 61) of Prof. Ken Sakurabe's outstanding Japanese translation of the first two
chapters of the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam, his Kusharon no kenkyû (“A Study of the Abhi-
dharmakośabhāṣyam”), Kyoto, Hōzōkan, 1969 (first edition). The second part of this Introduc-
tion is a translation of pages 110 to 114 of Prof. Ryūjō Yamada’s Bongo Butten no shobunken
("The Manuscript Sources of Sanskrit Buddhism”, Kyoto, Heirakuji-shoten, 1959 [first edition])
which deals with the Sanskrit fragments of the Abhidharma literature. This part of the
Introduction has also been augmented by the bibliographical material given in volume one of
Prof. Akira Hirakawa's Kusharon-sakuin ("Index to the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam”, Tokyo, Daizō
-shuppan kabushiki-kaisha, 1973).xxviii Translator's Preface
7. Kyokuga Saeki appears to have been the first to term his works the “kandō” editions. His first
Kandō-bon was his edition of the Kusharon, the Kandō Abidatsuma Kusharon, published by the
Hözökan, Kyoto, in 1869. He followed this by Kandō editions of the Sankoku-buppō-denzü-engi
(1888), and the Yuishiki-sanruikyō-sen'yō and the Jō- Yuishikiron (both in 1890). Kandō editions
were continued after his death (cf. the Immyō-sanjūsanka-honsa-hōsange in 1895) by his disciples
and students, Shundō Sugihara and Etō Senabe.
For the life of Kyokuga Saeki, see Mochizuki, op. cit., I.624.The Abhidharma:
The Origins, Growth and
Development of a Literary Tradition
Leo M. PrudenXXX
The Abhidharma
1. Origin and Growth of abhidharma.
Today
Loday the word abhidharma signifies the third of the Three Pitakas (Skt:
Tripitaka) or collections of scriptures that go to make up the full Buddhist Canon.
These three Piṭakas, or collections, are: 1) the Sutras or Agamas, the words of the
Buddha, directed to both laymen and clerics, dealing with a host of different topics:
ethics, philosophical questions, legends and tales, etc.; 2) the Vinaya, directed to the
monks and nuns of the Buddhist Sangha, spelling out the prohibitions to be
followed by the clerics and injunctions on the carrying out of various seasonal
events, adjudicating disputes, the distribution of property, etc.; and 3) the
Abhidharma Pitaka, a number of texts¹ later in compilation than either the Sūtra
Pitaka or the Vinaya Pitaka.
If the word abhidharma does not signify the Third Pitaka in its totality, then the
word signifies the contents of this Third Piṭaka, its style of thinking and writing,
and thus a certain type of commentarial literature, the Sastras or commentaries on
the Sūtras of the Buddha.
Since the Sutras and Vinaya, it is believed, took their essential form before the
Third Piṭaka was given its final form, the word abhidharma as used in the Sūtras
and in the Vinaya, was a word that did not signify the Third Pitaka. What then did
the word abhidharma signify when it was first used in the Sutras and Vinaya, in the
reputed words of the Buddha?
There are two meanings to the word abhidharma: 1) referring to the Dharma;
and 2) the higher, or superior Dharma.
The first person interested in the etymology of the term abhi-dharma was
N.W. Geiger, in his work, Pali Dhamma (1921), where he states, "abhidhamma
originally mean the highest Dhamma; such is the interpretation of later
commentators, that is, abhidhamma as uttaradhamma." The earliest meaning of
the word abhidhamma, he held, is "concerning the dhamma, or referring to the
dhamma." In the Sūtras, indeed,this word always appears in the locative case, as
abhidhamme, ("with respect to Dhamma") and in this manner parallels the form
abhivinaye ("concerning the Vinaya”).
This definition ("concerning the dhamma") was adopted by the Critical Pali
Dictionary (1935, 1st edition) where this form was termed (p. 350) a prepositional
compound, and the word itself defined as: "as regards the dhamma."Pruden xxxi
2. Abhidhamma as "higher dhamma”.
The Pali Text Society's Pali-English Dictionary (1st edition 1921-1925, p. 65)
gives the meaning of the word abhidhamma as: "the special Dhamma, i.e., 1) the
theory of the doctrine, the doctrine classified, the doctrine pure and simple (without
any admixture of literary grace or of personalities, or of anecdotes, or of arguments
ad personam...” This is a definition adopted by G.P. Malalasekera, Dictionary of
Pali Proper Names, and by Étienne Lamotte, in his Histoire de Bouddhisme indien,
p. 1971.
Among the English translations from the Pali Sutras (Pali: sutta; in their
collections known as the Nikayas), C.A.F. Rhys-Davids gives "the advanced
teaching of Doctrine" (Dialogues, III, 19.246); F.L. Woodward gives "extra
doctrine" (Gradual Sayings 1.276) and "the further doctrine" (Gradual Sayings, V, p.
19, 139 ff); E.M. Hare gives "More-Dhamma” (ibid. III.85, IV. 267); and Lord
Chalmers gives "quintessential Doctrine" (Further Dialogues I.155) and "higher
branches of the Doctrine" (ibid., I.133).
Kōgen Mizuno gives, as a definition of abhidhamma in his Index to the Pali
Canon (Part II, p. 34), the "superior dhamma", the “higher dhamma", and the
"most distinguished dhamma".
E.J. Thomas, in his History of Buddhist Thought (p. 159, 276) gives “special
dhamma" and "further-dhamma" as translations for abhidhamma. T.W. Rhys-
Davids defines abhi-dhamma and abhivinaya as "the higher subtleties of the
Dhamma and Vinaya”.
From the above then we can see that there are two schools of interpretation
concerning the meaning of the word abhidhamma, a fact pointed out by I.B. Horner
in her article "Abhidhamma Abhivinaya in the First Two Pițakas of the Pāļi
Canon", in Indian Historical Quarterly XII.3 (Sept. 1941), pp. 291-310. According
to Horner, the meaning of the word abhidhamma, in the Pāļi Canon, "fluctuates"
between these two definitions (the non-judgmental "concerning the dhamma", and
the judgmental “higher, superior (hence, better) dhamma”), but that in point of
fact, these two meanings of the word are not mutually exclusive.
According to Ken Sakurabe, Geiger's definition of abhidhamma (“concerning
the dhamma") is correct, whereas the Pali Text Society and I.B. Horner rely
overmuch on the traditional interpretations of later Singhalese commentators.
Let us then take a look at the usage of the word abhidhamma as it is used in the
Pali Canon of the Theravadins. Following are some examples of these two words,
abhidhamma and abhivinaya, used together as a set phrase in the Canon:
1. Vinaya Pitaka, I, p. 64:xxxii The Abhidharma
aparehi pi bhikkhave pañcah'ańgehi samannāgatena bhikkhunā na upasampa-
detabbam, na nissayo dātabbo, na samanero upaṭṭāpetabbo: na patibalo hoti
antevāsim vā saddhivihārim va abhisamācārikaya sikkhaya sikkhāpetum,
ādibrahmacariyikāya sikkhāya vinetum, abhidhamme vinetum, abhivinaya
vinetum, uppannam diṭṭhigatam dhammato vivecetum vivecāpetum.
"And monks, if a monk is not possessed of five further qualities he should
not ordain . . . a novice should not attend him: if he is not competent to make a
pupil or one who shares a cell train in the training regarding the fundamentals
of conduct, to lead him in the training regarding the fundamentals of the
Brahmafaring, to lead him in what pertains to dhamma, to lead him in what
pertains to discipline, to discuss or get (another) to discuss, by means of
dhamma, a false view that has arisen...” (translation by I.B. Horner, SBB XIV,
p. 84; see also Horner's discussion of abhidhamma, abhivinaya in SBB XIII,
Introduction, p. x and following).
This same passage is translated by Rhys-Davids and Oldenburg, SBE, XIII,
pp. 184-5):
"And also in other five cases, oh Bhikkhus, a Bhikku should not confer, etc.:
when he is not able to train an antevāsika or a saddhiviharika in the precepts of
proper conduct, to educate him in the elements of morality, to instruct him in
what pertains to the Dhamma, to instruct him in what pertains to the Dhamma
a false doctrine that might arise . . .”
"
In the above text the words are given in the locative case, which in Pali means
"with reference to", "pertaining to". Here the word abhidhamma refers to the
details of the dhamma (i.e., Sūtra) study, and to the details of Vinaya study. Horner,
Rhys-Davids, and Oldenburg all agree in this interpretation.
2. Dīgha Nikaya, III, 267:
puna ca param avuso bhikkhu dhamma-kāmo hoti piya-samudhahāro abhi-
dhamme abhivinaye ulāra-pāmujjo. Yam p'avuso bhikkhu dhamma-kāmo
hoti... pe... ulāra-pāmujjo, ayam pi dhammo nātha-karaṇo.
"And furthermore, friends, he loves the doctrine, the utterance of it is dear
to him, he finds exceeding joy in the advanced teaching of both Doctrine and
Discipline." (TW. and C.A.F. Rhys-Davids, SBB, XC IV, p. 246; see also
footnote 2, where Buddhaghosa's gloss on this passage is given).
In this above example (which is in Av 24, 90, 201, 339) the ideal monk isPruden
xxxiii
described. Horner feels that two dhammas are spoken of: 1) dhamma-kāmo, and 2)
abhidhamma and that abhidhamma is used to distinguish it from the first and lower
type of dhamma. According to Sakurabe, this is a forced meaning, an interpretation
not necessary for an understanding of the passage.
3. Majjbima Nikāya, I, p. 472:
āraññaken'āvuso bhikkhunā abhidhamme abhivinaya yogo karaṇiyo.
Sant'avuso araññakaṁ bhikkhuṁ abhidhamme abhivinaye pañhaṁ pucchi-
tāro. Sace āvuso araññako bhikkhu abhidhamme abhivinaye pañham puṭṭho
na sampāyati tassa bhavanti vattāro:
... araññaken'āvuso bhikkhunā ye te santā vimokhā atikkamma rūpe arūppā
tattha yogo karaṇiyo. . . ärannaken'avuso bhikkhunā uttarimanussdhamme
yogo karaniyo.
"Your reverences, earnest study in Further-Dhamma, in Further-
Discipline should be made by a monk who is forest-gone. Your reverences,
there are those who will question a monk who is forest-gone on Further-
Dhamma and Further-Discipline. If, your reverences, a monk who is forest-
gone, on being asked a question on Further-Dhamma, on Further-Discipline,
does not succeed in answering it, there will be those who speak about him and
say. .
"Your reverences, earnest study should be made by a monk who is forest-
gone concerning those that are the peaceful deliverances and are incorporeal
having transcended material shapes . . .
"Your reverences, earnest study in states of further-men would be made by
a monk who is forest-gone. . ." (English translation by I.B. Horner, Middle
Length Sayings, II, p.145).
3. Abhidhamma alone.
Here Horner maintains that since the three accomplishments of the forest-
dwelling monk are all put in the locative case (abhidhamme, abhivinaye, yogo...),
abhidharma and abhivinaya refer to superior states of attainment. According to
Sakurabe, however, this passage is like the Digha passage (no. 2 above). This
occurrence of the terms abhidhamma-abhivinaya is the only place in the Sūtras
where abhidharma and abhivinaya are ranked together with supernormal states of
attainment, but such an explanation as Horner's is not necessary for under-
standing the sense of this passage.xxxiv
The Abhidharma
There are, to be sure, a number of passages where the word abhidhamma
occurs apart from the word abhivinaya.
1. Majjbima Nikāya, I, p. 214 gives:
idh'avuso sāriputta dve bhikkhū abhidhammakathaṁ kathenti, te aññamañ-
ñaṁ pañhaṁ pucchanti, aññamaññassa pañhaṁ putthā vissajjenti no ca
samcadenti, dhammi ca nesam kathā pavattani hoti.
"In this connection, reverend Sāriputta, two monks are talking on further
dhamma; they ask one another questions; in answering one another's
questions they respond and do not fall, and their talk on dhamma goes
forward."
2. Majjbima Nikāya, II, p. 239:
tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ye vo maya dhamma abhiñña desota, seyyathidam:
cattāro satipatthānā, cattāro sammappadhānā, cattāro iddhipādā, pañc’indri-
yana, pance balāni, satta bojjhanga, ariyo aṭṭhangiko maggo,-tattha sabbeh'va
samaggehi sammodamanehi avivadamanehi sikkhitabbam; tesañ ca vo,
bhikkhave, samaggānaṁ sammodamānānaṁ avivadamānānam sikkhataṁ,
siyamsu dve bhikkhū abhidhamme nānāvādā.
"Wherefore, monks, those things taught to you by me out of super-
knowledge, that is to say the four applications of mindfulness, the four right
efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five controlling faculties, the five
powers, the seven links in awakening, the ariyan eightfold Way-all together,
in harmony and without contention you should train yourselves in each and all
of these. But when you, monks, all together, in harmony and without
contention have trained yourselves in these, there might be two monks
speaking differently about Further-Dhamma.” (English translation by I.B.
Horner, Middle Length Sayings, III, p. 25.)
After the Buddha has taught, through his dhamma-abhiññā (his higher or
superior knowledge of the dharma), the thirty-seven factors of enlightenment,
two monks are now depicted as having abhidhamme nānāvādā, “differing views
on abhidhamma," and the other monks should try to settle the contentions of
these two. The 37 dhammas so taught are by definition dhammā abhiñña, or
abhidhamma. Thus the two monks' contentions are regarding these itemized, 37
superior dharmas. This is the opinion of I.B. Horner.
Sakurabe points out that the word dhammā is given in the plural whereasPruden XXXV
abhidhamma is given in the singular locative case, so this connection between
dhammā-abhiññā and abhidhamma is unnatural. Geiger translates this passage as
"zwei Bhikkhu, die uber den dhamma verschiedenes aussagen,” and so translates
abhidhamme as "concerning the teaching."
4. Abhidhamma-kathā.
The phrase abhidhamma-kathā occurs some three times in the Pali Canon.
1. Majjbima Nikāya, I, p. 214:
idh'āvuso sāriputta dve bhikkhū abhidhammakatham kathenti, te
aññamaññaṁ panham pucchanti, aññamaññassa pañhaṁ putthā vissajjenti
no ca saṁsādenti, dharmmî ca nesain kathā pavattani hoti.
"In this connection, reverend Säriputta, two monks are talking on further
dhamma; they ask one another questions; in answering one another's
questions they respond and do not fall, and their talk on dhamma goes
forward."
In this passage the phrase abhidhamma-kathā is followed by the words
dhammi... katha... So too the following passages from Majjhima Nikaya, I,
p. 218:
sādhu sādhu sariputta, yathā tam Moggallāno va sammā byākaramāno
byākareyya. Moggallāno hi Sāriputta dhammakathiko ti.
"It is good, Sāriputta, it is good. It is so that Moggallāna, in answering you
properly, should answer. For, Säriputta, Moggallāna is a talker on dhamma."
(I.B. Horner, Middle Length Sayings, I, p. 270; see also her note on this
passage.)
Here we see that anyone who gives a correct, clear account of dhamma is a
dhamma-kathiko, a "speaker on dhamma.” But later commentators (namely,
Buddhaghosa, in his Asl. p. 29) terms a dhamma-kathiko to be an abhidhamma-
bhikkhu, a monk who specializes in the study (and teaching) of the abhidhamma.
In another passage (Anguttara, III, p. 392), a monk who can do abhidhamma-
kathā well is to be respected and honored. According to Sakurabe, this refers to
one who can preach correctly and well, and the term abhidhamma in this passage
as yet has no specific sense of a superior doctrine, but rather just the superior
talent of being able to present the dharma well.
In another passage (Anguttara, III, p. 107) an ignorant monk confusesxxxvi
The Abhidharma
abhidharma-talk, and becomes verbose and long-winded (vedalla-kathā) and, by
doing so, pollutes the Dharma and the Vinaya.
5. Traditional Explanations of Abhidhamma.
In the Pāļi commentarial literature, the word abhidhamma clearly means "a
special, superior dharma." This is seen in some of the words and phrases used by
the later Pāļi commentators in describing the abhidhamma.
In commentaries on the Sutras, the abhidharma is termed uttara-dhamma,
"the highest dharma,” and abhi-visittha dhamma, "the very distinguished
dhamma."
In commentaries on the Abhidhamma, the words dhamma-atireka (unique
dhamma) and abhamma-visesa (distinguished) are used. Abhidhamma is called in
the plural vuddhimanto dhammā (the expanded, augmented dhammas), salak-
khanā dhammā (unique dharmas), pūjitā dhammā (dharmas to be honored,
worshipped), parichinnā dharmā (special dharmas), and adhikā dhammā (ex-
cellent dharmas). Such traditional Pali commentators have influenced the Western
translators of the Suttas to see in the word abhidhamma more than it probably
originally intended (as Rhys-Davids, Woodward, Hare, Chalmers, et al.)
This understanding was roughly the same in the case of the Sanskrit tradition
of Northern Buddhism. In the Chinese translation of the Majjhima Nikāya,
(termed the Madhyama Āgama in Sanskrit and traditionally held, in Far Eastern
Buddhism, to be a Sarvästivādin compilation), we see such phrases as "He
discusses the very deep abhidharma," or "He speaks the very profound abhi-
dharma . . .” (T. 1, p. 450a, p. 634c, p. 688c, and p. 727b which corresponds to
Majjhima, I, p. 214). The translation of the phrase abhidharma-katham kathenti
("he speaks abhidharma-talk," as above Majjhima, I, p. 214) is, in the Chinese
translation, prefaced by the word "deep” or"profound” (Skt. gambhiram), added
by the translator, based on his idea of the Abhidharma as a unique and superior
teaching.
6. Abhidhamma in the Mahavibhāṣā
The major Sarvāstivādin compendium of thought, the Mahāvibhāṣā (The
Great Commentary) gives a full list of synonyms and definitions of the word
abhidharma (T. 27, p. 4) recognized by various Sarvāstivādin masters, as well as
by masters of various other traditions (the Mahiśāsakas, the Dharmottaras, the
Grammarians, etc.), which reflect by and large the prevailing traditional definitionPruden xxxvii
of abhidharma as "a superior teaching"; but in the Mahavibhāṣā's list of
definitions, covering some 20 pages in its Chinese translation, the definition
"concerning the dharma" appears a large number of times also.
The Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam reflects this approach when, in its analysis of
the word abhidharma, it says that abhi means abhimukha, “facing," "with
reference to," "in the direction of," "taking something as the object of study or
analysis."
7. The Abhidhamma Piṭaka.
From whence then did the third collection of writings, the Third Pitaka, the
Abhidhamma Piṭaka, arise?
There are two major scholarly opinions concerning how the Abhidhamma
Pitaka came into existence.
The first opinion was initially propounded by Taiken Kimura in his book
Abidatsuma-ron no kenkyū (A Study of the Abhidharma Šāstras, now vol. VI of
the Kimura Taiken Zenshū.) According to Kimura, abhidharma signified "con-
cerning the dharma," and soon referred to discussions centered on the dharmas,
their various classifications, itemizations, etc. This discussion was termed abhi-
dhamma-kathā (kathā = discussion, debate), and such discussions came to be
collected together to form the Abhidhamma Piṭaka. This view is the generally
accepted view among Japanese scholars. (For this view in recent Japanese
publications, see Bukkyōgaku-jiten, edited by Taya, Öchō, and Funabashi, 1955
edition, under the entry abidatsuma, p. 6; and the article “Bukkyō tetsugaku no
saishō no tenkai" by Tetsuro Watsuji, in the Watsuji Tetsuro Zenshū, vol. 5,
p. 311, 344).
The second view was introduced by Geiger (in his Pali Dhamma, p. 118 ff.)
and has been adopted by most Europeans (as A. Bareau, Dhammasaṁgini,
traduction annotee, 1951, p. 8 ff.; Étienne Lamotte, Histoire, p. 197; E.
Frauwallner, WZKSO (1964), p. 59; see also Pali Text Society, Pali-English
Dictionary, under mātikā). This opinion holds that the earliest form of what we
now call the Abhidhamma Piṭaka is seen in what is termed in Pali the mātikā
(Skt: mātṛkā). In the Pali Canon there very frequently occurs (some 18 times) the
set phrase: dhammadharo vinayadharo mātikādharo (“holding, grasping,” i.e.
"study and recitation of Dhamma, of Vinaya, of Mātikā"). Here there are three
distinct objects of study, the Dhamma (the Sutras), the Vinaya, and the Mātikās,
or "summaries".xxxviii
The Abhidharma
8. The Mätikā.
The word mātikā is used in a variety of contexts. It is used to signify: 1.
commentarial literature on the sūtras (Pat. I.1); 2. the books that go to make up
the Abhidhamma Pitaka (Asl., p. 3); and 3. commentaries not included within the
Abhidhamma Pitaka (Vism. p. 536, 546, 626, etc.).
Generally then, the meaning of mātikā is: a list of items or words that serve as
the object of debate or discussion, the technical terms of the commentarial
literature.
Within the Vinaya Pitaka, the word mātikā is used in the order: Vibhanga,
Khanddhaka, Parivāra, and Mātikā, so that here the word means the Patimokkha
list of rules, that is, the essential items or rules of the Vinaya, devoid of illustration
and elaboration.
So mātikā with reference to the Suttas and Vinaya has points of similarity: the
usage in both contexts signifies a bare, skeletal itemization of words or terms
apart from their explanations or elaborations.
In the commentarial literature, then, mātikā signifies an (earlier) bare-bones
list of dharmas, which underwent later elaboration, and the eventual codification
of this elaboration developed into the various books of the Pali Abhidhamma
Piṭaka. In the Vinaya, then, the mātikā referred to the Pratimokkha list of rules,
which mātikā then led to the elaboration of these rules, the circumstances
surrounding their promulgation by the Buddha, the exceptions to the rules, their
penalties, etc.
The earliest meaning of the word mātikā, then, was merely a list. It was only
later that the word mātikā came to mean the Patimokkha rules themselves (the
present-day meaning of the word), a change in meaning from "a list" to "the List,"
a change likewise seen in its further meaning as a list of technical terms, of
dharmas, used in abhidharma discussions.
Thus the word mātikā, as used in Vinaya Piṭaka, means a list of essential items
(here the Vinaya rules) within the Vinaya Piṭaka, when the word is used in the
Suttas, it refers to a list of items (a list of dharmas) within the Suttas.
Within the Suttas, the word mātikā occurs, according to Sakurabe, in only
those passages in a later stratum of the Canon, texts which themselves are already
close to being abhidharmic texts. Likewise this is the case with the Vinaya Pitaka:
the word occurs in its later passages, or in passages that have already assumed a
commentarial status. So the list: dhamma-vinaya-mātikā could conceivably be
translated "the teaching, its monastic rules, and the itemized lists of their contents
or essentials."Pruden xxxix
One Japanese scholar even goes to far as to say that the phrase bahussuto
āgatāgamo dhammadharo vinayadharo mātikādharo be interpreted by agata-
agamo equalling dhamma dharo, and vinaya equalling mātikā (Egaku Mayeda, in
his Genshi Bukkyo Seiten no Seiritsu-shi kenkyü, p. 194), that is, "the learned
agata-agamo (understander of the tradition) who is a dhamma-dharo, (and the
learned) upholder of the Vinaya who is an upholder of mātikā.”
9. Mātikā and Abhidharma.
There are several passages in the scriptures that do show that the term
mātṛkā was seen as synonymous with the word abhidharma.
A. In one text preserved in Chinese translation (T. 24, p. 408b), vol. 40 of the
Ksudrakavastu of the Mūla-Sarvästivādin Vinaya, it states that after the First
Council had finished reciting the Sūtras and the Vinaya, Katyāyana said, "Persons
of later generations will be of little wisdom and of dull faculties; their
understanding will be based on the text [of scriptures], and they will not penetrate
to its deeper meaning. Now I shall myself recite the Matrka, in order that the
meanings of the Sūtras and the Vinaya will not be lost." He then recited the 37
components of enlightenment (the bodhyangas, see above, Majj. II. 239), and he
then said "Know therefore, this is the Sutra, this is the Vinaya, this is the
Abhidharma." Here then Mätṛkā means the itemized dharmas in the Sūtras and
the Vinaya,and the identification is made between it and the Abhidharma.
B. The identification is also made in the Kathāvatthu, reputedly the latest
work in the Pali Abhidhamma Pitaka, where in the "Journal of the Pali Text
Society," 1898, p. 7, Geiger regards this identification as being the original word of
the Buddha.
C. This identification is also made in the Asoka-avadāna, the biography of the
Emperor Asoka; see its Chinese translation, the O-yü-wang ch'uan, T. 50, p. 113c.
D. In the Yogācāra's huge encyclopaedic work, the Yogācarabhūmi, vol. 81 (T.
30, p. 753b), one of the twelve classes of literature into which all Buddhist
literature is divided is upadeśa, discussions or debates wherein all the dharmas are
correctly analyzed. Here upadeśa is otherwise termed mätrkā or abhidharma.
Further, this mātṛkā is an exhaustive and thorough-going analysis (of the
dharmas).
From the above, then, we can see that the Mätikās (or Matṛkās) performed an
important function in the development of the corpus of Buddhist literature, as
admitted in traditional Buddhist literature itself.
By itemizing the component parts of the Dharma and the Vinaya, thexl
The Abhidharma
Mātrkā did play an important part in the later elaboration which is Abhidharma
literature. However, the Abhidharmikas worked on these lists, minutely analyzed
the items on these lists, and then proceeded to give long, exhaustive treatises on
each item. So the Mātṛkā represents but one aspect of the whole picture of the
growth of the Abhidharma.
If the Abhidhamma was merely speaking on the dhamma as some scholars
maintain, and if the Mātikā served as the nucleus of later Abhidhamma
elaborations, why, when the literature was codified into a Piṭaka, was it named the
Abhidhamma Pitaka, and not the Mātikā Pitaka? It appears then that the Mātikās
did not directly develop into the Abhidharma literature as we now have it.
As Kimura has shown, in the earliest Buddhist Sangha, abhidhamma-katha-
discussion on the dharma-had a direct relationship with the later development
of the commentarial literature on the Dhamma, the Abhidhamma commentaries.
In the process, there were two tendencies; one: to summarize and to itemize, and
two: to analyze and elaborate. This latter tendency came to predominate, and the
name for this-abhidhamma-came to be attached permanently to this new
corpus of literature.
10. Abhidharma in the Agamas: the Religion of the Agamas.
There are abhidharmic tendencies in the extant sutras, in Pāļi as well as in
those preserved in Chinese translation. Let us say a few words first, however,
about the religion of the early Buddhist canon, the religion of the Agamas.
According to de La Vallée Poussin, all the teachings of the Buddha were not
publically given out. Instead, much of the philosophy and the more subtle forms of
the teaching were embodied in texts which were reserved for the study of monks
in their monasteries; and the Agamas (or Nikāyas), the earliest form of the
Buddhist sermons which have been preserved for us, are such philosophical texts
as were transmitted from one generation of monks to those of a subsequent
generation. Such texts are then the “clericalized” texts, and in these texts we see
only a small bit of the popular side of early Buddhism.
Such is the case, to be sure, in any religion, and this is especially so in the case
of Indian religions. Any Indian religion has two sides to it: a clerical, well worked-
over doctrine, and a popular aspect of the religion, which includes many elements
brought over in the mind of the new converts to the religion. But the important
point to remember is that the extant literature of any religion is the technical
literature used in the monasteries. The real face of early Buddhism in all of its
aspects cannot be gotten at only through its literature, but must also be obtainedPruden
xli
through archaeology, art and chronology (Le dogme et la philosophie du
Bouddhisme, 1930, Chap. VII). Such a mass Buddhism was the Buddhism that
preceeded the canon, "precanonical Buddhism" (Bouddhisme precanonique). Its
contents were not only a darśana—a systematic school of Indian philosophy, a
consistent world-view-but a faith concerned with spirits and the release of these
spirits from the round of birth and death, having, according to scholars, little in
common with the doctrines of anitya, anātman, and duḥkha so often stressed in
the Agamas (see de La Vallée Poussin's Nirvāṇa, 1925, p. 85, 115, 131). The
spread of Buddhism was dependent upon its moral teaching, the personality of its
founder, its wisdom embodied in memorable sentences and couplets (the
Dhammapada or Udānavarga), coupled with popular animal tales (the Jātakas)
(see The Way to Nirvāṇa, 1917, Chap. V). Buddhism was also closely related to
ancient Indian nature worship, the worship of certain trees, and the veneration of
snakes.
Buddhism also came to be changed, especially on its popular level, by virtue of
the influence of non-Buddhist religions, through the conversion to Buddhism of
many non-Buddhists who brought their own ideas into the company of older
believers. Popular Buddhist religion absorbed much of the pan-Indian pantheon
of deities. However formal and set its doctrines might have been, most of the
believers of Buddhism were but "demi-civilize" or semi-civilized (Bouddhisme,
1909, p. 349 ff.). Such is also the view of A.B. Keith (Buddhist Philosophy in India
and Ceylon, 1923) and C.A.F. Rhys-Davids (Sakya or Buddhist Origins, 1931,
p. 431 ff.).
11. The Agamas and the Nikāyas.
This above view was strongly opposed by Stcherbatsky (The Conception of
Buddhist Nirvāṇa, 1927). De La Vallée Poussin would appear to oppose the
popular elements of early Buddhism to the scholarly works of later Buddhism:
such would imply that there is something essentially different between early
Buddhism and Abhidharma Buddhism. Stcherbatsky held that the Buddha was a
product of the philosophical environment of his time, and that he obviously had a
well-defined philosophy with its attendant metaphysic.
But even if the set passages and formulas were removed from the Aamas, de
La Vallée Poussin and Rhys-Davids cannot say that Buddhism is merely a faith
concerned with spirits and immortality. So-called popular Buddhism and "pure"
clerical Buddhism cannot be so clearly distinguished one from the other. Yet the
Agamas do not give a clear picture of early Buddhism, especially in its popularxlii
The Abhidharma
aspects: the Agamas are the traditions (agama) of a scholarly elite, as de La Vallée
Poussin maintains.
The Agamas, literally the "transmitted” (doctrines) were in a sense also
Nikāyas (compilations): the transmitted doctrines were collected together, formal-
ized, and their vocabulary became technical terms; these terms came to be
analyzed through vibhangas (long, explanatory definitions) and niruktas (ety-
mologies); these same terms were also organized on the basis of numerical
categories or on the basis of similarities (samyukta) into mātṛkās. So the
tendencies that led ultimately to a systematic Abhidharma literature led in this
same process to the systematization of the Agamas (the traditions) into Nikāyas
(formal literary compilations).
In summary, the Agamas are doctrinal compilations from an early stage of
Buddhism, and their recensions (Nikayas) are in a sense Abhidharmic compila-
tions and, being largely abhidharmic in tendency, they led ultimately to the growth
of the Abhidharma as a separate literary genre.
12. Abhidharmic Tendencies in Extant Agamas: Numerical Categories,
Samyuktas, and Vibhangas.
Abhidharmic tendencies, tendencies that led eventually to the growth of a
separate literature, can be seen early in some scriptures. The use of numerical
categories is one such tendency.
A. The Sangiti-suttanta (the “recited” sūtra, Dīgha Nikāya no. 33, vol. III, pp.
207-271) lists a variety of items in a list from one to ten (one item, two items,
three items . . .) Digha Nikāya no. 34, the Dasuttara-suttanta, lists items in a list
from one to ten, but now analyzes them according to various other categories,
marking then a further development along abhidharmic lines.
This same tendency is seen in the case of the Anguttara Nikāya (anguttara,
"increasing by an item"), which classifies all of the suttas in its collection on the
basis of numerical categories: thus all suttas dealing with any group of “four”
items are collected together, followed by all suttas dealing with “five" of anything
(up to eleven items). This scheme then forms the basis for this one collection of
texts, or nikāya.
B. Many other suttas or āgamas were joined to one another on the basis of
their affinity in subject matter. To be sure, this is not sharply distinguishable from
the above numerical classification, but now the items are more meaningfully
arranged. Such texts are called samyuktas (Pali: samyuttas) or “conjoined” texts.1
Pruden xliii
Examples of this tendency are the Șal-āyātana vagga (vagga = section or
chapter) in the Majjhima Nikāya, and the Kamma-samyutta vagga in the
Majjhima: i.e., all those texts dealing with the ayatanas were grouped together, as
were all those texts dealing with karma.
This too became the guiding principle in the compilation and editing of the
Samyutta Nikaya and parts of the Khuddaka Nikaya.
C. The concept of an expanded commentary (a vibhanga) is best seen in
individual suttas in the Samyutta Nikāya and in the Majjhima Nikaya. Many such
texts have the word vibhanga in their titles:
Samyutta Nikāya XII.2: the Vibhangam (II, pp. 2-4), which is an expansion of
XII.1 (deśanā); XLV.8, the Vibhango (V. pp. 8–10), which is a commentary on the
Noble Eightfold Path; and LI.20, the Vibhanga (V, pp. 276–281), which is a
commentary on the siddhi, or supernormal powers, of a Buddha.
The Majjhima Nikaya has Majj. 135, the Cula-kamma-vibhanga sutta
(cula = smaller, lesser) (III, pp. 202-206), which treats of Karma, and is followed
by the Maha-kamma vibhanga-sutta, Majj. 136 (pp. 207-215) which is an
elaboration of certain of the former sutta's sections; Majj. 137, the Salayatana-
vibhanga-sutta on the six āyatanas (p. 215–222) and all of its following suttas are
vibhangas: Majj. 138, 139, 140 (on the dhātus), 141, 142. Synonymous with the
vibhanga is the word vedalla, which also means "expanded": as the Cūla-vedalla-
sutta, and the Mahā-vedalla-sutta. The Buddha would give a short sermon, and
one of his disciples, such as Kätyāyana, or the Buddha himself, would elaborate on
it; or the disciples would discuss it among themselves, and in this way it would
reach its present form.
The agamas (in their Chinese translations) which have the characteristics of
vibhangas can be rather closely identified with these same Suttas extant in Pali:
they are largely the same text (especially Majj. 131 to 142, as above), a fact which
does not hold for the other agamas.
Thus abhidharmic tendencies are clearly seen in many texts in both Pāļi and
Chinese, so far advanced in many cases that it is merely a short step to real
Abhidhamma literature, as the Samgiti-sutta has led to the Samgiti-paryaya.
There is in fact very little internal change from abhidharmic agamas to
Abhidhamma works; indeed, greater internal changes have come about in later
Abhidharma works at a susequent period, as we shall see below.
13. Sarvāstivādin Agamas.
There are sectarian, Sarvāstivādin āgamas, but there must have been somexliv
The Abhidharma
chronological distance between the Sarvāstivādin āgamas and those āgamas in
their final shape (in the form that we have them today) before the split of the
Sarvastivādins from the rest of the Sangha.²
Thus early agamas, non-sectarian in content, led to the growth of sectarian,
i.e., Sarvästivādin agamas, which in turn led to the growth of Sarvästivādin
Abhidharma. So to know the Sarvastivadin Abhidharma, it is important to know
the Sarvāstivādin agamas. This however is almost impossible.
In the Abhidharma literature, when for instance the four types of pratyayas
(conditions) are mentioned (as in Kośa T. 29, p. 36b, and the Nyaya-anusāra, T. 29
p. 440a) the reference "as given in the Sūtra" is given, and since this particular
sūtra can be fully reconstructed (as explained below), this one text can be claimed
for the Sarvästivādins. However this specific sūtra is today not found in any of the
extant Pāļi Canon or in the Chinese translation of the Agamas.
Since the publication, in the latter half of the 18th century, of the scholar-
monk Hōdō's work, the Kusha-ron Keikō, it has come to be generally agreed
upon by scholars that the Madhyama Agama and the Ksudraka Agama, as they
presently exist in Chinese translation, are, if not Sarvāstivādin in affiliation and
editorship, at least very close to it. But as we know from the āgamas quoted in
Sarvāstivādin Abhidharma works, there was a difference between the Sar-
västivādin agamas that exist in Chinese and those agamas that are directly quoted
by the Sarvastivadin Abhidharma literature. How great a distance there was, we
have no idea.
It is clear further that the Sarvästivādin authors of their Abhidharma
literature were clearly aware that there were sutras which claimed various
sectarian affiliations and that there were differences among them. In the Kośa,
phrases like "sūtras of the Mahisāsakas" (p. 11.12a; 12.16a), "sūtras of the
Kasyapiyas" (p. 23.17a), "sūtras of the Sthaviravādins" (p. 19.19b), and sūtras of
other groups (4.48a, 5a) occur very often. In one passage in the Kośabhāṣyam
where the question whether sukha (pleasure) is experienced by the mind, or by
the mind and by the body (the former is a Sauträntika position, the latter,
Sarvāstivādin), the Sarvāstivādins quote as proof of their position a sūtra which
the Sautrāntikas criticize by saying that "all sūtras hold that pleasure is
experienced by the mind, whereas the sutras of the Sarvästivādins add the word
'body' in this passage."
In another passage, the Nyaya-anusāra (T. 29, p. 330a-b) says, "This is not the
teaching of the Buddha, but of the sutras. We see differences in words and
meanings in the scriptures of the different sectarian groups. Because the sūtras
have different meanings, the sectarian teachings are different. That is, the
""Pruden xlv
Sautrāntikas recite The Sutra of the Seven States of Existence, and (on the basis of
this) posit, in their Abhidharma, the existence of an antara-bhava (an inter-
mediary existence), and so too posit a gradual manifestation of insight. There is
also a text, The Basic Teachings of All the Schools (Sarva-darśana mūla-paryāya?)
which is not read by the Sarvāstivādins. The work The Simile of Grasping with
the Fist (the Hasta-dvala?) collects together many scriptural quotations, but there
are those groups, among all groups, who do not read this work. For although it
collects together a number of scriptures which are unanimously read by all the
sects, yet there are differences in their phraseology."
So it would thus be worthwhile to attempt a reconstruction of the sectarian
sutras of the Sarvästivādins.
14. Samathadeva's Commentary.
How can we know the Sarvästivādin āgamas, and especially those āgamas
quoted by Vasubandhu in the Kośabhasyam? One source is a commentary on the
Kośabhasyam by one Samathadeva, an Indian scholar-monk about whom nothing
is known. Only one work bearing his name remains, preserved in the Tibetan
Tanjur (Tohoku no. 4094; Peking no. 5595), entitled the Upāyika-nāmā Abhi-
dharmakośa-Tīkā. Although entitled a țīkā (sub-commentary), the Upāyika is not
a commentary in the usual sense of that word; in fact, the Upāyika is only about
half the length of the Kośabhāṣyam.
Rather, wherever there is a passage in the Kośabhasyam that quotes from an
agama, that passage is given by Samathadeva by the full quotation of the passage
from out of the sutra text. Often the whole paragraph is given, or if not, he gives
the title of the agama and the chapter or section title where the passage is to be
found. Occasionally, if there is no passage to be found in relevant āgamas, related
passages are given from āgamas which illustrate examples of usage. The Upāyika
is valuable, not so much for understanding the Kośabhasyam, but for the
reconstruction of sectarian, Sarvästivādin āgamas.
It is premature to suppose that the agamas quoted in the Upāyika are the
same as those seen by Vasubandhu. Still they are close enough to get a good idea of
the influences of the Sarvastivādin āgamas on Sarvāstivādin Abhidharma. Yet the
difficulties inherent in the Upayika are still great.
For example, the Kośabhāṣyam gives "in the ninth sūtra of the Dirgha
Agama ..." (19.17b), or "in the third sūtra, included in the thirteenth śloka of the
Śrāvaka-vyākhyāna . . .” (2.7b), or "in the second sūtra in the Vibhanga-
saṁgraha . . ." (10.10b), or sometimes simply "frävastyam nidānam . . ." ("in thexlvi The Abhidharma
episode at Śrāvasti"), or "Evam mayā śrutam . . .” ("Thus have I heard"). But
since many of these works cannot be found in the extant Chinese or Pāli editions
of the Canon, comparison is impossible.
Sakurabe (in an article on pp. 155-161 of the Yamaguchi Hakase Kanreki-
kinen Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Ronsõ) traces a number of Sarvāstivādin āgamas,
and found a remarkably close correlation between the agamas quoted in the
Kośabhāṣyam (and the Upāyika) and those texts traditionally held to be
Sarvästivādin agamas in the Chinese Canon.
Several of Sakurabe's findings are: 1. that the Sarvăstivādins had a fifth agama
(as does the Pāļi Canon today), for the Upāyika gives the sentence “in the
Artha-vargiya sutra of the Ksudraka" (see Kośabhāṣyam 1.10a), which Ksudraka
(miscellany) is the same name given the fifth nikaya (the Khuddaka Nikāya) of
the Pali Canon; 2. that the Sarvāstivādin Kṣudraka Āgama has texts that a) are in
the Chinese Tso O-han Ching (the Chinese translation of the Kṣudraka Āgama),
b) which circulated separately, and c) which do not exist in the Păļi Canon; and 3.
that the Dirgha Agama of the Kośabhāṣyam and Upāyika is totally different from
the Chinese edition of the Dirgha Agama, the Ch'ang O-han Ching. His studies
have shown that whereas the arrangement within the texts is often very close,
texts not in the Pāļi can exist in both the Kośabhāṣyam (and Upāyika) and in the
Chinese Canon.
15. Sarvästivādin Abhidharma Literature.
We can thus see that the early period of this literary genre went through three
major states of development, as given above: 1. the early usage of the word
abhidharma, 2. Abhidharmic elements in the Agamas and Nikayas, which in turn
formed the basis for 3. an independent, elaborated literature, a literature the vast
bulk of which (with the exception of the Kośabhasyam and its commentary, the
Vyākhyā) exists today only in Chinese and Tibetan translation.
16. Origin of the Abhidhamma
According to the Pāli tradition, at night the Buddha would ascend to
Tavatimśa Heaven, and there he preached the Abhidhamma to his mother, Māyā,
and to the Devas residing in that Heaven. In the daytime he would return to the
earth, where he preached this same Abhidhamma to his disciple Sāriputta.
Sāriputta, through his supernormal powers of memory, memorized the totality ofthis teaching, and in turn recited it to Bhaddaji; Bhaddaji in turn recited it, in toto
and without any error whatsoever, to his disciple, and in this way it was finally
recited to Revata who, in turn, recited it publicly at the Third Council, held in
Pāṭaliputra in 251 B.C. some 235 years after the death of the Buddha.
In the Theravada tradition of Pāļi Buddhism there are some seven long books
that go to make up the third Piṭaka, the Abhidhamma Pitaka. These books are, in
the traditional order in which they are listed:
1. Dhamma-sangani, “Enumeration of the Dhammas"
2. Vibhanga, "The Book of Treatises"
3. Patthāna, "The Book of Origination"
4. Dhātu-kathā, “Discussion of the Dhatus"
Pruden xlvii
5. Puggala-paññatti, "Description of Individuals"
6. Yamaka, "The Book of Pairs"
7. Kathā-vatthu, "The Book of Controversy."
Historians, however, place the Dhamma-sangaṇi and the Vibhanga as the
earliest of these works, followed by the Dhatu-kathā, the Puggala-paññatti, the
Kathā-vatthu, the Yamaka and the Paṭṭhāna. With the end of the composition of
the Paṭṭhāna, the Abhidhamma Piṭaka is closed, and no subsequent Abhidhamma
work in Pāļi is included within the Canon.
The Sarvästivādins claimed some six treatises (see below); these six works
went to make up the Jñaprasthāna, the Jñāprasthāna gave rise to the Maha-
vibhāṣā, and this work in turn gave rise to later compilations of doctrine.
There was no closed canon for the Sarvästivādins as far as the Abhidharma
Piṭaka was concerned, and the numerous references to "the seven Abhidharma
books of the Sarvastivādins" must be understood in this context.
In the traditional view of the six smaller works that stand in relation to the
Jñānaprasthāna, it is held that the Jñānaprasthāna is an earlier, more important
work (the body), and that the other six works-shorter in length and dealing with
only one or two topics—are its legs (Skt., pāda), implying by this that they were
written subsequent to the Jñanaprasthana in order to comment in greater detail
on topics raised first in the Jñānaprasthāna. The contemporary scholarly opinion,
however, is that these six works were the precursors of the larger Jñanaprasthāna.
These six, the padaśastras, are:
la. Sangīti-paryāya, by Śariputra (var. by Mahakauṣṭhila) composed approxi-
mately 200 years after the Nirvāṇa of the Buddha. The contents of this work
closely resemble the Dasuttara-suttanta of the Digha Nikāya; exists in Chinese
translation, T. vol. 26, no. 1536.
lb. Dharma-skandha, by Maudgalyāyana (var. by Šāriputra). This work alsoxlviii The Abhidharma
exists in Chinese translation, T. vol. 26, no. 1537.
2a. Vijñānakāya, by Devasarman, composed approximately one hundred years
after the death of the Buddha. Exists in Chinese translation, T. vol. 26, no. 1539.
2b. Dhātukaya, by Vasumitra (var. by Pūrṇa). Composed approximately three
hundred years after the death of the Buddha. Preserved in the Chinese Canon, T.
vol. 26, no. 1540.
2c. Prakaraṇa-pāda, by Vasumitra, composed some three hundred years after
the death of the Buddha. This work, which closely resembles the Pali Vibhanga-
prakaraṇa, exists in two Chinese translations, T. vol. 26, no. 1541 and no. 1542.
2d. Prajñapti-śāstra, composed by Maudgalyāyana. This work exists in one late,
incomplete Chinese translation (T. vol. 26, no. 1538), and in a Tibetan translation.
According to Sakurabe, the bulk of Sarvästivādin Abhidharma literature is
divided into three major periods: 1. the early period, the period of the six
padaśāstras, before the composition of the Jñanaprasthāna; 2. the period of the
Jñanaprasthāna, its commentaries (the vibhāṣās), to the composition of the
Amṛta-rasa, and 3. all works subsequent to the Amṛta-rasa.
Abhidharmic tendencies found within the Sūtras were extended and devel-
oped into such texts as the Sangiti-paryāya (la) and the Dharma-skandha (lb).
There is a Sangiti-suttanta in the Digha Nikaya; the Sarvastivādin text
entitled the Sangīti-puryāya is an extension of this sūtra.
The Dharma-skandha is not an extension or commentary on a sūtra, but it
takes a topic from the sutra literature and reclassifies it. The topic is taken from
one sūtra preached by the Buddha at the Jetavana-vihāra, and quotations are taken
from other texts to serve as a commentary to its subject matter.
The Dharma-skandha is made up of 21 chapters, and all but two of them are
taken verbatim from sūtras. Of these two, one is a miscellaneous chapter, and one
is on the indriyas.
The miscellaneous chapter in the Dharma-skandha lists some 78 different
types of defilements, a list found verbatim nowhere in the sūtras. What the editor
of this text obviously did was to bring together any and all descriptions of the
defilements found scattered throughout the Canon, and collect them in this one
work where they now form a total of some 78 defilements.
The chapter on the indriyas in the Dharma-skandha gives 22 different types
of indriyas; again nowhere in the sūtras are the number of indriyas given as 22,
but the editor collected all sutra references to the indriyas, and these came to 22.
According to Kimura, these śāstras were composed as a type of commentary
to the Sūtras, and in the words of Lamotte, these works are "tres proches des sūtra
cathechetiques," "close to those sutras which are catechetical in form."Pruden
xlix
According to Kimura, these two works have already left the sutra form (that
is, they are not attributed to the Buddha) and are now in the form of an
independent Abhidharma śāstra. Nevertheless they are not totally outside of sūtra
influence, and so they still have the appearance of being an edition (Lamotte:
recension) of a sūtra.
Further, these works are not fully abhidharmic in their treatment of their
subject matter; that is, there is no attempt to be inclusive in their range of topics;
rather they are devoted to only one topic. Their sectarian tendencies are still quite
small, and there is no attempt at polemics or defense of their specific doctrines. In
this last respect, the Păļi Vibhanga, the Dharma-skandha, and the Säriputra-
Abhidharma are very close to one another. And too, both the Sangiti-paryaya and
the Dharma-skandha are attributed to direct disciples of the Buddha, to Śāriputra
and to Maudgalyayana respectively (with the variants, to Mahākausthila and to
Sariputra, respectively).
The Prajnapti-sästra (2d) is included by Lamotte (Histoire, p. 206),
Frauwallner and Ryūjō Yamada in the earliest period of this Abhidharma
literature. Indeed, the fact that it is not fully abhidharmic in its treatment of
subject matter, that its sectarian or polemical tendency is small, and that it is
attributed to a direct disciple of the Buddha (here Maudgalyāyana) does apply to
this text as well as to the Sangīti-paryāya and the Dharma-skandha. Nevertheless
this work is not as close as these other two works to their origins, that of the sutra
form, but appears to mark a further step away from, or a development from its
sūtra prototype, and so is placed by Sakurabe in the second stage of the
development of early Abhidharma literature.
Both Frauwallner and Sakurabe place the Sangiti-paryāya as the earliest
Abhidharma text, and the Dharma-skandha as being slightly later in time than
the Sangiti-paryaya. De La Vallée Poussin and Lamotte place these texts however
at approximately the same period of composition.
17. The Second Period of Early Sarvāstivādin Literature.
A slightly later period in the development of this Abhidharma literature saw
an advance in terms of the texts' internal organization and their doctrinal
development. Characteristics of the literature of this period are a) the numerical
classification of items, b) the detailed commentary given to each item of the series,
and c) a greater elaboration in the contents of these works than was seen in the
earlier period of the literature. In this period of literature we have the growth of
Sarvästivādin sectarian concepts and vocabulary, and by now the vocabulary comes1 The Abhidharma
to be set.
The Sarvästivādin sectarian influence can be seen primarily in their method of
dividing, or classifying the dharmas: the dharmas are divided into defiled (aśrava)
and undefiled (anaśrava) dharmas, or into the mind (citta) and its mental events
(cetasika, caitasika). In this period too we have an elaboration of cause and effect
relationships.
The Prakarana-pada (2c), a work from this period, is noteworthy in three
respects: a) in form it is the first purely sästra work of this literature; b) in
doctrine it is the first purely Sarvāstivādin sectarian work; and c) it is the first
work to divide the dharmas into five major divisions: uncompounded dharmas
(asaṁskṛtā dharmā) and compounded (saṁskṛtā) dharmas. The compounded
dharmas are made up of four groups: physical matter (rupa), the mind (citta),
mental states (caitasikā dharmā) and dharmas or elements that are neither mind
nor matter. (Sakurabe, however, finds evidences of the fivefold division of the
dharmas in both the Sangiti-paryāya and the Dharma-skandha.)
The Prakaraṇa-pādā is made up of eight chapters. Several chapters (nos. I, IV,
and V) have had an independent translation into Chinese, which might point to
the fact that they had an independent circulation in India itself.
According to the Prajñā-paramita Upadeśa (the Ta-chih-tu lun, traditionally
attributed to Nagārjuna), the Prakaraṇa-pādā comes from two different sources,
Vasumitra and the Kaśmīrian Arhats, each writing four chapters apiece. Each of
the eight chapter deals with a different subject: even though the chapter divisions
in this work are meaningful divisions, each chapter is almost totally unrelated to
the other chapters. The Prakaraṇa-pādā is thus perhaps a collection of eight
independent works, brought together by one or two persons who were the final
editors of this work. Frauwallner terms the Prakaraṇa-pādā "ein Sammelwerk."
Chapter Four of the Prakaraṇa-pādā is an elaboration of the mental states as
first raised in the Dhātukāya; however, they are revised and augmented here by
the editor of the Prakarana-pādā.
Chapters Six and Eight have traceable origins in the Sangīti-paryāya, but the
Prakaraṇa-pādā has added considerable new material to them. Chapter Seven is
one chapter from the Dharma-skandha; here, however, the contents undergo a
reclassification.
The remaining chapters, I, II, III, and V, are the Prakaraṇa-pada's independent
contribution to the development of Sarvästivādin thought, for it is in these
chapters that we find the fivefold division of the dharmas, the tenfold wisdoms, a
new classification of the ayatanas, and an elaboration of some 98 types of mental
laziness.18. The Jñanaprasthāna.
The Jñanaprasthāna is a major compendium of Sarvästivādin thought, and its
bulk is considerably larger than all of the previous works. Its 44 chapters occupy
(in Chinese translation) some 120 pages of the Taishō edition of the Canon.
The Jñanaprasthāna (The Foundation of Knowledge) also presents original
contributions to Sarvästivādin doctrinal development: it applies dependent
origination (pratītyasamut-pāda) to biological life, and it elucidates some six
different types of material causes (hetu).
Because of its central position in the development of Sarvāstivādin Abhi-
dharma thought, it is termed the mula-śästra (Ch. pen-lun) and "the basic
Abhidharma treatise" (gen-pen o-pi ta-mo).
Both the Vibhāṣā and the Abhidharmakośa state that Katyayaniputra
collected the teachings of the Buddha which had hithertofore been scattered
throughout the Scriptures, and brought them together in one work, the
Jñānaprasthāna.
(Kásmir)
3a Asta-grantha
Pruden
The internal organization of the work leaves much to be desired: within each
topic, all information relevant to this topic is indeed collected together in one spot,
but the overall organization of the text is haphazard.
The Jñanaprasthāna exists in two very different Chinese translations. Tradi-
tionally this was thought to be simply two rather differing editions of the same
work, the one work (now termed the Așța-grantha, T. no. 1544) being the basic
text, and the other translation (now termed the Abhidharma-śāstra, T. no. 1543)
being a variant of it. Modern Japanese scholars now hold, however, that these two
works represent two different traditions of Sarvăstivādin Abhidharma learning,
one tradition being centered in Kásmir (the Asṭa-grantha), another being
centered in Gandhāra (the Abhidharma-śāstra). This is also seen in the fact that
the Mahāvibhāṣā (ostensibly a commentary on the Jñanaprasthāna) is also
preserved in two very different Chinese translations.
trans. 383 (in 30 chian)
by Sanghadeva and
Chu Fo-nien
(Gandhāra)
3a Abhidharma-śāstra
li
trans. 657-660 (in 20 chüan)
by Hsüan-tsanglii
The Abhidharma
4a Maha-Vibhāṣā
by Vasumitra and the
500 arhats, compiled
400 years after the
Parinirvāṇa of the Buddha
trans. 656–659 (in 200 chüan)
by Hsüan-tsang
4b Vibhāṣā
by Katyayaniputra
trans. 437-439 (in 14 chian)
by Buddhavarman
19. The Vibhāṣās
The Jñānaprasthāna was commented upon (in both Kaśmir and Gandhara?)
and its commentaries (vibhāṣā) were termed simply "The Commentary," or
Vibhāṣā. Since these works exist in two Chinese translations, the commentary
from Kásmir is termed the Mahāvibhāṣā (The Great Commentary, T. 1545), and
the commentary from Gandhāra is termed simply the Vibhāṣā (T. 1546).
The Mahāvibhāṣā is a voluminous commentary upon the Asta-grantha. It is
made up of some 43 long chapters and the whole work occupies some 200
fascicules (volumes) in its Chinese translation, or one whole volume, vol. 27, of
the Taishō Tripitaka. Volume 27 is 1,004 pages in length, each page having at
most some 1,392 Chinese characters!
The Gandharan Vibhāṣā, however, is much shorter in length, occupying only
14 fascicules in its Chinese translation: it has only 16 chapters to its text.
Such a voluminous commentary demonstrates to us the importance of the
Jñānaprasthāna to the Sarvastivādins, and secures for the Jñanaprasthāna a
position as the authoritative text of the Sarvästivādins.
The Mahāvibhāṣā is a detailed analysis of everything in the Jñanaprasthāna, in
one place, the Mahāvibhāṣā devotes some 76½ pages to commenting on one
passage in the Jūānaprasthāna of only 100 characters. The work also raises new
issues, issues not raised previously in the Jñanaprasthana. Much new doctrine is
introduced, and in addition, the Mahāvibhāṣā quotes differing opinions on topics
from outside orthodox Sarvāstivādin ranks. Also many non-Buddhist theories are
quoted at length.
By way of illustration, at the start of the work the Jñānaprasthāna asks the
question, "What is the highest worldly dharma (laukika dharma)?” The answer in
the Asta-grantha version of the Jñānaprasthāna is in some 70 Chinese characters,
while the Mahavibhāṣā's answer to this same question is in more than 8,000
Chinese characters, and takes up some two Chinese fascicules.
In the Mahāvibhāṣā, in answer to the question, "Why, in the Scriptures, didthe Blessed One first teach the highest worldly dharma?", some 33 different
answers are given, from this question's doctrinal implications for the concept of
adherence (prāpti), to the various types of mindfulness (smṛtyupasthāna), to the
four different types of conditions (pratyaya), and gives, in all, the names of eight
different masters and schools.
The Mahāvibhāṣā spends many pages on important points and problems but,
in the main, it follows the Jñanaprasthāna's (the Asta-grantha's) internal
organization.
20. Development of the Literature After the Vibhāṣās.
Sakurabe places the Abhidharma-amṛta-rasa (The Abhidharma Taste of the
Deathless) between the Jñanaprasthāna and the Mahāvibhāṣā on the basis of its
doctrines, for it introduces points not found in the Jñānaprasthāna, points which,
however, are found in the Mahāvibhāṣā: the doctrine of the five types of results
(phala), the theory of atoms (paramaņu), etc.
This work is a simple summary of all Sarvastivādin doctrine. It is made up of
16 chapters, and so, according to Sakurabe, constitutes the first work in the third
period of Sarvastivadin Abhidharma literature, the period after the composition
of the Jñanaprasthāna. In its internal organization it appears to be a precursor to
Dharmajina's Abhidharmahṛdaya, which was in turn the direct precursor to the
Abhidharmakośabhāṣam.
Pruden liii
21. The Abhidharmabrdaya.
The Abhidharmahṛdaya (Heart of the Abhidharma) is a work in seven
integral chapters, the order of which almost perfectly parallels the later order of
the chapters in the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam.
The chapters of the Abhidharmahṛṣdaya are:
I. Dhātu-nirdesa
II.
Samskara-nirdesa
III. Karma-nirdeśa
IV. Anusaya-nirdesa
V. Pudgala-marga-nirdeśa
(Kośa chapters)
I. Dhatu-nirdesa
II. Indriya-nirdesa
III. Loka-nirdeśa
IV. Karma-nirdeśa
V. Anusaya-nirdesa
VI. Pudgala-marga-nirdeśaliv
The Abhidharma
VI. Jnana-nirdesa
VII. Samāpatti-nirdesa
VII. Jnana-nirdeśa
VIII. Samāpatti-nirdesa
IX. Pudgala-pratiṣedha
The Abhidharmahṛdaya concludes with a supplement (a Miscellanea) and an
appendix (a Discussion), for a total of nine chapters.
The Abhidharmahṛdaya was the first work to use kārikās, or verses, followed
by their prose commentary (bhāṣyam). This was the first real innovation in the
internal organization of an Abhidharmic text. The work is internally coherent
from beginning to end, and it is not merely a summary or an elaboration of a
previous text: it is a well thought-out presentation of doctrine. The author of this
work, Dharmajina (or Dharmaśreşthi) clearly had a self-conscious awareness of
this work as a whole, complete text.
This sevenfold chapter division of the Abhidharmahṛdaya was adopted by
later works, by the Abhidharmahṛdaya of Upaśānta (Taishō no. 1551), the
Kṣudraka-Abhidharmahṛdaya (also called the Samyukta-Abhidharmahṛdaya,
Taishō no. 1552) of Dharmatrāta, and, with some modifications, by Vasubandhu,
in his Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam.
22. The Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam.
Even though Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakośabhasyam is the outstanding
Abhidharma text of Far Eastern Buddhism, it is not the purpose of this article to
discuss the question of the authorship of the Kośabhāṣyam, nor the circumstances
surrounding its composition: these topics will be discussed in a later article. I
should like rather to merely say a few words on the place of the Kośabhāṣyam in
the general course of development of the Sarvästivādin Abhidharma literature.
Vasubandhu changed the name of the second chapter (from Saṁskāra-
nirdeśa) to Indriya-nirdeśa, and added another chapter, the third chapter, Loka-
nirdeśa, for a total of nine chapters. The former supplement and appendix
material was incorporated into the body of the work, and Vasubandhu added a
new appendix chapter, the Pudgala-pratisedha (Refutation of the Soul), to the end
of the work as a ninth chapter.
Later post-Kośa works, and indeed even anti-Kośa works like Sanghabhadra's
Nyaya-anusāra and his Samaya-pradipika, not only kept the kārikā-bhāṣyam style
of composition, but Saṁghabhadra even adopted the Kośa's (Vasubandhu's)
kārikās verbatim, adding his own prose commentary, or Bhasyam. Samghabhadra
changed the chapter names, and he took the ninth chapter, the Pudgala-de febre
Pruden lv
pratisedha, from the end of the work and put it at the beginning as a first chapter,
there to serve as an introduction to what is the most essential feature of Buddhist
thought, its doctrine of anātman.
Another work, the Abhidharma-dipa (Lamp on the Abhidharma, or the
Abhidharma-vṛtti Marmadīpa-nāma) was composed somewhat later than these
above works. The author of this work (known only in Tibetan as Phyogs-kyi-glan-
po) renamed the first chapter (the Dhātu-nirdeśa) the Skandha-ayatana-dhātu-
nirdeśa, and the sixth chapter (the Pudgala-marga-nirdeśa) became simply the
Māraga-nirdeśa. The author kept the kārikā-bhāṣyam format, which was by now a
distinctive feature of Sarvästivādin Abhidharma literature.
The kārikā-bhāṣyam format has only one exception to it: the Abhidharma-
avatāra. This work, whose full name is the Sārasamuccaya-nama Abhidharma-
avatāra-țikā (Entry into the Abhidharma, being a Compendium of its Essentials)
is a work roughly contemporary with the composition of the Kośa. Tradition
names the author as one Parśva (or Skandati). This work does not have the
kārīkābhāṣyam format but is, rather, a short treatise completely in prose;
moreover the work lacks chapter divisions. It classifies all Sarvästivādin doctrine
on the basis of the five skandhas and the three uncompounded dharmas, an
original departure from the division based on uncompounded and compounded
dharmas (see above).
23. Sanskrit Remains of the Abhidharma.
Very little remains of the bulk of Abhidharma literature in its original Sanskrit
or Indic languages, especially when compared with the remains of the various
vinayas and sūtras which have been uncovered. Thus the Abhidharma literature of
the schools of Kaśmir and Gandhara-the Sarvästivādins and the Sautrāntikas-
exist primarily in their Chinese and Tibetan translations, and almost not at all in
their original Sanskrit.
A fragment thought to be of the Sangīti-paryāya was found on 31 July 1930 in
Bamiyan. In the village of Akkan, in the foothills of the Himalayas, there is a
35-meter-high image of the Buddha, and to the east of this image is a cave. It was
from the collapsed roof of this cave that one page of text, written in Guptan
script, was found. This fragment was studied by Professor Sylvain Lévi, and he
discovered that it corresponded to a part of the Sangiti-paryāya. The results of his
study were published in the Journal Asiatique (1932), and were translated and
reprinted in two Japanese journals within that same year.lvi
The Abhidharma
The passages in question were from that part of the Sangīti-paryāya which is
in close agreement with a Dīgha Nikāya passage and, indeed, the rediscovered
passage was so fragmentary that it could also be from the Vinaya or from the
Anguttara Nikaya! But if it is indeed a section of the Sangiti-paryaya, there is then
but one page from the early period of Sarvästivädin Abhidharma literature which
has been preserved for us in its original language.
Furthermore, Bamiyan is 150 kilometers to the west of the city of Kabul, the
present-day capital of Afghanistan. This area was the center-as Gandhāra-of
Sarvāstivādin studies, a fact perhaps relevant to the identification of this fragment
with the text of the Sangiti-paryaaya.
24. The Sanskrit Kośabhāṣyam.
Another piece of Sanskrit Abhidharma literature that has been found is the
full text of the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam.
The Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam is made up of two parts, the kārikā or verse
sections (the Kośa), and the auto-commentary to these verses (the bhāṣya) by
Vasubandhu.
The kārikā section has traditionally been known. It has in fact a separate
translation into Chinese, which points to its having had an independent
circulation in India.
The prose or commentarial section, the bhāṣyam, had long been lost, but in
1935 Rahula Saṁkṛtyāyana discovered a palm-leaf manuscript of both the kārikā
and the bhāṣyam of the Abhidharmakośa, that is, the full text of this work, in the
Tibetan monastery of Ngor, a Sakyapa institution located some two days' ride
south of Shigatse.
This palm-leaf manuscript dates from the 12th or the 13th century. It is an
incomplete text: in the sixth chapter, kārikās nos. 53 to 68 are missing.
Nevertheless, the manuscript has some 600 kārikās, plus 13 from the last chapter.
The kārīkā section of this manuscript find was published in the Journal of the
Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, by V.V. Gokhale; but it was only
recently (1967) that the prose section, the bhāṣyam, was published together with
these kārikās (see below).
Preceeding the find by Saṁkṛtyayana, however, much scholarly work had
already been done on the text of the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam.Pruden lvii
25. Translations of the Abhidharmakośabhasyam.
A team of Japanese and French scholars had worked on the Kofa, based on
the kārikās as they had been preserved in the Sphuta-arthā Abhidharmakośa
Vyākhyā, a Sanskrit commentary on the Kośabhasyam by Yaśomitra. In this
Vyākhyā the kārikās are quoted, as well as large parts of the prose text (the
bhāṣyam). Working with a Cambridge manuscript of Yasomitra's Vyākhyā and
with the Tibetan translation of the Vyākhyā, Louis de La Vallée Poussin published
a complete French translation of the Chinese text of the Abhidharma-
kośabhāṣyam (i.e., the Chinese text of Hsuan-tsang's translation) in six volumes
in Brussels (1923–1931). In chapter six of his translation, de La Vallée Poussin
published the complete text of all the kārikās as then recently discovered by
Sylvain Lévi in Nepal, a total of some 210 ślokas.
Based on de La Vallée Poussin's work, Samkṛtyayana published the ikās
with his own Sanskrit commentary (1933).
In 1935 the Japanese scholar Yoshio Nishi published the Kusharon (the
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam in Hsüan-tsang's Chinese translation) in the Kokuyaku-
issaikyō series, and in this work he included the Sanskrit text of the kārikās. (The
Kokuyaku-issaikyō series was an edition of important works from the Far Eastern
Buddhist Canon, translated into Japanese with often valuable introductions and
annotations to the texts). In 1936 Ryūjō Yamada published the kārikās of the
first chapter of the Kośabhāṣyam, the Dhātu-nirdeśa, with their Chinese and Tibetan
Tibetan versions (in Japanese translation) in a leading Japanese cultural journal,
Bunka (Culture).
More recently, Narendra Nath Law's edition of Yasomitra's commentary
served as the basis for Aiyaswami Sastri's publishing all the kārikās to the third
chapter, the Loka-nirdeśa, and his translation of them into English in the Indian
Historical Quarterly, vol. XXIV (1953).
26. Commentaries on the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam.
There are altogether some seven Indian commentaries to the Abhidharma-
kośabhasyam preserved in Tibetan, Chinese, and Uighur translations. The only
one whose complete Sanskrit text has been preserved is Yaśomitra's Vyākhyā
(which also exists in Tibetan translation). Manuscripts of the Vyākhayā exist in
libraries in Paris, Cambridge, Leningrad, and Calcutta, and partial editions of this
text are preserved in the libraries of Tokyo University and Kyoto University,
Japan. The Paris manuscript, the best edition of this Vyākhyā, is preserved in the
collection of the Societe Asiatique; this text was reproduced by the Japanese
scholars Bun'yu Nanjō and Kenjū Sasahara, and deposited in the ŌtaniIviii
The Abhidharma
University Library, Kyoto.
In 1912, international efforts were begun to publish this work under the
leadership of Sylvain Lévi. Lévi, Stcherbatsky, and Unrai Ogiwara began. the
publication of this work in Bibliographie Bouddhique, getting as far as the middle
of the second chapter (1918, 1931). De La Vallée Poussin independently published
the text and French translation of the third chapter, the Loka-nirdeśa
(1914-1918).
In Japan an association was formed to aid in the publication of the Vyākhyā,
an association headed by Ogiwara. This edition of the Vyākhyā was to be based
primarily on the Calcutta manuscript, with reference to the Paris manuscript. It
was then that the whole text of the Vyākhyā was finally published in Roman
script in Tokyo (1932–1936). This work was recently reprinted (1971) in Tokyo,
and is still readily available. In this work Ogiwara compared the text of the
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam with its Chinese and Tibetan translations. The text of
the Kośabhāṣyam is italicized in the body of Yasomitra's work, and all of the
works quoted in both Vasubandhu and Yaśomitra are checked out in the footnotes.
More recently, Narendra Nath Law has published Yaśomitra's Vyākhyā as far
as the fourth chapter, Karma-nirdesa, in Devanagari script, based on the
Cambridge manuscript edition of this text. Law's work was published in the
Calcutta Oriental Series, no. 31 (1949-1955).
27. The Tibetan Kośabhāṣyam.
All of the work described above is based almost exclusively on the Sanskrit
editions of the Kośabhasyam and the Vyākhyā, and on its Chinese translations.
Nevertheless, the Tibetan translation of the Kofabhāṣyam has also received some
attention from Western and Japanese scholars.
Stcherbatsky published the Tibetan text of the first chapter, the Dhātu-
nirdeśa, in Bibliographie Bouddhique, XX, Part I (1918), and, in Part II (1930) of
this same series, continued the publication of the text up to the 46th kārikā of the
second chapter.
In Japan, Shunga Teramoto published the Tibetan text of the first chapter in
Kyoto (1936), and the Department of Buddhist Studies (Bukkyōgaku kenkyū-
shitsu) of Kyoto University published the Tibetan text of the first chapter of the
Kośabhasyam along with the Vyākhyā of Yaśomitra: they have now gotten as far as
the sixth chapter of the work.Pruden
lix
28. Translations of the Kośabhāṣyam and the Vyākhyā.
At the present time there exists a number of translations of the Kośabhāṣyam
and of the Vyākhyā.
A complete French translation of the Kośabhāṣyam was carried out by de La
Vallée Poussin. This translation is primarily based on the Chinese translation of
Hsuan-tsang, but frequent reference is made to the Sanskrit text of Vasubandhu
(as preserved in Yasomitra), the Chinese translation of Paramartha, and the
Tibetan. This work was published from 1921 to 1931 (see above).
Stcherbatsky "translated" the ninth chapter, the Pudgala-pratiședha, from the
Tibetan into English, under the title "The Soul Theory of the Buddhists” (1920).
This translation was first published in the Bulletin de l'Academie des Russie, but it
has been recently reprinted in India. This work is actually a very loose paraphrase
of the ninth chapter.
Yasomitra's Vyākhyā has also undergone a number of partial translations. De
La Vallee Poussin translated the Vyakhya's commentary on the third chapter of
the Kośabhasyam into French (1914-1919), and the combined efforts of Ogiwara,
Susumu Yamaguchi, Gadjin Nagao, and Issai Funabashi have translated the
Vyākhyā into modern Japanese up to the second chapter of the Kośabhāṣyam. In
addition, Yamaguchi and Funabashi have published a Japanese translation of the
Vyākhyā commentary on the third chapter, the Loka-nirdeśa (1955). In this work,
each sentence of the Sanskrit is compared with its Tibetan translation, Yasomitra's
commentary is added, and illustrative material from Sthiramati and other Indian
masters is added. Working in this same format, Funabashi translated parts of the
fourth chapter, Karma-nirdeśa, in 1956.
More recently, Sakurabe has translated the first and the second chapters of the
Kośabhāṣyam into Japanese (1969), based on the full Sanskrit text edition of
Pradhan (Patna, 1967).
29. Indexes to the Kośabhasyam
The first index to the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam was an index based on the
Chinese translation of this work. This index was called the Kandō-Kusharon-
sakuin. This index lists all of the Chinese words of the Kusharon (the
Kośabhasyam) in the order of their Japanese reading. The text used as the basis
for this index was the Kandō-bon, or Kandō edition of this text. The word kando
literally means that the annotation or commentary (-dō) to the text was placed atlx
The Abhidharma
the top or crown (kan-) of the page. When a text is termed the Kandō edition,
this means that the editing of the work was done by one eminent scholar monk of
the late 19th and the early 20th century, Kyokuga Saeki. Saeki's edition (i.e., the
Kandō edition) of the Kusharon was the edition of this text used by de La Vallée
Poussin in his French translation, and most of de La Vallée Poussin's annotation is
taken directly from the work of Saeki.
With the publication in 1946 of the Sanskrit kārīkas by V.V. Gokhale (see
above), and especially with the publication, in Devanagari script, of the full text of
the Abhidharmakośa-bhāṣyam (Saṁkṛtyāyana's manuscript find) by P. Pradhan in
1967, it now became possible to compile an index to the Sanskrit text of the
Kośabhāṣyam. This was done in the Kusharon-sakuin, compiled by Professor
Akira Hirakawa of Tokyo University. The English title of this index is "Index to
the Abhidharmakośa-bhāṣyam, Part One", and it was published in Tokyo in 1973.
The lead words in this index are given in Sanskrit, with their Tibetan and Chinese
translations. The Chinese words are given as they appear in Hsüan-tsang's
translation of the Kośabhasyam, with the variants of Paramartha given when
needed. In this index, the first and all subsequent occurrences of the Sanskrit lead
words are given (as found in Pradhan's edition of the text), followed by the use of
each word in a compound, then by its Tibetan and Chinese translation. Part One
of the Kusharon-sakuin is prefaced by a long English essay by Professor
Hirakawa dealing with a number of topics raised by the Kośabhāṣyam: the date of
Vasubandhu, the relation of the Kośabhasyam to the Yogācāra tradition of Indian
Mahāyāna Buddhism, the relation of the Sautrāntikas and Mahāyāna Buddhism,
and a review of the internal structure and the contents of the Kośabhāṣyam.
Part Two of this Index was published in 1977 and in this index the lead entries
are given in Chinese, with their Sanskrit equivalents; the occurrence of the
Chinese words in both the translations of Hsüan-tsang and Paramārtha are
shown, as well as the location of their Sanskrit originals in Pradhan's edition of
the text.
Part Three was published in 1978 and is a Tibetan-Sanskrit index to the
Kośabhasyam. The references to the Tibetan Kosabhāṣyam are taken from the
Peking edition (vol. 115) of the Tibetan Canon, with occasional readings adopted
from the Derge edition of the Canon. Part Three also includes a complete page
concordance from the Pradhan edition of the Kośabhasyam (published in the
Bauddha Bharati Series, vols. V, VI, VII, IX), to the Taishō editions of the text (the
translations of Hsüan-tsang and Paramārtha), to the Kandō edition of Kyokuga
Saeki (see above), and to both the Peking and the Derge edition of the Tibetan
Kośabhasyam.Pruden
lxi
Part Three also contains an Addenda section with a supplement to the
Sanskrit of Part One, and a valuable supplement to the corrigenda of Pradhan's
text; and a 53-page corrigenda to Parts One and Two of this index concludes this
work.lxii
The Abhidharma
1. The Theravadin Tradition of Hināyāna Buddhism-the religion of Ceylon, Burma, Thailand,
Laos, and Cambodia-recognizes some seven works as comprising the totality of their Abhidharma
Pitaka: the Sarvästivādins of Kaśmir and Gandhara also have an Abhidharma Pițṭaka, but the
contents of this corpus are not limited to seven and include a larger number of works: nor it appears,
was it ever a closed system like the Theravadins'.
2. On the split, see the Prefatory Notes of C.A.F. Rhys-Davids, in her Points of Controversy.
According to Vasumitra, the original Sangha split into two, the Mahāsānghikas and the
Sthaviravādins (Pāļi: Theravadins), and the Sthaviravādins then split into two: the Haimavata
(the "snow dwellers”, the present-day Theravādins) and the Sarvăstivādins. This last split
occurred around 250 B.C.Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam
of Vasubandhu
Louis de La Vallée PoussinINTRODUCTION¹
The earliest literature of Buddhism is divided into two parts or "baskets": The
Vinaya, the rules and regulations of the monastic discipline, including a history
and commentary on this discipline; and the Dharma,² later termed Sūtra, a
collection of discourses which explain the Dharma, that is to say, everything that
directly or indirectly concerns the path to salvation-a little moral law (powerless
though it is to definitively deliver one from suffering), and above all the Eightfold
Path, the methods of contemplation and of meditation which lead to the definitive
deliverance from suffering, that is to Nirvāṇa. This is the essential thing, for "the
sole taste of the Good Law is the taste of deliverance.**
The Sūtra or Dharma cannot be practiced exclusively. One effectively combats
desire and hatred (lobha, dveșa) only by destroying ignorance (moha); the moral
law presupposes samyagdṛsti or correct view with respect to the existence and
retribution of action. Even more so, the elimination of the defilements and their
most minute traces, indispensable to liberation from the round of rebirth,
presupposes penetrating illumination into the nature of things, their accidental
and transitory character. The sūtras always contained, we can believe, much
psychology and ontology.³ When catechesis developed, numerous discourses of
the Buddha were edited, which contained enumerations, filled with glosses, of
technical terms. These are what the early tradition calls mātṛkās or indices. The
Anguttara³ and Digha 33-4, where these categories are arranged according to the
increasing number of their terms, have preserved for us an early type of this
literature. [One of the most notable matṛkās is the Sangitisuttanta. The Pāļi
Canon has made a sutra of this text and places it in the Digha. Under the name of
Sangitiparyaya, this mātṛkā takes its place among the seven canonical Abhi-
dharma texts of the Sarvästivāda.]6
One school, more famous than the others, and which was perhaps the first to
constitute standardized baskets of Vinaya and of Sūtra, was the school of the Pāļi
language, also the first to compile a third basket. The first catechism had been
incorporated into the Sutra. The name Abhidharma was given to the new, more
systematic, catechisms. It was a name which designated a special manner of
presenting the Dharma and the authenticity (if not historical, at least doctrinal) of
these texts came to be affirmed and they were grouped into a "basket" placed on
the same level as the baskets of Vinaya and Sūtra. [For a discussion of the2
Introduction
authenticity of the Abhidhammapiṭaka, see for example Atthasālini, p. 35.] "Let it,
then, be clearly understood," says Mrs. Rhys Davids, "that our present knowledge
of such philosophy as is revealed in the Buddhist Pâļi canon would be practically
undiminished if the whole of the Abhidhammapitaka were non-existent... The
burden, then, of Abhidhamma is not any positive contribution to the philosophy
of early Buddhism (?), but analytic and logical and methodological elaboration of
what is already given ... The chief methods of that (=Abhidhamma) training
were: first, the definition and determination of all names or terms entering into
the Buddhist scheme of culture; secondly, the enunciation of all doctrines,
theoretical and practical, as formulas, with coordination of all such as were
logically interrelated; and finally, practice in reducing all possible heterodox
positions to an absurdity . . ."7 Nevertheless, the word Abhidhamma takes on a
higher scope, which we can understand by example. The prohibition against
drinking alcohol is a precept of the Vinaya; but to examine the transgression of
alcohol as a transgression of nature or a transgression of disobedience is to bring
pure theory to play upon the Vinaya, to "refined the Vinaya, and this is what is
called Abhivinaya. In the same way, the Abhidharma did not remain a stranger to
scientific research and philosophy; it concerns itself with questions whose
relationship with the Dharma properly so-called are quite loose. This tendency is
very much accentuated in the latest of the Pali Abhidhamma treatises, the
Kathāvatthu, which tradition dates from the Council of Asoka. This work is an
account of heresies, and fixes their positions very clearly with respect to a mass of
purely speculative points: in this work one can verify the long work of exegesis of
which the Sūtra had been the object.
8
The Pāli Abhidhamma does not form part of the ancient patrimony common
to all the sects-which is not to say that it is Singhalese! Whereas all the
soundings carried out in the canonical literature of purely Indian Buddhism
reveals to us some Vinayas and sūtras that have developed out of the Pali
literature, or which have a close connection with this literature, no one has yet
discovered the presence of any "prototypes" of the Pāļi Abhidhammas.
11
In any case, according to the tradition itself, the Kathāvatthu belongs in its
own right to a certain philosophic school, the Vibhajjavādins, "the followers of
distinction." 10 To the old question, discussed in the sūtras, "Does all exist?",
these philosophers answered by distinguishing (vibhajya): "The present, and the
past which has not yet brought forth its result exist; the future and the past which
have brought forth their result do not exist. ¹2
To this school there is opposed-from ancient times, we may believe-the
school of "all exists," Sarvästivāda, (Sarvāstivādinas, Sabbatthivadino). ThisPoussin 3
school-which also formed a sect, which had a special Vinaya and its own canon,
and which was Sanskritized ¹3-“carved out" the Dharma. In addition to “casuists,”
vinayadharas, they had "philosophers,” ābhidhārmikas. [Their Devasarman, the
proponent of the existence of the past and the future, was opposed to Mu-lien or
Moggaliputta.] A long work, with regard to which we are little informed, ¹4 led to
the redaction of numerous works among which are the seven books of the
Abhidharma, Treatises (sästra) or Works (prakarana), the Jñānaprasthāna and its
six “feet” (pāda), the Dharmaskandha, etc. There were philosophies which came
out of this first level of wisdom literature. ¹ But the speculative work continued
and, towards the end of the first century of our era (Council of Kaniska),¹6 a
commentary was written on the Jñanaprasthāna: the Vibhāṣā, a collective work
which gives its name to all the masters who adopted it. The Vaibhāṣikas are the
philosophers who refer to the Vibhāṣā (Watters, i.276). The center of the school
appears to have been Kaśmir, even though there were Sarvästivādins outside of
Kaśmīr,—Bahirdeśakas, “masters from foreign lands”; Pascattyas, "Westerners
[relative to Kaśmir]"; Aparantakas, "masters from the western borders"-and
some Kaśmiris who were not Vaibhāṣikas.
15
The Sarvāstivādins and the Vaibhāṣikas believed that the Abhidharmas were
the word of the Buddha. But there were masters who did not recognize the
authenticity of these books. When they were obliged to observe that there is no
"basket of the Abhidharma” outside of the Abhidharmas of the Sarvastivādins but
that each one of them knew that the word of the Buddha was embraced within
three "baskets," they answered that the Buddha taught the Abhidharma in the
Sūtra itself-which is quite true. They recognized only the authority of the Sūtra,
and took the name of Sautrāntikas. ¹7
But we should not be mistaken with respect to their attitude. Even though
formally opposed to some of the theses of the Vibhāṣā and of the Vaibhāṣikas, the
Sautrāntikas had a modern enough speculation and perhaps a Buddhology. They
did not systematically combat their opponents, who were, without doubt, their
predecessors. They admitted everything from the system of the Vaibhāṣikas which
they had no formal reason to deny.
Such is, at least-to speak with greater prudence, the attitude of our author,
Vasubandhu, 18
His work, the Abhidharmakośa, a collection of approximately six hundred
verses, describes itself as "a presentation of the Abhidharma as taught by the
Vaibhaşikas of Kaśmir." This is not to say that Vasubandhu is a Vaibhāsika;
neither is he a Sarvāstivādin. He has evident sympathies for the Sautrāntikas, and
utilizes the opinions of the "early masters"-namely "the Yogācārins, the chief4
Introduction
among them being Asanga"-but without doubt, in his own mind, the system of
the Vaibhāṣikas is indispensable: the Vaibhāṣikas are "the School." One does not
find anywhere else a body of doctrine as organized or as complete as theirs.
Nevertheless they are sometimes in error, and on important points too.
Vasubandhu completes his collection of technical verses, an impartial presentation
of the Vaibhāṣika system, with a prose commentary, the Abhidharmakośa-
bhasyam, wherein his personal opinions, objections, and the opinions of diverse
schools and masters are found presented among numerous theses rejected by the
School. 19 We know that Vasubandhu was, in his turn, combated and refuted by
orthodox Vaibhāṣikas.
But it matters little to us whether he is always right! The essential thing, for
us as for the masters who followed him, is that his book and his bhāṣyam are truly
a treasure (kośa).
***
From the point of view of dogmatics the Abhidharmakośa, with the Bhāṣyam,
is perhaps the most instructive book of early Buddhism (the Hinayana). It renders
a great service in the study of canonical philosophy and in the study of
scholasticism properly so-called.
It would be very wrong to say that we do not know the philosophy of
canonical Buddhism: we know its essentials, its principle teachings, its major
affiliations, and many of its details. But the history of this philosophy, its origins
and development, is less clear: even though we can imagine that Buddhism, like
the Buddha himself, took many steps at its birth, and these in all directions. But it
is fair to say (and encouraging to repeat) that if the history of the canonical
philosophy has not yet been done, the image that scholars such as Rhys Davids
and Oldenberg have given of this philosophy either remains definitive or calls for
but light retouching. We may believe, however, that we do not fully know any
part, because we so imperfectly know the scholasticism which certainly enriched it
and perhaps deformed it, but which certainly unfolded within it; which moreover
should be, by its methods and its tendencies, completely parallel to the early
speculation from whence the canonical philosophy itself arose. This philosophy is
made up of the earlier strata of a speculation which continues within scholasticism
proper, Pali as well as Sanskrit.
The impression of ignorance is very strong when we attempt to read early
works such as the Dhammasangani or the Kathāvatthu, or when, with some
rigor, we attempt to determine the sense of the sūtras themselves, word for wordPoussin 5
(avayavärtha). How many terms the exact significance of which escape us! It is
easy
and often correct to observe that these terms originally did not have a precise
meaning; that the general orientation of Buddhist thought alone merits our
interest; that, if we were to ignore precisely the four dhyanas and the four
ārūpyasamāpattisā, vitarka and vicāra, rūpa, the "fruits" and the "candidates for
these fruits," we nevertheless have a sufficient idea of the major purport of and
the methods leading to holiness within Buddhism; and that it is the candidates for
these fruits who should preoccupy themselves with the details of the Eightfold
Path rather than Western historians. Some think that scholasticism is not
interesting; that, throughout Buddhist history, it remains alien to religion
proper, as with the early doctrine. This is wrong: iti cen na sūtravirodhataḥ, “If
you think thus, no, for this is in contradiction with the Sutra!" Buddhism was born
complicated and verbose; its scholastic classifications are often pre-Buddhist; it is
our good fortune to be able to examine them up close, in sources more ancient
than Buddhaghosa; and the Abhidharmakośa bestows this good fortune upon us
in the measure in which we have the courage to be worthy of it.
An example of this is given by the Buddhists themselves. The Abhidharma-
kośa has had a great destiny: "This work . . . had an enormous influence. From
the time of its appearance, it became indespensable to all, friend and foe, we are
told; and there is reason to believe this, for the same fortune followed it
everywhere, first in China with Paramārtha, and Hsüan-tsang and his disciples,
and then in Japan, where to this day specialized Buddhist studies begin with the
Kośaśāstra." 20
The author assures us that we will find in his book a correct summary of the
doctrine of the Vaibhāṣikas; but, however close may be his dependence on earlier
Abhidharma masters, we may believe that he improves upon what they have said.
When the Kośa has been read, the earlier works of the Sarvästivādins, the
Abhidharmas and the Vibhāṣā, undoubtedly lose part of their practical interest.
Though the Chinese have translated these works, the Tibetan Lotsavas did not
think it proper to put these works into Tibetan (with the sole exception of the
Prajñapti2¹), doubtless because the Abhidharmakośa, in accord with the resolution
of Vasubandhu, constitutes a veritable summa, embracing all problems-ontology,
psychology, cosmology, discipline and the doctrine of action, the theory of
results, mysticism and sanctity-and treating them with sobriety and in clear
language, with all the method of which the Indians are capable. After Vasubandhu,
the Northern Buddhists-whichever school they belonged to, and whether or not
they adhered to the Mahayana-learned the elements of Buddhism from the
Kośa. All schools, in fact, are in agreement with respect to a great number of6
Introduction
fundamental items, the same admitted by Pāļi orthodoxy, and the same, we may
add, which are often subjacent to the sūtras themselves. These items, which the
Vaibhāṣikas have elucidated, are nowhere so wisely presented as in the Abhi-
dharmakośa. This sufficiently explains the reputation of the author and the
popularity of the book.
If Vasubandhu is an excellent professor of Buddhism, of Buddhism without
epithet of sect or school, he furthermore renders us a precious service by initiating
us into the systematic philosophy of these schools. He constructs before us the
spacious edifice of Vaibhāṣika dogma; he shows us its flaws; he explains what the
Sautrāntika says, what the Vaibhāṣika answers, and what he himself thinks. Like
many philosophical treatises, and like the best of them, the Abhidharmakośa is a
creature of circumstances, written sub specie aeternitatis. We find in it many
proper names, and many allusions to contemporary debates. 22 This is not a dull
book.
We also find in it a great number of quotations which are shortened
elsewhere. Because of this, the Kośabhāṣyam is a precious testament for the study
of the earlier literature. 23 Its quotations add to the numerous fragments of the
Sanskrit canon which the sands of Turkestan have given us or which have been
discovered under the modernist prose of the Divyāvadāna and the sūtras of the
Great Vehicle. These bear most often on texts of a doctrinal order, and we become
clear with respect to the doctrinal, if not the historical, relationships of the canons.
***
For a long time the importance of the Abhidharma has been recognized by
European scholars, initially by Burnouf. Let us see why the study of this work has
been deferred for such a long period of time.
The work of Vasubandhu is made up of two distinct parts: the Abhidharma-
kośa or the kärikäs, a collection of approximately six hundred verses; and their
commentary or bhasyam.
And of the vast exegetical literature that fills eight volumes of the Tibetan
canon, the Nepalese scribes have preserved only a single document for us, a
commentary on the Bhasya by Yasomitra, the Abhidharmakośavyakhya, which
bears the name of Sphuṭārtha, "of clear meaning."
This commentary by Yasomitra is not a complete commentary. It occasionally
quotes the stanzas of Vasubandhu, and it elucidates such and such a passage of the
Bhāṣyam, indicating the passage in question by the first words of that passage,Poussin 7
following the general usage of commentators. "The subject itself," says Burnouf,
"is difficult to follow because of the form of the commentary, which detaches each
word from the text, and develops it or argues with it in a gloss which ordinarily is
very long. It is only very rarely possible to distinguish the text from among those
commentaries in the midst of which it is lost." Let us add that Yasomitra passes
over in silence everything that appears easy to him or without interest, and he
plunges the reader ex abrupto into discussions of items and "positions" which are
not indicated. In the First Chapter, he explains nearly every word of the text.
Elsewhere he applies himself only to the points with respect to which there is
something important to say.
The commentary of Yaśomitra is thus, as Burnouf says, “an inexhaustible
mine of precious teachings" (Introduction, p. 447); we read thousands of
interesting things in it; but it is, by itself, a very ineffective instrument for the
study of the Abhidharmakosa.
This is why this work has been neglected for such a long time. Or, better, why,
even though it solicited the attention of many seekers, no one has yet set his hand
to work on it. A knowledge of Sanskrit is insufficient; one must join a knowledge
of Tibetan and Chinese to this, for until recently it was solely in its Tibetan and
Chinese versions that there existed, integrally, the book of Vasubandhu, Kārikā
and Bhasyam.
ii. Bibliography of the Kofa.
1. Burnouf, Introduction, 34, 46, 447 (its importance), 563; Wassiliew,
Buddhismus, 77, 78, 108, 130, 220; S. Lévi, La science des religions et les religions
de l'Inde (École des Hautes-Études, Syllabus 1892), Hastings' Encyclopedia, 1.20
(1908); Minayew, Recherches et Matériaux, 1887, trans. 1894.
J. Takakusu, "On the Abhidharma Literature," JPTS, 1905.
Noël Péri, "A propos de la date de Vasubandhu,” BEFEO, 1911.
De La Vallée Poussin, Cosmologie Bouddhique, Troisiéme chapitre de
l'Abhidharmakoca, kārikā, bhāṣya et vyākhyā, avec [uneintroduction et] une
analyse de la Lokaprajñāpti et de la Kāraṇaprajñāpti de Maudgalyāyana,
1914-1919; Paul Demiéville, "Review of the Kosa i-ii," Bulletin, 1924, 463; 0.
Rosenberg, Probleme der buddhistischen philosophie, 1924, trans. of the work
published in Russian in 1918 (the appendix contains a rich bibliography of
Abhidharma literature, Chinese sources and Japanese works); Th. Stcherbatsky, 1.
The Central Conception of Buddhism and the Meaning of the Word "Dharma,"
1923 (the first appendix is a translation of Kośa, v, p. 48-65 of the French8
Introduction
translation; the second is a list of the 75 dharmas with substantial notes); 2. an
English translation of the Pudgalapratiṣedhaprakaraṇa or the ninth chapter of the
Kośa, Ac. de Petrograd, 1918.
Sōgen Yamakami, Systems of Buddhistic Thought, Calcutta, 1912, Chap. iii,
"Sarvāstivādins." Bibliography of contemporary Japanese articles and works in
Péri, Demiéville, Rosenberg, and notably in Suisai Funabashi, Kusha Tetsugaku,
Tokyo, 1906.
2. The Kośa and its commentaries, Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Chinese sources.
a. Abhidharmakośavyākhyā, Bibliotheca Buddhica, Sphuṭārtha Abhidharma-
koçavyākhyā, the work of Yaçomitra, first Koçasthāna, edited by Prof. S. Lévi and
Prof. Th. Stcherbatsky, lst fasc., Petrograd, 1918; 2nd fasc. by Wogihara,
Stcherbatsky and Obermiller, (part of the second chapter), Leningrad, 1931.
Text of the third chapter, kärikās and vyākhyā, in Bouddhisme, Cos-
mologie . . . L. de La Vallée Poussin [with the collaboration of Dr. P. Cordier],
Brussels, 1914-1919.
b. Tibetan translation of the Abhidharmakoçakārikāḥ and of the Abhi-
dharmakoçabhāṣya of Vasubandhu, edited by Th. I. Stcherbatsky, Ist fasc. 1917, 2nd
fasc. 1930.
3. Tibetan sources, Palmyr Cordier, Catalogue de fonds tibetain de la
Biblioteque Nationale, third part, Paris 1914, p. 394 and 499:
a. Abhidharmakośakaārikā and Bhasya of Vasubandhu, Mdo 63, fol. 1-27, and
fol. 28-Mdo 64, fol. 109.
b. Sūtrānurūpā nāma abhidharmakośavṛttiḥ of Vinitabhadra, 64, fol. 109–304.
c. Sphuṭārthā nāma abhidharmakośavyākhyā of Yasomitra, 65 and 66. This is
the commentary preserved in Sanskrit.
d. Lakṣaṇānusārinī nāma abhidharmakośaṭīkā of Pūrṇavardhana, a student of
Sthiramati and master of Jinamitra and Silendrabodhi, 67 and 68.
e. Upāyikā nāma abhidharmakośaṭīkā of Samathadeva, 69 and 60, fol. 1-144.
f. Marmapradīpo nāma abhidharmakośavṛttiḥ of Dignaga, 70, fol. 144–286.
g. Lakṣaṇānusāriņi nāma abhidharmakośaṭīkā, an abridged recension of the
"Brhattika," above item d, 70, fol. 286-316.
h. Sārasamuccayo nāma abhidharmāvatāraṭīkā, anonymous, 70, fol. 315-393.
i. Abhidharmāvatāraprakaraṇa, anonymous, 70, fol. 393–417.
j. Tattvärtho nāma abhidharmakośabhāṣyaṭīkā of Sthiramati, 129 and 130.
4. Abhidharmakośaśāstra, of Vasubandhu, trans. by Paramārtha in the period
564-567, Taishō volume 29, number 1559, p. 161-309; trans, by Hsüan-tsang,
651-654, Taishō volume 29, number 1558, p. 1-160.
The references in our translation are to the edition of Kyokuga Saeki, thePoussin 9
Kandō Abidatsuma Kusharon (Kyoto, 1891), the pages of which correspond to
those of the Ming edition, a remarkable work which notably contains, in addition
to interesting notes of the editor, copious extracts 1. from the two major Chinese
commentators, 2. from the Vibhāṣā, 3. from the commentary of Samghabhadra,
and 4. from the work of K'uei-chi on the Trimśikā.
5. Among the Chinese commentaries on the Kośa:
a. Shen-t'ai, the author of a Shu: the Chü-she lun shu, originally in twenty
Chinese volumes, today only volumes 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 17 are extant; Manji
Zoku-zōkyō- 1.83.3–4.
b. P'u-kuang, the author of the thirty-volume Chü-she lun Chi, TD 41,
number 1821.
c. Fa-pao, the author of a thirty-volume Chü-she lun Shu, TD 41, number
1822.
Two other disciples of Hsüan-tsang, Huai-su and K'uei-chi, have written
commentaries on the Kośa which are lost. P'u-kuang has also written a short
treatise on the teachings of the Kośa.
d. Yuan-hui wrote a thirty-volume Shu on the Karikās of the Kośa, a work
with a preface written by Chia-ts'eng and dated before 727; this work, the Chi-she
lun
sung Shu (var. Chü-she lun sung shih), is preserved in TD volume 41, number
1823. This Shu "was commented upon many times in China and very widely
disseminated in Japan; it is from this intermediary text that Mahāyānists in
general draw their knowledge of the Kofa. But from the point of view of
Indology, it does not offer the same interest as the three preceding com-
mentaries."
Hsuan-tsang dictated his version of Saṁghabhadra to Yuan-yu. There are
some fragments of a commentary written by him.
6. Guṇamati and the Lakṣaṇānsāra.
Gunamati is known through his commentary on the Vyākhyāyukti; many
fragments of this commentary are quoted in the Chos-byun of Bu-ston,
trans. Obermiller, 1931. It is mentioned four times by Yaśomitra in his
Abhidharmakośavyākhyā.
a. Introductory stanzas: Guņamati comments on the Kośa, as has Vasumitra;
Yasomitra follows this commentary when it is correct.
b. "Guṇamati and his disciple Vasumitra say that the word namas is declined
in the fourth case. But when the word namas is not independent, we have the
accusative. This is why this master (Vasubandhu), in the Vyakhyayukti, says,
'Saluting the Muni with my head' . . .” (Kośa, Vyākhyā, i p.7).
c. Guņamati holds that the Kośa wrongly teaches that “Conditioned things,10
Introduction
with the exception of the Path, are sāsrava (Kośa, i. 4b),” for all of the dharmas,
without exception, can be taken as an object by the āsravas(Vyākhyā i, p. 13).
d. On the subject of the continuity of the mental series, “the master Guṇamati,
with his disciple the master Vasumitra, through affection for the doctrine of his
own nikāya, instead of confining themselves to explaining the Kośa, refute it”
(Kośa,iii. lla-b, note).
N. Péri (Date, 41) recalls that Burnouf mentioned (Introduction, 566),
according to Yasomitra, the commentary of Gunamati. He adds: “An author very
rarely quoted. His Lakṣaṇānusāraśāstra (Taisho 1641) forms part of the Canon,
where it is classified among the Hinayāna works. It summarizes the ideas of the
Kośa, and then presents his own opinions on several points. The Hsi-yü-chi, after
having listed him among the celebrated monks of Nālandā (TD 51, p. 924a2),
tells us that he left the monastery where he had been living in order to move to
Valabhí (p. 936c2)."
Taishō 1641 is only an extract of the treatise of Gunamati, the chapter which
examines the sixteen aspects of the truths (Koša, vii. 13): “Do we have sixteen
things or sixteen names? The masters of the Vibhāṣā say that sixteen names are
posited because there are sixteen things. But the sutra-upadeśa masters say that
there are sixteen names, but only seven things; four things for the first Truth, one
thing for each of the three others. In the beginning the Buddha promulgated the
Upadeśasútra. After the disappearance of the Buddha, Ānanda, Kātyāyana, etc.,
recited that which they had heard. In order to explain the meaning of the Sūtra, as
disciples do, they composed a śāstra explaining the Sūtra, which is thus called a
sūtra-upadeśa. Then the Vibhāṣā extracted an upadeśa from that which was to be
found [in this upadeśa]; since it only indirectly comes from the Sūtra, it is not
called a sutra-upadeśa."
Gunamati continues as in the Kośa, vii.13a, “According to the first explana-
tion, anitya, impermanent, because it arises dependent on causes (pratyayā-
dhinatvāt)." And he comments, "Conditioned things, without force, do not arise in
and of themselves . . .'
"
The first volume ends, "The thesis of Vasubandhu is similar to the meaning of
the sutra-upadeśa masters."
The second begins, "The author says, 'I am now going to give the explanation
of what I believe. Anitya, impermanent, because, having arising, it has extinction.
Conditioned things, having arising, and extinction, are not permanent. Arising is
existence . . ."
"
The treatise touches on diverse points of philosophy, the absence of atman,
etc. In this work we encounter some very interesting notes, for example (Taishō,Poussin
11
page 168b9), “In the Hinayāna, the pretas are superior to animals; in the
Mahāyāna, the opposite. In fact, the pretas are enveloped in flames . . ."
It is curious that the title of the work of Gunamati, literally Laksanānusā-
raśāstra, is exactly identical to that of the book attributed to Pūrṇavardhana in the
Tanjur. We have Guņamati, a teacher of Sthiramati, and Purṇavarudhana, a
student of Sthiramati. ²5
7. Sthiramati, a student of Guņamati, defended the Kośa against Samgha-
bhadra. "His commentary on the Kośa is mentioned many times by Shen-t'ai,
P'u-kuang, and Fa-pao in their work on the same text. The precise manner in
which they quote it, in which they note and discuss its opinions, causes us to
believe that Hsüan-tsang may have brought it to China, and perhaps they
themselves had also read it" (N. Péri, Date, 41). Sthiramati, the author of the
Tsa-chi, is one of the great masters of the Vijñaptimātrată system.
There exists (Taishō 1561) a small treatise by Sthiramati (transcription and
translation) entitled Kośatattvärthaṭīkā or Abhidharmakośaśāstratattvārathaṭīkā,
which is doubtless an extract of a voluminous work of the same name and by the
same author preserved in Tibetan (Cordier, 499).
We observed, at the beginning, the commentary on the seven points indicated
in the introductory stanza of the Kofa.
On the wisdom of the Buddha, superior to that of the saints, the author quotes
the Kalpanāmaṇḍitikā stanza (Huber, Sūtrālamkara), Kośa, i.1, vii.30; and recalls
the ignorance that Maụdgalyāyana had of the place where his mother had been
reborn, Kofa, i.1.
In order to demonstrate the thesis of the Kośa that śraddhendriya can be
impure, ii.9, the author quotes at length the sutra on the request of Brahmã to the
Buddha (setting into motion the Wheel of the Law), a sūtra briefly indicated by
Vasubhandu.
The work ends with some remarks on the duration of life: The stanza says:
"Among the Kurus life is always 1,000 years in length; half of this to the west and
the east. In this continent, it is not set: at its end, some ten years; in the beginning,
without measure” (Kośa, iii. 75–77), "There are, in fact, in this world, some beings
who have extra meritorious actions and who make the resolution, 'May I have a
long life!, without desiring more precisely, 'May I live one hundred years, ninety
years, eighty years!' Or rather some venerable persons, parents and friends, say,
'May you live long!' without saying more precisely how long a time. If one makes
similar vows, it is because the actions done by persons of this continent are
associated with thoughts of desire. The Sūtra says, 'Know, oh Bhikṣus that the
length of life was over 80,000 years under Vipaśyin, 20,000 years under Kaśyapa;12
Introduction
the length of life is now 100 years; few will go beyond this, and many will have
less.' If the length of life is not set, why does the Blessed One express himself in
this way?..." The treatise concludes with the well-known stanza: sucīrṇa-
brahmacarye'smin . . . (Kośa, vi.60a).
8. Samghabhadra has written two works.
The first (TD 29, number 1562), the title of which is transcribed into Chinese
as Abhidharmanyāyanusāraśāstra—or perhaps better as Nyāyānusāro nāma
Abhidharmaśāstram-is a commentary which reproduces without any changes
the Kärikäs of the Abhidharmakośa. But this eighty-volume commentary
criticizes the Kārikās, which present the Vaibhāṣika doctrine by noting them with
the word kila, which means "in the words of the School"; it refutes the Bhasyam,
the auto-commentary of Vasubandhu, when this work presents views opposed to
those of the Vaibhāṣikas,and it corrects them when it attributes to the Vaibhāṣikas
views which are not theirs.
The title of the second treatise (TD 29, number 1563) is not completely
transcribed: Abhidharmasamaya-hsien-śāstra or Abhidharmasamaya-kuang-śāstra.
J. Takakusu proposes Abhidharmasamayapradīpikāśāstra, which is not bad;
however pradipa, "lamp," is always teng, and we have for hsien the equivalents
prakāśa and dyotana.
This is a forty-volume extract from the Nyāyānusāra, from which all polemic
is excluded and which is thus a simple presentation of the system (samaya) of the
Abhidharma. It differs from the Nyāyānusāra by the presence of a rather long
introduction, in seven stanzas and prose, and also by the manner in which it treats
the Kārikās of Vasubandhu: these Kārikās are either omitted (ii.2-3) or corrected
(i.11, 14) when they express false doctrines or when they cast suspicion on true
doctrines by the addition of the word kila. 26
Saṁghabhadra is an innovator, and K'uei-chi distinguishes the earlier and the
later Sarvāstivādins, Siddhi, 45 (theory of atoms), 65 (lakṣaṇas of "conditioned
things"), 71 (the viprayukta called ho-ho), 147 (vedana?), and 311 (divergent
Sarvastivadins, on adhimoksa).
***
(Additions to the Bibliography, by Hubert Durt.)
The following titles are editions of texts and works related to the Abhi-
dharmakośabhasyam, which have appeared in print since the first appearance of
de La Vallée Poussin's French translation (1923-1931).Poussin 13
Sanskrit:
Gokhale, V.V., The Text of the Abhidharmakośakārikā of Vasubandhu, Journal
of the Bombay Branch, Royal Asiatic Society, n.s., vol. 22, 1946, p. 73–102.
Pradhan, P., Abhidharm-Koshabhasya of Vasubandhu, Tibetan Sanskrit Works
Series, vol. viii, K.P. Jayaswal Research Institute, Patna, 1967; 2nd edition, revised
with introduction and indices, by Dr. Aruna Haldar, 1975.
Shastri, Swami Dwarikadas, Abhidharmakośa & Bhasya of Acharya Vasu-
bandhu with Sphutärtha Commentary of Acarya Yasomitra, Part I (I and II
Kośasthāna), critically edited, Bauddha Bharati, Varanasi, 1970.
Wogihara, Unrai, Sphuṭārtha Abhidharmakośavyakhya, 2 vols., Tokyo
1933-1936; photomechanical reprint edition, Tokyo, 1971.
Tibetan:
Otani University, The Tibetan Tripitaka, Peking Edition, vol. 115 (number
5590), to Vol. 119 (number 5597), Suzuki Research Foundation, Tokyo, 1962.
Chinese:
Takakusu, J.K. Watanabe, The Tripitaka in Chinese, vol. 29 (numbers 1558 to
1563), The Taishō Issai-kyō kankō kwai, Tokyo 1926.
Otani University, Index to the Taishō Tripitaka, no. 16, Bidon-bu III (vol. 29),
Research Association for the Terminology of the Taishō Tripitaka, Tokyo, 1962.
Funabashi, Suisai and Issai Funabashi, Kandō Abidatsuma Kusharon Sakuin,
Kyoto, 1956. This index is based on the Chinese version of Kyokuga Saeki-the
Chinese version used by de La Vallée Poussin-, the Kandō-bon Kusharon, in
thirty volumes,Kyoto, 1887.
iii.The Date of Vasubandhu. The Former Vasubandhu.
We shall not undertake here a bibliography of Vasubandhu. But his treatise,
the Pratītyasamutpādavyākhyā (Cordier, iii. 365), calls for the attention of the
reader of the Kośa. G. Tucci has published some fragments of this work (JRAS.
1930, 611-623) where the twelve links in the chain are explained in detail, with
numerous quotations from scriptures. G. Tucci also proposes to publish the
Trisvabhāvakārika27 and some parts of the commentary to the Madhyāntavibhāga.
Concerning the "definition of pratyakṣa by Vasubandhu,” vāsubāndhava
pratyakṣalakṣaṇa, known through the Tataparyaṭikā, 99, and the Vādavidhi
attributed to Vasubandhu, see the articles by G. Tucci, A.B. Keith, R. Iyengar,
JRAS. 1929, 473; Ind. Hist. Quarterly, 1928, 221; 1929, 81; Stcherbatski, Logic,
ii.161,382; G. Tucci, Maitreya [nātha] et Asanga, 70-71, and finally Pramana-14
Introduction
samuccaya, chap. i, by R. Iyengar, pp. 31–35. It appears that Dignāga denies the
authorship of the Vädavidhi to Vasubandhu,in spite of universal opinion, and the
Tika quotes Kośa ii.64, which contradicts the above-mentioned definition of
pratyakṣa. There are also numerous passages of the Vyākhyayukti in the Chos-
'byun of Bu-ston (above p.16).
Wassiliew, Buddhismus, 235 (1860): "Life of Vasubandhu."
Kern, Geschiedenis, trans. Huet, ii.450.
S. Lévi, JA., 1890, 2.252; Theatre indien, 1890, i.165, ii.35; "Donations
religieuses des rois de Valabhī” (Htes Etudes, vii, p. 97); “Date de Candragomin,"
BEFEO., 1903, 47; Sūtrālaṁkāra, trans. preface, 2–3, 1911.
Bühler, Alter der indischen Kunst-Poesie, p. 97, 1890.
J. Takakusu, "Life of Vasubandhu," T'oung-pao, 1904; "A Study of Para-
martha's Life of Vasubandhu and the date of Vasubandhu," JRAS., 1905;
“Samkbyakārikā,” BEFEO, 1904.
Wogihara, Asanga's Bodhisattvabhūmi, 14, Strasbourg thesis, Leipzig, 1908.
Noël Péri, "A propos de la date of Vasubandhu," BEFEO., 1911, 339–392.
Pathak, Bhandarkar, Indian Antiquare, 1911 - 1912 (V. Smith, History, 3rd
edition 328, 4th edition, 346).
B. Shiiwo [Benkyō Shiio], Dr. Takakusu and Mr. Péri on the date of
Vasubandhu (270-350), Tetsugaku Zasshi, Nov.-Dec. 1912.
Winternitz, Jeshichte, ii.256 (1913), iii.693 (1922).
H. Ui, “On the Author of the Mahāyānasūtrālaṇkāra,” Z. für Ind. und
Iranistik, vi.1928, 216-225.
A group of articles, many of which are summaries of articles written in
Japanese, in Mélanges Lanman (Indian Studies in Honor of Charles Rockwell
Lanman), 1929; J. Takakusu, Date of Vasubandhu, the Great Buddhist Phi-
losopher, T. Kimura, Date of Vasubandhu Seen from the Abhidharmakośa; G.
Ono, Date of Vasubandhu Seen from the History of Buddhistic Philosophy; H. Ui,
Maitreya as an Historical Personage. Further, mention of the opinions of B.
Shiiwo, S. Funabashi, E. Mayeda, S. Mochizuki.
"H.P. Sastri pointed out the historicity of Maitreyanātha from the colophon of
the Abhisamayalaṁkārakārikā, which is a commentary, from the Yogācāra point
of view, on the Pañcavimśatisahasrikā-prajñā-pāramitā-sutra by Maitreyanātha"
Kimura, Origin of Mahāyāna Buddhism, Calcutta, 1927, p. 170).
The date of Vasubandhu is bound to that of Asanga, his brother. Now some
parts of the Yogaśāstra, the work of Asanga, were translated into Chinese in
413-421, and in 431. However, the opinion is accepted among Japanese scholars
that the works attributed to Asanga, writing under the inspiration of the futurePoussin
***
15
Buddha Maitreya, are in reality the works of a master Maitreya, an ācārya, "an
historical personage." This thesis permits us to strip Asanga of one part of the
library of which we thought he was the pious redactor, and to place him, along
with his brother Vasubandhu, toward the middle or end of the 5th century,
or-why not?-towards the 6th century. "If a scholar named Maitreya is found to
be the author of those works hitherto attributed to Asanga, then the date of the
latter ought to be shifted later, at least by one generation, if not more. The ground
for an earlier date for Vasubandhu should give way altogether" (Takakusu,
Mélanges Lanman, 85).
H. Ui, in Philosophical Journal of the Imperial University, Tokyo, number
411, 1921, takes into account the arguments, developed afterwards in his Studies
of Indian Philosophy, i.359, summarized in Mélanges Lanman. These arguments
appear to be weak and, to my mind, non-existent (Nute bouddhique, xvi, Maitreya
et Asanga, Ac. Royale de Belgique, January 1930). I do not think that they gain any
force from the observations of G. Tucci ("On some aspects of the doctrines of
Maitreya-[nātha] and Asanga," Calcutta Lectures, 1930). The tradition of the
Vijňaptimātrāta school establishes, as Tucci observes, the lineage Maitreya-
nātha-Asaṁga-Vasubandhu, but Maitreyanātha is not the name of a man, but
rather "He who is protected by Maitreya"; nātha is a synonym of buddha, or more
precisely of bhagavat.28 The commentary of the Abhisamayālamkāra (p. 73 of the
Tucci edition) gives to Maitreya the title of bhagavat in one place where he
explains how "Asañga, in spite of his scriptural erudition and his insight
(labdhādhigamo'pi, Kośa, viii.39), did not understand the Prajñāpāramitā and lost
heart. Then the Bhagavat Maitreya, for his sake (tam uddiśya) explained the
Prajñāpāramitā and composed the treatise which is called the Abhisama-
yālaṁkārakārikā." It is with the title of the Maitreyanātha that Säntideva
designates the saint who, in the Gandavyuha, explains to the pilgrim Sudhana the
virtues of "the Bodhi mind" (Bodhicaryāvatāra, i.14, Rajendralal Mitra, Buddhist
Nepalese Literature, 92). If the School holds as sacred, as āryā deśanā, the treatises
of Asanga, it is because the Bhagavat Maitreya has revealed them. That the
Tibeto-Chinese tradition varies in its attributions, sometimes naming as author a
revealing deity, sometimes an inspired master, does not pose any difficulty.
The biography of Vasubandhu (by Paramartha) is not without its difficulties.
The Kośa excited the criticism of Saṁghabhadra who, in his large Nyāyānusāra,
brings up innumerable heresies of a Sautrāntika character which mar the work of16
Introduction
Vasubandhu. We are told that Vasubandhu refused to enter into controversy: "I am
now already old. You may do as you please" (Takakusu's version). But we are also
assured that Vasubandhu was then converted to the Mahāyāna by his brother
Asanga, that he decided to cut out his tongue in order to punish it for not
confessing the Mahāyāna earlier, and, more wisely, that he wrote numerous
treatises wherein the doctrines of the Mahāyāna were brilliantly elaborated.
Yasomitra, the commentator on the Kofa, says that the expression pūrvā-
cāryās, "former masters," of the Kośa, designates “Asañga, etc.” (āsangapra-
bhṛtayas). N. Péri thinks that Yaśomitra means to designate the school of the
Pūrvācāryas by their most illustrious name, and that the text does not imply that
Asanga is in fact pūrva relative to Vasubandhu (see my Cosmologie bouddhique,
p. ix).
The Kośa was only translated in 563, whereas the work of Dharmatrāta, an
imperfect draft of the Kośa, was translated in 397-418, 426-431, and 433-442.
Takakusu observes, “If the Kośa had existed, why did so many translators linger
over the book of Dharmatrata? (Mélanges Lanman). And it is difficult to give a
pertinent answer to this question. 29
But it appears almost impossible to believe that Paramārtha the biographer of
Vasubandhu and first translator of the Kośa, arriving in China in 548, erred when
he made the author of the Kośa the contemporary and the brother of Asanga. It is
a hopeless hypothesis to identify the brother and the convert of Asanga with the
former, or earlier, Vasubandhu.
One should admit the existence and the "Abhidharmic" activity of an earlier
Vasubandhu. The problem, which I have taken up in the preface to Cosmologie
bouddhique (above, p.6), has been taken up again by Taiken Kimura, "Examen
lumineau de l'Abhidharma" (contents in Eastern Buddhism, iii, p.85), fifth part:
"On the sources of the Kośa." We can see a summary of his conclusions in
Mélanges Lanman. Subsequently, see Note Bouddhique xvii, Acad. de Belgique:
"Vasubandhu l'ancien."
Yasomitra, in three places (Kośa, i.13, iii.27, iv.2–3), recognizes in a master
refuted by Vasubandhu the author of the Kofa (and a disciple of Manoratha
according to Hsuan-tsang), a “Sthavira Vasubandhu, the teacher of Manoratha,” 3⁰
an "earlier master Vasubandhu," vṛddhācāryavasubandhu. P'u-kuang (Kimura,
Mélanges Lanman, 91) confirms Yaśomitra, and designates the master in question
under the name of "the earlier Vasubandhu, a dissident Sarvāstivādin master."
On the other hand, the gloss of the initial five stanzas of the treatise of
Dharmatrata, the re-edition of the Abhidharmasāra of Dharmaśrī, 3¹ attributes an
edition of the same book in 6,000 verses to Vasubandhu. These stanzas and thisPoussin 17
gloss are not very clear. Kimura has studied them (Mélanges Lanman); I have
amended his interpretation (Note bouddhique xvii).
iv. The Seven Canonical Treatises of the Abhidharma.
The Sarvāstivādins recognize the authority of seven Abhidharma treatises,
"the word of the Buddha." Among them, the Abhidharmikas, "who only read the
Abhidharma with its six feet,"32 are distinct from the Vaibhasikas "who read the
Abbidbarma.”
"
The Abhidharma "with its six feet" 3³ is the great treatise of Katyayaniputra,
entitled the Jñānaprasthāna, upon which the Vibhāṣā is a long commentary, and
six treatises the order and authorship of which vary somewhat according to our
sources. Following the order of Abhidharmakośavyākhya, there are: the Prakara-
ṇapāda of Vasumitra, Vijñānakāya of Devaśarman, Dharmaskandha of Śāriputra
(or of Maudgalyāyana, according to Chinese sources), Prajñaptiśāstra of Maudgal-
yāyana, Dhātukāya of Pūrņa (or of Vasumitra, Chinese sources), and Sangiti-
paryaya of Mahakauşthila (or of Sariputra, Chinese sources).
One should note that the Tibetans list the Dharmaskandha first, and the
Jñanaprasthāna only as sixth: "The Tibetans seem to regard the Dharmaskandha
as the most important of all." This is also the opinion of Ching-mai (664 A.D.),
the author of the Chinese colophon (Takakusu, 75, 115).
Takakusu, in "On the Abhidharma Literature" (JPTS, 1905), brings together a
number of details on these seven books which Burnouf was the first to list; he
gives the contents of the chapters of each of them. The remarks which follow are
an addition to this fine work.
a. Jñanaprasthāna.34
1. According to Hsüan-tsang, Kätyāyanīputra composed this śāstra in the
monastery of Tamasavana 300 years after the Parinirvāņa (the fourth century), 35
However, the Vibhāṣā (TD 26, p. 21c29), commenting on the Jñānaprasthāna
(TD 26, p. 918) says, "When the Bhadanta composed the Jñanaprasthāna, he lived
in the East, and this is why he cites as an example the five rivers that are known
in the East." (Kośa, iii.57).
2. We know through the quotations of Yasomitra that the chapters bore the
name of skandhaka (Indriyaskandhaka, Samādhiskandhaka), and that the work
which he is referring to was written in Sanskrit.
However, the first translation has for its title "Sastra in eight chien-tu";
Paramartha has "Sastra in eight ch'ien-tu." We reminded of khanda, but18.
Introduction
Paramartha explains that ch'ien-tu is equivalent to ka-lan-ta, which is evidently
grantha. S. Lévi thinks that ch'ien-tu is the Prakrit gantho. Takakusu concludes,
"All we can say is that the text brought by Samghadeva seems to have been in a
dialect akin to Pali... But this supposition rests solely on the phonetic value of
Chinese ideographs."36
3. The Jñānaprasthāna, a very poorly composed work, begins with the study of
the laukikāgradharmas.37
"What are the laukikāgradharmas? The mind and mental states which are
immediately followed by entry into samyaktvanyāma (see Kośa, vi.26). There are
those who say the five moral faculties (indriyas, faith, etc.) which are immediately
followed by entry into samyaktvanyāma are called the laukikāgradharmas.” The
text continues, "Why are this mind and these mental states so called . . . ?"
The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 7cl, 38 reproduces the two definitions of the
Jūānaprasthāna and explains: "Who are the persons who say that the laukikāgra-
dharmas are the five faculties? The former Abhidharmikas. Why do they express
themselves in this way? In order to refute another school: they do not intend to
say that the laukikāgradharmas consist solely of the five faculties. But the
Vibhajyavādins hold that the five faculties are exclusively pure (anāsrava) (see
Kośa, ii.9) ... In order to refute this doctrine, the former Abhidhārmikas say that
the lokottaradharmas consist of the five faculties. Now these dharmas are
produced in the person of a prthagjana: thus it is proven that the five faculties can
be impure."
The interest of this commentary lies in the fact that it distinguishes the
"former Abhidhārmikas” from Kātyāyanīputra and from the Jñānaprasthāna.
4. One of the last stanzas of the last chapter is the sloka on the meaning of
which, according to Vasumitra (Sectes, Masuda, p.57), the Vātsīputrīyas disputed
among themselves: whence the separation of the four schools, Dharmottariyas,
etc.
5. But if the Jñānaprasthāna is the work of Kātyāyanīputra, how can the
Sarvāstivādins consider this treatise as the word of the Buddha?
The Vibhāṣā answers this question: 39
"Question: Who has composed this treatise, that is, the Jñanaprasthāna?
"Answer: The Buddha Bhagavat. For the nature of the dharmas to be known
is very profound and very subtle: apart from the omniscient Buddha Bhagavat,
who would be able to understand them and to teach them?
"[Question]: If this is the case, who in this treatise, asks the questions, and
who answers?
"[Answer]: There are many opinions on this: 1. the Sthavira Śāriputra asksPoussin 19
the questions and the Bhagavat answers; 2. the five hundred arhats ask the
questions and the Bhagavat answers; 3. the gods ask the questions and the
Bhagavat answers; 4. some fictive (nirmita) bhikṣus ask the questions and the
Bhagavat answers. This is the law (dharmatā, fa-erh) of the Buddhas, that
they should teach to the world the nature of the dharmas to be known. But is
there no one who asks the questions? Then the Bhagavat creates some bhikṣus of
correct appearance and aspect, agreeable to behold, shaven headed, dressed in
robes; he causes these beings to ask the questions and he answers them . . .
"Question: If this is the case, why does tradition attribute the writing down of
this treatise to the Aryan Katyayaniputra?
"Answer: Because this Aryan has upheld, and published this treatise in such a
manner that it became widely propagated; this is why it is said to be his. But the
treatise was spoken by the Bhagavat. Nevertheless, according to another opinion,
this treatise is the work of the Aryan Kātyāyaniputra.
"Question: Have you not said above that no one, with the exception of the
Buddha, is capable of understanding and of teaching the nature of the dharmas?
How was the Aryan able to compose this treatise?
"Answer: Because the Āryan himself also possesses a subtle, profound, ardent,
and skillful intelligence; knows well the unique and the common characteristics of
the dharmas; penetrates the meaning of texts from the beginning to the end
(pūrvāparakoți); knows well the Three Baskets; has abandoned the defilements of
the Three Dhātus; is in possession of the three vidyās; is endowed with the six
abhijñās and the eight vimoksas; has obtained the pratisamvids; has obtained
pranidhijñāna, formerly, under five hundred Buddhas of the past, he practiced the
religious life; he made the resolution: (In the future, after the Nirvāṇa of
Śākyamuni, I shall compose the Abhidharma.) This is why it is said that this
Treatise is his work. In the mass of disciples of all the Tathāgatas Samyaksaṁ-
buddhas, it is the law (dharmatā) that there shall be two great masters
(Sastrācāryas) who uphold (dhatar, Kośa, viii.38,39) the Saddharma: in the
lifetime of the Tathāgata as the Āryan Sariputra, and after his Nirvāṇa as the
Aryan Katyayaniputra. Consequently this Āryan, by the power of his resolution,
has seen what was useful to the Dharma and composed this Treatise.
"Question: If this is the case, how do you say that it is the Buddha who spoke
the Abhidharma?
"Answer: The Bhagavat, when he was in this world, explained and taught the
Abhidharma in different places by means of diverse theoretical presentations (lit.
vāda-patha). Either after his Nirvana or when the Bhagavat was still in this
world, the Āryan disciples, by means of their pranidhijñāna, compiled and20
Introduction
brought together [these teachings], arranging them into sections. Thus
Katyayaniputra also, after the departure of the Bhagavat, by means of his
pranidhajñāna compiled, brought together, and composed the Jñanaprasthāna.
Among the theoretical teachings of the Bhagavat, he established the gates of a
book (vākyadvāra); he arranged stanza summaries, and he composed diverse
chapters to which he gave the name of Skandhaka. He brought together the
diverse teachings dealing with disparate subjects and composed a Miscellaneous
Skandhaka out of them; the teachings relative to the samyojanas, to the jñānas, to
karman, to the mahābhūtas, to the indriyas, to samadhi and to the drsțis constitute
the Samyojanaskandhaka, etc. In this same way all the Udanagathās were spoken
by the Buddha: the Buddha Bhagavat spoke them, in diverse places for the benefit
of different persons, in accord with circumstances. After the Buddha left the world
the Bhadanta Dharmatrāta, who knew them from tradition, compiled them
together and gave [to the groups] the name of varga. He brought together the
gathās relative to impermanence and made the Anitya-varga out of them, and so
forth.
"The Abhidharma was originally the word of the Buddha; it is also a
compilation of the Āryan Kātyāyaniputra.
"Whether the Buddha spoke [the Abhidharma], or whether the disciple spoke
it does not contradict Dharmatā, for all the Buddhas want the bhikṣus to uphold
the Abhidharma. Thus this Āryan, whether he knew the Abhidharma from
tradition, or whether he sees and examines it by the light of his pranidhijñāna,
composed this treatise in order that the Good Law should remain a long time in
the world . . .”
b. The Prakarana of Vasumitra.
This is also called the Prakaranagrantha, or the Prakaraṇapādaśāstra: it is an
important work, but little systematized (for many things have been brought
together in the chapter of "The One Thousand Questions"); frequently quoted in
the Kośa (for example, i.7, 9, ii.41, 51, 54 . . .).
On one important point it differs from classical Vaibhāşikavāda: it ignores the
akusalamahābhūmikas (iii.32). Sometimes it expresses itself in terms which one
must interpret with some violence to make them correct (ii.46, 52, ii.4, 41). It
differs from the Jñānaprasthāna, v.10.
Ignorance of the akusalamahābhumika category seems to prove that the
Prakarana is earlier than the Jñanaprasthāna.
Sometimes the authors of the Vibhāṣā (p. 231c3) are unsure:
"Why does this treatise (the Jñānaprasthāna) say pṛthagjanatva and notPoussin 21
pṛthagjanadharma, whereas the Prakaranapada says pṛthagjanadharma and not
pṛthagjanatva? ... This Treatise having said prthagjanatva, the Prakaraṇapāda
does not repeat it; this Treatise not having said prthagjanadharma, the Prakarana-
pada says pṛthagjanadharma. This indicates that this treatise was composed after
that one. There are some persons who say: that Treatise having said pṛthagjana-
dharma, this Treatise does not repeat it . . . ; this indicates that that Treatise has
been composed after this one."
The Prakaraṇa does not enumerate the indriyas in the same order as the
Sūtra, the Jñanaprasthāna, or early Pāļi scholasticism (Kośa, i.48).
c. The Vijnanakaya.
This is a work that some Chinese sources (quoted in Takakusu) place one
hundred years after the Parinirvāṇa; attributed to Devasarman or to lha-skyid
(Devakşema?). Concerning its author, who has the title of arhat in Hsüan-tsang,
see Wassiliew in Taranātha, 296, Hiouen-thsang [=Hsuan-tsang], Vie, 123,
Watters, i.373.
The interest of this book, though small from the point of view of doctrine, is
notable from the point of view of history. The first chapter, Maudgalyāyanaskan-
dhaka, and the second, Pudgalaskandhaka, are related to two great contro-
versies, the existence of the past and the future, and the existence of the pudgala. 40
Devasarman refutes the doctrine of Mu-lien or Maudgalyāyana: this latter
denies the existence of the past and future, exactly as does Tissa Moggaliputta in
the Pāli language ecclesiastical histories.
Here we have, from the Sarvästivādin side, the controversy which gave rise to
the council of Asoka. According to the legend that Buddhaghosa has spread to
Ceylon and to London, the king was assured that the Buddha was "a follower of
distinction" (vibhajyavādin)—that is to say, probably, not totally accepting "the
existence of all” (sarvāstivāda); he then charges Tissa Moggaliputta, that is to say,
I believe, our Mu-lien, to preside over a council where only the opponents of the
existence of the past and the future were admitted. 41
There is not a very close relationship between the Maudgalyāyanaskandhaka
and the work of Tissa (Kathavatthu, i.6 and following). We should not be
surprised at this, since the two works represent and bring about the triumph of
two opposing doctrines.
On the contrary, the Pudgalaskandhaka presents, together with Kathavat-
thu, i.1, some close analogies to this text even down to an identity of phrases.
Devasarman speaks of two masters-a follower of pudgala (pudgalavādin), 42
who admits a vital principle, a type of soul or self (pudgala), and a follower of22
Introduction
emptiness (śünyatavādin), that is to say a negator of the soul (ātman), an
orthodox Buddhist who does not recognize any permanent principle.
1. The thesis of the pudgalavādin is formulated in terms which are partially
identical to those that the puggalavādin of the Kathāvatthu employs.43
2. The arguments are in part the same:
a) Argument taken from the passing from one realm of rebirth to another
(compare Kathāvatthu, i.1, 158-161).
b) Argument taken from the passing from one degree of holiness into another
(ibid., i.1, 221).
c) Connection between the doer of the action and the "partaker of its results"
(ibid., i.1, 200).
d) Is suffering "done by oneself" or "done by another”? (ibid., i.1, 212).
e) Is the pudgala conditioned (saṁskṛta) or unconditioned? (ibid., i.1, 127).
f) The pudgala is not perceived by any of the six consciousnesses; the
consciousnesses arise from well-known causes, without the intervention of a
pudgala (Kathāvatthu, passim).
3. The method of argumentation is the same in the Sanskrit source and in the
Pāļi source. The negator of the pudgala puts the follower of the pudgala in
contradiction to the sūtras, that is to say in contradiction with himself-for the
follower of pudgala recognizes that the Buddha has well said all that he has said.
“The pudgalavādin says: There is a self (ātman), a living being (sattva), a
living principle (jiva), a being that arises (jantu), a being that nourishes itself
(posa), a person (purusa), a pudgala. 44 Because there is a pudgala, he does actions
which should bear an agreeable result (sukhavedaniya), a disagreeable result, or a
result neither disagreeable nor agreeable. Having done these three types of
actions, he experiences, accordingly, sensations which are agreeable, disagreeable,
neither disagreeable nor agreeable.
"The sūnyatavādin asks him: Yes or no, it is the same person who does the
action and who experiences the sensation?
"The pudgalavādin answers: No.
"Recognize the contradiction into which you fall! 45 If there is a pudgala, and
if, because there is a pudgala, he does actions and experiences their proper
retribution, then one should say that it is the same person who does the action and
who experiences the sensation: hence your answer is illogical. If you now deny
that it is the same person who does the action and who experiences the sensation,
then one should not say that there is a self, a living being et cetera. To say this is
illogical.
"If the pudgalavādin answers: 'It is the same person who does the action andPoussin 23
who experiences the sensation', then he should be asked: Yes or no, is what the
Bhagavat says in the Sūtra well said, well defined, well declared, namely, 'Oh
Brahmin, to say that it is the same person who does the action and who
experiences the sensation, is to fall into the extreme opinion of permanence'?"46
"The pudgalavädin answers: Yes, this is well said.
"Recognize the contradiction into which you fall..."
The relation between the Pāli and the Sanskrit Abhidharma treatises is close.
The comparison between the Prakaraṇa and the Dhātukaya with the Dham-
masangani brings out, as does that of the Vijñānakāya with the Kathavatthu,
numerous evidences of the unity of this scholasticism. The controversy of the
pudgala is, without doubt, one of the kathavatthus, one of the oldest subjects of
discussion. Presented in Pāļi and in Sanskrit according to the same principles,
with, often, the same arguments and striking coincidences of phraseology-
clearer in Devasarman, but more archaic, it appears to me, in Tissa—it cannot fail
to clarify to a certain degree the history of the gravest conflict to agitate early
Buddhism. We may be surprised that Devasarman's pudgalavādin does not make
anything of the sūtra on the bearer of the burden, a sūtra which is one of the
principal authorities of Vasubandhu's pudgalavadin (Kośa, ix).
As for the Kathāvatthu, it is not imprudent to think that this book is made up
of bits and pieces. Certain parts are old, other parts are suspect.
d. The Dharmaskandha.
Takakusa asks if the compilation of this name is the work of Śāriputra
(Yasomitra) or of Maudgalyayana (Chinese title); but this is quite a useless
concern.
This is a collection of sūtras, promulgated in Jetavana, addressed to the
bhikṣus, preceded by two stanzas: "Homage to the Buddha ... The Abhidharma
is like the ocean, a great mountain, the great earth, the great sky. I wish to make
an effort to present in summary the riches of Dharma which are found in it."
The author, in fact, comments most frequently on the sūtras which he quotes
by quoting other sūtras: "Among these four, what is stealing? The Bhagavat
says
""
Without any doubt, the author was a scholarly man and well informed
concerning the most subtle doctrines of the Sarvāstivāda: "The Bhagavat, in
Jetavana, said to the bhikṣus: "There are four framanyaphalas, results of the
religious life. What are these four? The result of srotaāpanna . . . What is the
result of srotaāpanna? It is twofold, conditioned and unconditioned (saṁskṛta,
asaṁskṛta). Conditioned, that is to say the acquisition of this result and that which24
Introduction
is acquired through this acquisition, the precepts of the Śaikṣa. all the dharmas
of the Saikṣa. Unconditioned, that is to say the cutting off of the three bonds..."
(compare Kośa, vi. 51, 76).
e. The Prajñāptisastra
a. The Tibetan Prajñāptiśāstra is made up of three parts: Lokaprajñāpti,
Karaṇaprajñāpti, and Karmaprajñāpti.
The first two are described and analyzed in Cosmologie bouddhique,
pp. 295-350.
The third is in the same style. The text is divided into chapters preceded by a
summary. Here is the beginning:
"Summary: Intention, volition, past, good, object, sphere of desire, stanza,
resume of actions.
"1. Thus have I heard. The Bhagavat resided in Jetavana in the park of
Anāthapindada; he said to the bhikşus, "I teach the retribution of intentional
actions, done and certain, retribution in this life . . ." Thus spoke the Bhagavat.
"2. There are two actions: volition action (cetanā karman), and action after
having willed (cetayitvā karman). What is the first? It is called: cetană,
abhisamcetană, cintanā, cetayitatva, cittābhisaṁskāra, mānasa karman; this is
called volitional action . . .
"3. Volitional action is past, future, present. What is past volitional action?
That which is jāta, utpanna, abhinirvṛtta... abhyatīta, kṣīņa, niruddha, vipari-
ṇata, atītasaṁgṛhīta, atītādhvasaṁgṛhita.
"4. Volitional action is good, bad, or neutral . . .
"5. Is the object of volitional action good?
“6. Volitional action is of the three Dhātus. What is of the sphere of desire and
of kama?
"7. A stanza in honor of the Buddha who teaches the different types of action.
"8. One action: all actions done (literally: ekahetunā karmaṇāṁ saṁgrahaḥ
karmeti). Two actions; volition and action after having been willed. Three actions:
bodily, vocal, mental. Four actions: of Kāmadhātu, of Rūpadhātu, of Ārūpyadhātu,
and not belonging to the Dhātus. Five Actions: definite (=either good or bad) and
neutral actions which are abandoned through Meditation, those not to be
abandoned (aheya). . . And so forth up to twelve."
Almost all of the theories presented in Kofa, iv, are treated, with long
quotations from the sūtras.
Many details deserve to be mentioned. For example, "Lying arisen from
ignorance (Kośa, iv. 68)." Asked by a hunter if he had seen the deer, one thinks,Poussin 25
"It is not fitting that the hunter should kill the deer," and he answers that he has
not seen it (compare the story of Kṣāntivādin, Chavannes, Cing cents contes, i.
161). Asked by the king's army if he has seen the bandits. . . Asked by the
bandits if he has seen the king's troops ... And, above all, in the case of frivolous
speech arisen from desire, "or further, through attachment to examining the word
of the Buddha."
Chapter xi is interesting from another point of view. In relation to the
definition of death from exhaustion of life or merit (paragraph copied by
Vasubandhu, ii. 107), the story of Kāśyapa the Nude (Samyutta, ii. 19-22) is cited,
with some long developments: "A short time after he left the Bhagavat, he was
killed by a bull. At the moment of his death, his organs became very clear; the
color of his face became very pure; the color of his skin became very brilliant." Of
note also is the fact that Kāśyapa was received as an upāsaka: “Master, I go to the
Bhagavat: Master; I go to the Sugata; Master, I take refuge in the Bhagavat, I take
refuge in the Dharma and in the Sangha. May the Bhagavat recognize (dhāretu)
me as an upāsaka having renounced killing . . ." (compare Samyutta, ii.22 and
Digha, i.178).
Then: "The acquisition of karman is of four types. They are enumerated as in
the Sangītiparyaya” Then follow three paragraphs on giving: "Four gifts: it
happens that the giver is pure and the recipient is impure . . . and so forth as in
the Sangitiparyāya. Eight gifts: the asadya gift (Kośa, iv.117), and so forth as in
Sangītiparyāya. Eight gifts: it happens that a person of little faith gives little, to
immoral persons, for a short period of time . . ."
b. The Chinese Prajñāptiśāstra is incomplete. This edition, from its first part,
gives only the title, “In the great Abhidharmaśāstra, the Lokaprajñāpti, or first
part." And a gloss says that the Indian original is missing. There follows
immediately the title of the second part: Karaṇaprajñāpti.
The text begins as follows: "In the śāstra, the question is posed: For what
reason does the Cakravartin have the jewel of a woman . . . ?" In comparing the
Tibetan Kāraṇaprajñāpti, we see that the Chinese text omits the First Chapter on
the lakṣaṇas and on the Bodhisattva; and that the Second Chapter omits the
enumeration of the jewels and discussions on the wheel, the elephant, the horse
and the jewel.
The third chapter, in Chinese as in Tibetan, is made up of stanzas on the
Buddha, a king like the Cakravartin, and the jewel of the Buddha: the Dharma is
a wheel; the ṛddhipādas are an elephant. The Tibetan tells us that these stanzas
are the Sailagāthās. This refers to an edition that departs from the Suttanipāta,
where the single stanza 554 has two padas corresponding to the Tibetan: "Saila, I26
Introduction
am king, sublime king of the Dharma. In the circle of the earth, I set in motion the
Wheel of the Dharma; like a Cakravartin king, consider the Tathāgata as
compassionate, full of pity, a Muni beneficial to the world."
The Chinese text has fourteen chapters; the last, which is meteorological
(rain, etc.), corresponds closely, like the others, to the Tibetan text. This latter has
four supplementary chapters: the four gatis, the five yonis, to which womb do
beings of the different realms of rebirth belong, etc. It is likely that Vasubandhu
had read this chapter, for his version has, like the Tibetan Prajñāpti, the story of
the preti who eats her ten children every day, the story of Saila, of Kapotamālinī,
etc. (Kośa, iii.9; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p626c).
Takakusu has ingeniously supposed that the Lokaprajñāpti, omitted either by
mistake or on purpose in the Chinese Prajñāptiśāstra, of which it should be the
first "gate," is found in fact in the śāstra (Taishō 1644) entitled Li-shih: "Nanjio
translates Lokasthiti (?)-abhidharmaśāstra. But li signifies constructing, establish-
ing, and is practically equivalent to shih-she or prajñapti." Thus Takakusu
translates Lokaprajñāpty-abhidharmaśāstra.
Taishō 1644 exhibits the characteristics of a sūtra. Some editions precede the
title with the words, "Spoken by the Buddha."
The text begins: "As the Buddha Bhagavat, the Arhat, said, "Thus have I
heard.' The Buddha resided in Śrävastī, in the monastery of the upāsikā
Mrgāramātar Visãkhā, with many bhikṣus, all arhats ... with the exception of
Ananda. Then the earth shook. And Pūrna Maitrāyaṇiputra asks . . .” The
chapters begin normally, "Then the Buddha said,” “The Buddha said to the bhikṣu
Pūrṇa,” “The Buddha said to the bhikṣus," and end, "This is what the Buddha said;
thus have I heard.”
The contents of the chapters, established by Takakusu, show that, even though
it treats of subjects that the Tibetan Lokaprajñāpti treats, Taishō 1644 has nothing
in common with this Lokaprajñāpti. In this latter there is nothing that
corresponds to the chapter on the yakṣas and notably to the conversion of
"Sātāgira" and "Hemavata" (the stanzas of the Hemavatasutta of the Suttanipāta,
Uragavagga, Taishō, p. 177). The Lokaprajñāpti has only a summary indication of
the heavenly gardens, concerning which Taishō 1644 has some long develop-
ments. But in both works there is the battle of the suras and the asuras, the
movements of the sun and the moon, the length of life, the hells, the three small
and the three great calamities. Their order, however, differs.
The title of the chapters of Taishō 1644 do not give, sometimes, a precise idea
of the contents of the book.
For example, in the First Chapter, we have 1. the two causes of the shaking ofPoussin
27
the earth (movement of wind, water; and the magical power of the saint who
"considers the earth as small, the water as great”). 2. After two stanzas on the
shaking of the earth, the Buddha says to Pūrnṇa, "There are some winds
named Vairambhas . . ." (Kośa, vi.12). In this circle of wind, there is the water
and the earth whose thickness and height are fixed as in the Kośa (iii.45). 3. The
Buddha explains the great hell called "Black Obscurity" which is found between
the universes (and which is not mentioned in the Kośa), and the ten cold hells
(Kośa, iii.59a-c, second note). .. A little later, Ānanda manifests his admiration
for the Buddha and his power. Udāyin reprimands him and is, in his turn,
reprimanded by the Master. This is an edition of the celebrated Suttanta
(Anguttara, i.228), which differs from the Pāļi by the prophesy, “Aquatic beings
are many, terrestial beings are few... Samayavimukta arhats (Kośa, vi.56), are
many, asamayavimukta arhats are few, and are difficult to encounter in this world:
and I declare that Ananda will become an asamayavimukta Arhat."
f. The Dhatukāya.
1. At the beginning of this work, one finds the enumeration and the definition
of the dharmas of the Sarvastivādins: 10 mahābhūmikas, 10 kleśamahābhūmikas,
10 parittakleśas, 5 kleśas, 5 dṛstis, 5 dharmas . . .
The kusalamahābhūmikas are missing, as are the akusalas.
The five klesas make a strange list: kāmarāga, rūparāga, ārūpyarāga, pratigha
and vicikitsā.
More curious is the list of the five dharmas: vitarka, vicāra, vijñāna
(understood as the six consciousnesses, eye, etc.), āhrīkya and anapatrāpya.
We can imagine that this book is from the early Sarvāstivāda. 2. The second
part treats of samprayoga, association, and samgraha, inclusion.
"Vedanā, which forms part of the mahābhūmikas, is associated with how
any of the six vedanendriyas (pleasure, etc.)? With how many is it not
associated? . . ." and so forth until: "Affection arisen from mental contact is
associated with how many of the vedanendriyas? With how many is it not
associated?
"That which is associated with vedanā is included (saṁgṛhīta) in what? In the
mind and mental states, eight dhātus, two āyatanas, three skandhas. What is it
that is left over? Vedanā, rūpa, asaṁskṛta, the viprayuktasaṁskāras; that is to say,
eleven dhātus . . ."
These are precisely the type of questions that the Dhātukathāpakaraṇa
examines: sukhindriyam... kehici sampayuttam katīhi vippayuttam. . .? These
are the same questions: Vedanakkahandhena ye dhammā saṁpayuttā te dhammā28
Introduction
katīhi khandhehi katīhāyatanehi katīhi dhātühi saṁgahītā? te dhammā tīhi
khandhehi dvīhāyatanehi aṭṭhahi dhātühi saṁgahītā (Section xii).
3. We can thus affirm the close relationship between the Dhatukaya and the
Dhātukathāpakarana. The first, in its second part, is only a Sarvāstivādin
recension (theory of the mahābhūmikas, of the viprayuktasaṁskāras . . .) of an
earlier volume of scholastic exercises on the dharmas.
g. The Sangitiparyāya
The Sangitiparyāya is a recension of the Sangitisuttanta which forms part of
the Dīghanikāya.
Same nidāna: The Buddha at Pāvā; the death of the Nirgrantha; Śäriputra
invites the monks to chant together the Dharma and the Vinaya so that, after the
Nirvana of the Tathāgata, his sons will not dispute them. Then follow chapters on
the single dharmas, the pairs of dharmas ... the tenfold dharmas. Finally the
eulogy of Sariputra: sādhu sādhu, by the Bhagavat, "You have well collected and
recited with the bhikṣus the Ekottaradharmaparyāya taught by the Tathāgata . . .”
The close relationship of the Pāli and the Sanskrit texts do not exclude some
variants. It is thus that, among the eight-fold dharmas, the Abhidharma omits the
eight mithyātvas (number one of the Pāļi list) and adds the eight vimokṣas
(omitted in the Pali list, but which figure in the Dasa-uttara). The order also
differs. On the one hand mārgānga, pudgala, dāna, kausīdyavastu, ārabhayavastu,
punyot patti, parṣad, lokadharma, vimokṣa, abhibhvayatana; and on the other hand
micchatta, sammatta, puggala, kusitavatthu, ārabbhavatthu, dāna, dānuppatti,
parisă, lokadhamma, abhibhāyatana. Note that punyotpatti is better than
dānuppatti. 47
Yasómitra and Bu-ston attribute the Sangitiparyaya to Mahākauṣṭhila; the
Chinese sources attribute it to Śāriputra. Should we believe that in one recension,
that known by Yaśomitra, Mahākauṣṭhila had the role that fit the Pāļi and the
Chinese texts assigned to Śāriputra?
Takakusu says that the Sangitiparyāya, in volumes 15 and 18, quotes the
Dharmaskandhaśāstra. I have not encountered these quotations. The Prajñāpti-
sastra refers its reader to the Sangitiparyaya.
v. Some Masters of the Vibhāṣā.
The Vibhāṣā frequently quotes the divergent opinions of masters and
different schools. This presentation is often followed by the opinion of P'ing or of
the P'ing-chia: "The P'ing-chia says that the first opinion is the best one."Poussin 29
Elsewhere, as the commentators remark, “there is no P'ing-chia” (Kośa, iii. 14, 20,
41, Siddhi, 552, 690).
A good specimen of the methods of the Vibhāṣā: "If there is a pure prajñā
outside of the sixteen ākāras” (Kośa, vii. 12, Vibhāṣā, p. 529), why does the
Vijñānakāya not say this ...? If not, why do the Prakaraṇa and the Samgītiparyāya,
and even this treatise, the Vibhāṣā, say that . . .? And how does one explain such a
sūtra? One should say that there is no pure prajñā outside of the sixteen ākāras. In
this case, one understands the Vijñānakāya, but how does one explain the
Prakaraṇa . . .? There are five reasons which justify this text. . .
Among the masters of the Vibhāṣā, of special note are Parśva, frequently
quoted, and who, along with many anonymous commentators, comments on the
Brahmajāla (Vibh. 98, p. 508, but see also Vibh. 175, p. 881, on the Suddhāvāsikas
and 177, p. 889, on the number of the lakṣaṇas); Pūrņāśa (Kośa iii. 28, Vibh. 23, p.
118b: Samadatta (?), iii. 45, Vibh. 118c); Samghavasu (Vibh. 19, p. 97a, 106, p.
547a; 142, p. 732a) who recognizes only six indriyas in the absolute sense, the
jivita and the eight, eye, etc., because these six are the root of being, sattvamūla
(Kośa, ii. 5); and, with respect to this, Kuśavarman, who only admits one indriya,
the manas, a doctrine which leans towards the Vijñānavāda.
a. Vasumitra. 48
1. Vasumitra is one of the great masters of the Vibhāṣā, and one of the leaders
of the Sarvastivādin school. His theory on "the existence of all" is, Vasubandhu
says, preferable to that of the three other masters, Dharmatrāta, Ghosaka, and
Buddhadeva (Kośa, v. 26).
One searches in vain in the two Abhidharmas (of the collection of seven)
attributed to Vasumitra, the Prakaraṇapāda and the Dhātukāya, for an allusion to
this theory. Taranātha says, moreover, that the author of the Prakaraṇa has
nothing in common with the Vasumitra of the Vibhāṣā (p. 68).
2. The Āryan Vasumitra Bodhisattva gives his name to a treatise (Taishō
1549). According to the preface, this was the Vasumitra who, after Maitreya, will
be the Simhatathāgata; the Vasumitra to whom the fathers refused entrance to the
Council because he was not an arhat, and who later became the president of the
Council (Hiuan-tsang, Watters, i.271). Watters does not think that he is the great
master of the Vibhāṣā; indeed, the thirteenth chapter of Taishō 1549, entitled
"Sarvästi-akhanda," does not contain any references to the system of avasthanya-
thatva of the Bhadanta Vasumitra. This is all that I dare say about this very
complicated chapter.30
Introduction
The theory of the time periods is encountered in the second volume (p. 780b),
where the following text is discussed: "The past and the future are impermanent,
and even more so, the present." Why does the Bhagavat say "And even more so,
the present"? Six explanations follow (among which the fifth: "In former times
the length of life was 80,000 years; it will again become 80,000 years"); then: "The
Bhadanta says, "The present appears for a short period of time; the past and the
future do not remain permanently, but they come and go reciprocally. This is what
conforms to the sūtra.”
The paragraph devoted to avidyā (p. 722) does not formulate the opinion of
the author. There is only “It is said,” notably the opinion of the Mahiśāsakas. Is
this ajñāna, the five nīvaraṇas, ayoniśomanaskāra, viparyāsa, etc.? (See Kośa,
iii.28). It appears, from the silence of Kyokuga Saeki, the editor of the Kośa, that
the Vibhāṣā does not treat this point.
The problem of alcohol is treated on p. 786 (Kośa, iv.34, Vibhāṣā, jp. 645).
The discussion on lābha and bhāvanā (Kośa, vii.63), in which Vasumitra takes
part (according to the Vyākhyā,) should be referred to Taishō 1549, for Vasumitra
is not named in Vibhāṣā, p. 554b. The same remark applies to the erroneous
opinion of Vasumitra on the falling away from the nirvedhabhāgiyas, Kośa, vi.21.
The śloka on the eight aniyatas (Kośa, ii.27) is not found in Taishō 1549.
For the discussion, “Does it happen that the dharma which is hetupratyaya of
a dharma is not hetupratyaya of this dharma?", see Taishō 1549, p. 791a, and
compare the Jñanaprasthāna in Kośa, ii.52.
On living longer than a kalpa, see p. 782b; manodaṇḍa, schism, p. 785,
classical doctrines.
3. Vasubandhu (ii.44) quotes the Paripṛcchà,49 and has also written a
Pañcavastuka (Vyākhyā). The Paripṛcchā teaches a doctrine which is clearly
Sautrāntika (that nirodhasamāpatti is accompanied by a subtle mind). Also, K’uei-
chi (Siddhi, 211) says that this Vasumitra is a divergent Sautrāntika master.
As for the Pañcavastuka, 50 we possess a commentary, the Pañcavastukavi-
bhāṣā, from the hand of Dharmatrāta (Taishō 1555). The five vastus are the
vastus explained in Kośa, ii.55-56 (svabhāvavastu, ālambanavastu . . .).
This work does not appear to contain Sautrāntika opinions;5¹ it is divided into
three chapters, Rūpavibhāga, 'Cittavibhāga, and Caittavibhāga.
Vasubandhu adopts the demonstration of "seeing by the two eyes" through
the argument of seeing the two moons (Kośa, i.43, Pañcavastukavibhāṣā, p. 991c),
and he probably adopts the theory (i.38) that the five vijñānas are both of
retribution and out-flowing and that the sixth is also kşanika (Pañcavastuka,
p. 933c).Poussin
31
The demonstration of the existence of sukha (Kośa, vi.3) is very similar to the
demonstration established in the Pañcavastuka, p. 994c.
K'uei-chi, in his treatise on the sects (Sarvästivādin thesis, 28), mentions the
opinion of the Pañcavastuka on the nature of the svalakṣaṇa which is the object of
the vijñānas (Kośa, i.10).
b. Ghosaka and the Abhidharmāmṛtaśāstra.
After the Council and the death of Kaniska, a Tho-gar or Tukhāra was invited
with Vasumitra to the country of Asmaparānta-to the west of Kaśmir and close
to Tukhāra (Taranātha, 61)-by its ruler; he was the proponent of a theory that
"all exists," and is frequently quoted in the Vibhāṣā; he was also the author of the
Abhidharmamāmṛtaśāstra (Taishō 1553).
This treatise is a truly exquisite, small book, very readable (in spite of the early
date of its translation, 220–265), very complete (for example, Chap. vi, on the
doctrine of the lakṣaṇas and sub-lakṣaṇas, Kośa, ii. 45), but concise; however, we
find some well-chosen details (for example, the enumeration of the fields of
merit: father, mother, an old person, a sick person . . .).
The list of the viprayuktas, p. 970, is related to that of the Prakaraṇa (Kośa, ii.
35-36a): prāpti, jāti, sthiti, anityatā, asaṁjñisamāpatti, nirodhasamāpatti,
asaṁjñi-āyatana, nānādeśaprāpti (?), vastuprāpti (?), āyatanaprāpti (?), the three
kāyas, pṛthagjanatva.
The Kośa (ii.44) reproduces the essentials of a discussion between Ghosaka
and the Sautrantika Vasumitra, the author of the Paripṛccha (see above p. 30), on
the existence of the mind in the absorption of nirodha. The Vibhāṣā, it appears,
ignores the author of the Paripṛcchā.
Among the opinions of Ghoșaka mentioned in the Vibhāṣā and mentioned
again in the Kośa, the most notable is that “visibles are seen by prajñā associated
with the visual consciousness," an opinion that departs from orthodoxy (Vibhāṣā,
p. 61c, Kośa, i.42).
52
Elsewhere Ghosaka is very orthodox, 5² or his divergences, which are minimal,
indicate a progress; for example, Kosa, vi. 19, 20, 78. The references iv.4, 79 and
v.66 merit examination.
Vibhāṣā, p. 397b, is interesting: "Ghoșaka says: The five skandhas which form
part of one's own series, of the series of another, which belong to living beings
and which do not belong to living beings, are Suffering and the Truth of
Suffering. The ascetic, upon understanding (abhisamaya), sees only that the five
skandhas of his own series are suffering; he does not see that the others are32
Introduction
suffering. Why is this? Because one understands suffering under the aspect of
torment : now the skandhas of another's series . . . do not torment his own
series."
c. Buddhadeva.
S. Lévi asks (JA. 1896, 2, 450, compare Barnett, JRAS. 1913, 945) if the
Buddhadeva of the Vibhāṣā should be identified with the Āryan Buddhadeva, a
Sarvāstivādin, the Lion of Mathura. The Sarvastivādin Budhila mentions this
same Lion who appears to be related to the Mahasāṁghikas and who is perhaps
the Fo-t'i-lo of Hsüan-tsang, 53 the author of the Chi-chin-lun (Tattvasamuc-
cayaśāstra) used by the Mahäsāṁghikas (?) (Lévi, ibid.; Watters, i.82).
We will find in Konow (Kharoshthi Inscriptions, 44-49) the most recent
remarks on these difficult inscriptions. There is nothing wrong with Buddhadeva
being very much earlier than the Vibhāṣā. The Sarvāstivādins owe their name to
the theory that "all exists," which Buddhadeva was probably one of the first to
have explained.
In addition to his theory that "all exists” (Kośa, v.26), Buddhadeva is unique in
maintaining that derived matter (bhautika) is only a mode (avastha) of primary
matter (mahābhūtas) (i.64), and that the mental states (caittas, sensation, ideas,
volition) are only modes of the mind (citta, vijñāna) (ii.23, ix; Siddhi, 395,
Vibhāṣā, p. 661c, p. 730b), a doctrine which connects Buddhadeva to Dharmatrata
and to the Dārṣṭāntikas-Sauträntikas. 54
d. Dharmatrāta.
There are at least two Dharmatrātas:
1. The Bodhisattva who compiled the Udānavarga. The Vibhāṣā, followed by
the Kośa, quotes it to show that a work can be the "word of the Buddha” even
though edited by a master. According to the preface to Taishō 212 (A.D. 399), this
Dharmatrāta was the maternal uncle of Vasumitra (Chavannes, Cinq cents contes,
iii. 297).
2. The master quoted in the Vibhāṣā, the proponent of a theory of "all exists"
(Kośa, v.26) which appeared to the Vaibhasikas to be too close to the systems of
the heterodox.
3. This master of the Vibhāṣā is also the author of an Abhidharmasāra which
bears his name (Taishō 1552), a commentary and a new edition of the
Abhidharmasăra of Dharmaśrī (Taishō 1550). In fact, the Dharmatrata of the
Vibhāṣā (p. 383b) denies the rūpa which forms part of the dharmayatana, that is
●Poussin 33
to say, avijñatirüpa, the same negation, somewhat more involved, but clear
nevertheless, appears in the Sara (chapter on action, p. 888, see below).
4. There is nothing to prevent this same Dharmatrata from being
the commentator on the Pañcavastuka of Vasumitra, Taishō 1555, the
Pañcavastukavibhāṣā.55
e. The Bhadanta Dharmatrāta.
The Vibhāṣā, it appears, ignores Kumāralāta and Śrīlata, who were the heads
of the Sautrāntika school (Siddhi, 221, told to us by K'uei-chi). The Sautrāntika
school, or, more exactly, the school which should take the name of Sautrāntika, is
represented in the Vibhāṣā by the Dārṣṭāntikas and by two masters: Dharmatrāta,
a divergent Sarvāstivādin, and the master whom the Vibhāṣā simply calls
"Bhadanta," whom the Vyākhyā of the Kośa calls "the Sautrāntika Bhadanta”
(Kośa, viii.9), who is at the "head of the list of Sautrāntikas” (viii.40), and who
adheres to or leans toward the Sautrāntika system (i.20).56
Hsüan-tsang, P'u-kuang, and Bhagavadviseșa recognize on occasion, in the
"Bhadanta" of the Vibhāṣā, the Sthavira or Bhadanta Dharmatrāta (Kośa, i.20,
iv.4). Yaśomitra declares that Bhagavadvišeșa is wrong: "Bhadanta is the
philosopher that the Vibhāṣā calls simply by the name of Bhadanta, a philosopher
who adheres to the Sautrāntika system or leans toward this system; whereas
Dharmatrata, whom the Vibhāṣā calls by his name, is a Sarvästivādin, the author
of one of the four theories of the Sarvāstivāda (Kośa, i.20)." On the other hand,
"the first version of the Vibhāṣā gives the name of this master [Bhadanta] in
transcription and precedes this, like those of the other masters, with the title of
venerable" (note of N. Péri, in Cosmologie bouddhique, 276).
Dharmatrāta expresses some opinions on important points which clearly
depart from the system of the Vibhāṣā and from the orthodox Sarvāstivādin
system; the same may
be said of Buddhadeva.
1. The Bhadanta does not admit that the eye sees: it is the visual consciousness
that sees (i.42); he has a particular theory on the non-contact of atoms (Wassiliew,
279), which Vasubandhu accepts and which Samghabhadra discusses (i.43); 57 he
admits three caittas (ii.23, Add.), a position which distinguishes him from the
Dārṣṭāntikas; like the Sarvāstivādins, he denies that rūpa is samanantarapratyaya
(ii.62); he admits the prolonged existence of antarabhava, against the Sarvasti-
vādins (iii.14); he has a particular opinion on pratītyasamutpāda and samutpanna
(iii.28); he denies avijñapti, which is clearly anti-Sarvāstivādin (iv.4); on the four
modes of kusala, he has a very orthodox doctrine (iv.8); he holds to the "mortal"
sin of intelligent animals (iv.97): he gives an explanation of the word vimokşa34
Introduction
(viii.33); he mixes the dhyanas and the ſuddhāvāsikas (Vibhāṣā, p. 881c); he treats
the last thought of the arhat (p. 954a); on uccheda and śāśvata (p. 1003c); on the
meaning of alpa, sulabha, anavadya, and on the praise of his disciples by the
Buddha (p. 909a, and p. 900b, where he differs from Vasumitra). 58
The Bhadanta is very clear on vicāra-vitarka" (Vibhāṣā, p. 744b, and P. 269,
Kofa, ii.33 and viii.23): the author of the Jñanaprasthāna wants to refute what the
Dārṣṭāntika says. The latter says: "There is vitarka-vicãāra from Kāmadhātu up to
Bhavagra. Why is this? Because the Sūtra says that grossness of mind is vitarka
and that subtlety of mind is vicāra: now grossness and subtlety of mind exist up to
Bhavagra." The Bhadanta says: "The masters of the Abhidharma say that vitarka-
vicāra are grossness and subtlety of mind. Now grossness and subtlety are relative
things and exist up to Bhavagra. However, these masters only admit vitarka and
vicāra in Kāmadhātu and in Brahmaloka. This is poorly said, this is not well said."
The masters of the Abhidharma say, "What we say is well said, not poorly said. In
fact . . ."
2. Vasubandhu (Kośa, vii.31) attributes to the Bhadanta Dharmatrāta (see the
correction ad vii.31) an opinion on the power of the Bhagavat which is an opinion
of the Bhadanta according to Vibhāṣā, p. 155c.
In the Vibhāṣā (p. 61c) Dharmatrāta says that visible matter is seen by the
visual consciousness (cakṣurvijñāna): an opinion that the Kośa attributes to a
Vijñānavādin (i.42), and which differs from that of the Bhadanta (Vibhāṣā, p.
62b) who says that the eye sees by reason of light and the manas knows by reason
of the act of attention.
3. Vibhāṣā, p. 661c16: the Jñānaprasthāna wants to refute what the other
masters say. In this school there are two masters, the first Buddhadeva and the
second Dharmatrāta.
Buddhadeva says that rūpa is only the four mahābhūtas, that the caittas are
citta. “Derived rūpa (upādāyarūpa) is only mahābhūtaviśeṣa; the caittas are only
cittaviseșa. Sūtras quoted in support of this theory: 1. "What is in the eye is
solid. . ." (Kośa, i.35); 2. “Samadhi is cittaikāgrya..." (viii.2). How does
Buddhadeva prove the existence of dhātus, āyatanas, skandhas? ... The Abhi-
dharmācāryas say, "The quoted sūtras do not have this meaning . . ."
Dharmatrata admits the existence of derived rupa apart from primary rūpa,
and of the caittas apart from citta. But he holds that derived tangibles and the rūpa
which forms part of the dharmayatana do not exist. He thus attempts to prove
the existence of the dhatus, ayatanas, skandhas, as does the Abhidharma system.
But the derived tangibles exist separately, as do the other derived rupas; but if the
rūpa of the dharmayatana does not exist, avijñapti does not exist (Kosa, i.35, iv.3).Poussin 35
4. Vibhāṣā, p. 383b: The Abhidharma says, "What is rūpaskandha? Ten
rūpāyatanas and the rupa included in the dharmayatana (that is to say the
avijñapti)." What system does it want to refute? It wants to refute the
Dārṣṭāntikas, for they deny any rupa in the dharmayatana. And Dharmatrāta also
says, “Everything that is rūpa is either support or the object of vijñāna. How could
there be rūpa which is neither one or the other?" It is in order to refute these
opinions that the above-mentioned definition of rūpaskandha is given. But if the
rūpa which is included within the dharmayatana is real, how can one explain what
Dharmatrāta says? It is not necessary to explain it, for this is not in the Tripitaka.
Or, if one should explain it, one can say ... that the rūpa included within the
dharmayatana, arising from the mahābhūtas which are the object of touch, can be
considered as the object of touch consciousness. Thus the declaration of
Dharmatrāta is without error.
5. Vibhāṣā, p. 730b: Among the twenty-two indriyas or “organs” (Kośa, i.48),
how many are separate things, and how many are only names? The Abhi-
dhārmikas say that for twenty-two names there are seventeen things, for the two
sexual indriyas (parts of the organ of touch) and the three pure indriyas
(combinations of faith, etc.) are not separate things (Kośa,ii.2, 9).
Dharmatrata only admits fourteen things: the first five indriyas, the jīviten-
driya, the upekṣendriya, and the samādhīndriya are not things. In fact the
jivitendriya, the vital organ, is one of the viprayuktasaṁskāras (Kośa, ii.45) and
these are not real.6⁰ There are no sensations apart from the agreeable and the
disagreeable: thus the sensation of indifference (upekṣendriya) is not a thing.
There is no samadhi, concentration, apart from the mind.
Buddhadeva says that only a single indriya is real, namely the mana-indriya,
the mental organ: "The saṁskṛtas, he says, are of two types: mahābhūtas and
cittas ..."
The index of proper names contains information, nearly complete, on the
references to the Bhadanta in the Vibhāṣā.
vi. Some Schools of the Vibhāṣā.61
a. Dārṣṭāntikas and Sautrāntikas.
The history of this school, though long, is not yet clear. The notes of K'uei-chi
(Siddhi, 221-224; Masuda, "Sects," Asia Major, ii.67; Lévi, Dṛṣṭāntapankti, p. 97)
show that Hsüan-tsang was not well informed with respect to them. Takakusu
(Abhidharma Literature, 131) says that the Vibhāṣā speaks of the Sautrāntikas:
rarely, in any case, for I have only found a single reference to the Sauträntikas; we
can say that the Vibhāṣā only knows the Dārṣṭāntikas.36
Introduction
We have reason to establish a relationship between this name and the book of
Kumāralāta, the Dṛṣṭäntapankti. We may ask if the Dārṣṭāntikas are characterized
by the use of "comparisons," as the Tibetans say (Wassiliew, 274, according to
whom Sautrāntika = Dārṣṭāntika); however, the sense of the word dṛṣṭānta is not
proven with certainty. J. Przyluski thinks the Dṛṣṭānta is opposed to scripture.
This way of looking at it is confirmed, I believe, by the Vibhāṣā (p. 782b18). It is
said in traditional Drstanta: 61 "He who gives alms to a person who has left
nirodhasamapatti is endowed with an action which bears a result in this life. Why
is this? There is no reason to explain this text. Why is this? Because this is neither
in the Sūtra, the Vinaya, nor the Abhidharma, but only in the traditional Dṛṣṭānta.
That which is said in the traditional Dṛṣṭānta may be true or not true. If, however,
one desires an explanation of this, one should say that this alms-giver obtains a
result in this life or obtains great results. The text mentions only the first
alternative, because it is pleasing to people of the world."62
We can speak of a Dārṣṭāntika-Sautrāntika school: in looking at it more
closely, the Vibhāṣā assigns to its Dārṣṭāntikas almost all of the theses that the
Kośa assigns to the Sautrāntikas.
Here are the more important disagreements between the Sarvāstivādins and
the Dārṣṭāntikas-Sautrāntikas.
1. The Abhidharmas of the Sarvästivādins are not authoritative (Kośa, i.2, ii.1,
vii. 11).
2. The asaṁskṛtas do not have any real existence (ii.55).
3. The viprayuktas (ii.35–36) do not have any real existence: negation of the
praptis, of the jivitendriya, etc.
4. The past and the future do not have any real existence (v.25-26).
5. The existence of the past permits the Sarvāstivādins to explain the play of
causality; the praptis serve the same function. Negating the past, the prāptis, etc.,
the Dārṣṭāntika-Sautrāntika school admits a subtle mind, either of the bijas or of
vāsanā (perfuming), and thus takes into account the changes of the series (ii.36,
50, iv.79, ix. ...).
6. Extinction does not have a cause; things do not have any duration (sthiti):
the kṣaṇa or moment, is of a size that tends to zero (iv.2-3) (See Rocznik, vol.
viii).
7. Notable divergence with respect to action: negation of the avijñapti (iv.3),
of bodily action (iv.3), of the necessary character of retribution of an anantarya
transgression (Vibhāṣā, p. 359b20).
8. On the caittas and the bhautikas: opinions which depart from the
Sarvāstivādin system (ii.23).Poussin 37
9. Explanation of the three rafis (Kośa, iii.44), which exist from hell to
Bhavagra; beings having the dharmas of Nirvāṇa; beings not having them;
indeterminate beings (Vibhāṣā, p. 930b15; compare the Siddhi and its gotras).
10. The body of the Arhats is pure, being produced through "wisdom" (i.4,
Saṁghabhadra, p. 331b).
11. Simultaneity of the Buddha (iii.95-96).
The references which follow, complete in the index of proper names.
(Dārṣṭāntika-Sautrāntika), are classified according to the material in the Kośa.
1. The Dārṣṭāntika rejects certain sūtras: how does he pretend to the name of
Sautrantika? (Saṁghabhadra, p. 332a).
The vijñānas, including the manovijñāna, have a special object (Kośa, ix,
Vibhāṣā, p. 449a16).
If the eye sees the visible (Kośa, i.42, Vibhāṣā, p. 61b19).
2. The Sthavira (=Śrīlāta) and all the other Dārṣṭāntika masters deny ākāśa
(Samghabhadra, p. 347b).
Negation of prāpti, of apratisaṁkhyānirodha (Vibhāṣā, p. 479a19, p. 796b6,
p. 931b23).
The lakṣaṇas of "conditioned things”—Dārṣṭāntikas, Vibhajyavādins, Saṁ-
tānasābhāgikas (Vibhāṣā, p. 198a15 and foll.).
Pratyayatā is not real (Vibhāṣā, p. 680b27).
There is no vipäkahetu outside of the cetană, no vipākaphala outside of the
vedanā (Vibbāsā, p. 96a26).
Rūpa is not "a similar cause" of rupa-the opinion of the Därṣṭāntika
according to the gloss of Kyokuga Saeki (Kośa, ii.52), but, according to the
Vibhāṣā (p. 87c20), the opinion of the Bahirdeśakas.
"Among the Sautrāntikas, the Bhadanta Dārṣṭāntika holds to the separate
existence of vedanā-saṁjñā-cetanā, Buddhadeva adds sparsa and manasikāra: the
other caittas are only citta; the master Śrilāta holds that the asaṁskṛtas and the
viprayuktas have nominal existence" (Wassiliew, 281, 309, corrected).
Subtle mind in nirodhasamapatti and in asamjñisamāpatti (so too the
Vibhajyavādins) (Kośa, ii.44, viii.33, Vibhāṣā, p. 774a14, p. 772c21).
Negation of the reality of dreams (Vibhāṣā, p. 193b5).
The caittas arise in succession, according to the Dārṣṭāntikas and the same
Bhadanta (Vibhāṣā, p. 493c26, p. 745a7); the mind cannot be accompanied by
jñāna or ajñāna (p. 547).
Vitarka and vicāra in the Three Dhātus (Kośa, ii.33, viii.23, Vhibāṣā, p. 269b9,
p. 744b9).
3. Antarābhava and nirmita (Vibhāṣā, p. 700a15).38
Introduction
Sparsa is not a thing in itself (Vibhāṣā, p. 149a25).
4. Arising depends on hetupratyaya but not extinction; the Dārstāntikas as
against the Ābhidhārmakas (Kośa, iv.2–3; Vibhāṣā,p. 105a27).
Negation of the dharmayatanarüpa (=avijñapti); Dharmatråta and the Dar-
ṣṭāntikas (Vibhāṣā, p. 383b16).
On the four and eight types of actions from the point of view of their
determination, Dārstāntikas, or Sautrāntikas according to Vyākhyā (Kośa,
iv.50-51; Vibhāṣā, p. 593b10): all actions can be "reversed," action in antarabhava
(Kośa, iii.14), ānantaraya, action in Bhavāgra, action in asaṁjñisamāpatti
(Vibhāṣā, p. 359b20, p. 773c29).
Whether abhidhyā, vyāpāda, and mithyādṛṣṭi are actions (opinion of the
Dārṣṭāntikas, Kośa, iv.65, 78; of the Vibhajyavādinikāya, Vibhāṣā, p. 587a9).
5. All the kleśas are "bad" (Dārṣṭāntikas, Vibhāṣā, p. 259cll); contra, Kośa,
v.20-21).
Anuśayana (Vibhāṣā, p. 110a21; Kofa, v.16).
In saṁvṛtijñāna, the pṛthagjana does not cut off the kleśas (Dārṣṭāntikas and
the Bhadanta, Vibhāṣā, p. 264b19, p. 741c20).
The object of attachment and the pudgala are unreal, Dārṣṭāntikas (compare
the cittamātravāda); the object of attachment and the pudgala are real, Vatsipu-
triyās (Vibhāṣā, p. 288b15 and following).
Reincarnation solely by reason of desire and hatred (Vibhāṣā, p. 309all)-in
fact, by reason of any klesa.
On the time periods (Vibhāṣā, p. 919b12).
6-7. Definition of the Truths (Kośa, vi.2; opinion of the Abhidhārmikas,
Dārṣṭāntikas, Vibhajyavādins, Ghoṣaka, Pārśva . . . Vibhāṣā, p. 397b4).
On kṣānti and jñāna (Kośa, vii.1, 20, 22; Dārṣṭāntikas, the Bhadanta, Vibhāṣā,
p. 489b16).
Purity of the body of the Arhat (Kośa, i.4, iv.4; Dārṣṭāntikas, according to
Saṁghabhadra, p. 331b25).
8. Doctrine of dhyāna (the Bhadanta, Dārṣṭāntika-Sautrāntika, Kośa, viii.9).
The samantakas are "good" (Dārṣṭāntikas, Kośa, viii.22, Vibhāṣā, p 832a).
Mixed dhyāna (Kośa, vi.42, 58, vii.23) explained by perfuming (Dārṣṭāntikas
and Yogācārins, Vibhāṣā, p. 879c26; compare Siddhi).
Falling away from asaṁjñisamāpatti (Dārṣṭāntikas, Vibhāṣā, p. 773c29.
Nirmita is not real (Dārṣṭāntikas and the Bhadanta, Vibhāṣā, p. 700a15).
b. Vibhajyavādins.
They are clearly defined as "those who distinguish" and admit the existence ofPoussin 39
a certain kind of past and a certain kind of future (Kośa, v.22, P'u-kuang quotes
Kosa, v.9, and Vinitadeva, Traité sur les Sectes).
However, the information that we possess on the Vibhajyavādins is confused:
the Vibhajyavādins are the Mahãāsāṁghikas, the Ekavyavahārikas, the Lokot-
taravādins, or the Kaukkuţikas (K'uei-chi, Siddhi, 109).
1. Vasumitra, in his Treatise on the Sects, does not mention them. Vinitadeva,
presenting his theories concerning the history of the Sarvästivādins, makes them
the seventh Sarvāstivādin school. Bhavya (the Sthavira theory) makes them a
division of the Sarvāstivādins, and (the Mahāsāṁghika theory) the third original
school. According to Bhikṣvagra, they are the fourth Mahāsāṁghika school.
2. The note by Kyokuga Saeki (edition of the Kośa, xix, fol. 14a-b). 64
K'uei-chi, commentating on the Siddhi [iv.1, 35, p. 179 of the French
translation], says, "Those who were called Vibhajyavādins are now called
Prajñaptivādins." [This should be understood: Paramartha, in his version of the
Treatise of Vasumitra, has written “Vibhajyavādin,” whereas] Vasumitra [in the
version of Hsüan-tsang] says, “In the second century, a school called the
Prajñaptivāda came out of the Mahāsāṁghikas." In connection with this, the
commentator Fa-pao says, “According to these two translations, the Vibhaj-
yavādins make up only one school [with the Prajñaptivādins”]. In the Vibhāṣā,
p. 116c5, the Mahāsāṁghikas, etc., are called Vibhajyavādins [that is to say: the
Vibhāṣā attributes to the Vibhajyavādins an opinion that we know to be the
opinion of the Mahāsāṁghikas, see Kośa, iii.28]. Consequently the Arthapradipa,
p. 48, says, "The Vibhajyavādins are either some divergent Mahāyāna masters, or
all the schools of the Hinayana are called Vibhajyavādins: they are not a definite
school. Consequently, in the Mahāyānasaṁgraha (Taishō 1593), the Vibhaj-
yavādins are explained as Mahisasakas; in the Vibhāṣā, as Sāṁmītiyas."66
3. In many texts, the meaning of the word Vibhajyavādin is clearly defined.
a. Bhavya: We call [the Sarvästivādins] by the name of Vibhajyavādin when
they distinguish (vibhaj) by saying, "Among these things, some exist, namely the
former action whose result has not occurred; some do not exist, namely the
former action whose result has been consumed, and future things."
b. Kośa, v. 25-26: Those who admit the existence of the present and a part of
the past (namely the action which has not produced its result) and the non-
existence of the future and a part of the past (namely the action which has
produced its result), are held to be Vibhajyavādins; they do not belong to the
Sarvāstivādin school.
c. P'u-kuang, p. 310b23 (on Kosa, v.25-26): They say that there is no opinion
which is completely correct; that some part exists, and some part does not exist40 Introduction
[or: in part true, in part false]: one should thus distinguish. Thus they are called
Vibhajyavādins.
d. The Kaśyapiyas (Vasumitra, thesis 1 and 2) hold a clearly Vibhajyavādin
position: "The action whose result has matured does not exist; the action whose
result has not matured exists." Now Buddhaghosa (Kathāvatthu, i.8) attributes to
the Kassapikas, a branch of the Sarvāstivādins, the opinion that one part of the
past and future exists: this is the second Vibhajyavādin thesis of the summary of
Vinitadeva. Now the Theravādin, which should be Vibhajyavādin like the Buddha,
denies and refutes this.
4. Elsewhere: One calls Vibhajyavādins those who, distinguishing, admit that
the skandhas are real, and that the āyatanas and the dhātus have nominal
existence.
5. Vibhāṣā, p. 571c24 and elsewhere, opposes the Vibhajyavādin and the
Yuktavādin.
6. Vinītadeva attributes to the Vibhajyavādins the following thesis:
a. The pudgala exists “absolutely"; b. the past does not exist, with the
exception of the cause the result of which has not ripened; the future does not
exist, with the exception of the result; the present rigs mi mthun pa (?) does not
exist; c. dharma does not become an "immediate cause"; d. rūpa does not have a
"parallel cause," as the Dārṣṭāntikas claim (Kośa, ii.52).
7. More notable is the note of Hsüan-tsang (Siddhi, 179) which associates the
Vibhajyavādins and the Sthaviras with belief in bhavāngavijñāna.
And also: pure mind, Siddhi, 109-111; persistence of a subtle mind in
nirodhasamāpatti (with the Dārṣṭāntikas), 207; see also 770.
8. References to Kośa-Vibhāṣā:
a. Sound is of retribution (with the Vātsīputrīyas) (Kośa, i.37–38a, Vibhāṣā p.
612c13, Siddhi, 190).
The body of arising (janmakaya) of the Buddha is "pure" (with the
Mahāsāṁghikas) (Vibhāṣā, p. 871c2, Siddhi, 769–770).
b. Śraddhā, etc., are pure (Kośa, ii.9, Vibhāṣā, p. 7c3).
Life is cittanuvartin (Kośa, ii.50, Vibhāṣā, p. 770c6—refuted by Vasumitra).
Consequently, there is a subtle mind in asamjñisamāpatti, and in niro-
dhasamāpatti (Kośa, viji.33, Vibhāṣā, p. 772c21, p. 774a14).
c. Negation of antarābhava (Kośa, iii. 10, Vibhāṣā, p. 356c15, p. 700a15. From
whence the complicated explanation of the antarāparinirvāyin, Kośa, iii.12,
Vibhāṣā, p. 357b9).
Pratītyasamutpāda is asaṁskṛta, like the Path (Kośa, iii.28, Vibhāṣā, p. 116c5,
p. 479-like the Mahāsāṁghikas and the Mahisasakas).Poussin 41
d. Greed, anger, false views are "action" (Vibhāṣā, p. 587a9, Kośa, iv.65:
Dārṣṭāntikas).
Definition of "good by nature" (as jñāna), “through association" (as vijñāna),
"in origin" (as action of the body. . .) (Kośa, iv.8, ix, Vibhāṣā, p. 741a15).
The mind of the Bhagavat is always absorbed (Kośa, iv.12, Vibhāṣā,
p. 410b26).
e. The thirst for non-existence is abandoned through bhāvanā (Kośa, v. 10-11,
Vibhāṣā, p. 138c3).
On the viparyāsas (Kośa v.9, Vibhāṣā, p. 536c9).
f. Definition of the Truths (Kośa, vi.2, Vibhāṣā, p. 397b4).
Comprehension of the Truths at once (Kośa, vi.27, Vibhāṣā, p. 532a).
The Arhat does not fall (Kośa, vi.58, Vibhāṣā, p. 312b9).
Forty one bodhipākṣikas (Kośa, vi.66, Vibhāṣā, p. 499a.4).
g. Rūpa in Arūpyadhāto (Kośa, viii.3, Vibbāsā, p. 432a22).
Only the First Dhyāna has aṁgas (Vibhāsā, p. 813c28).
The Äryan of the fourth ārūpya obtains the quality of an Arhat without the
aid of the Path (Vibhāṣā, p. 929b14). (This is thesis 12 of the Mahīšāsakas in the
treatise of Vasumitra).
c. Yogācārins
Or
yoga-ācāryas, as the Chinese reads; we also have yogācāracitta (Vyākhyā
ii.49, ad Kośa, ii.23).
1. People who practice yoga or the contemplation of yogins; 67 (see Kośa, iv.4,
note, and the Vibhāṣā, passim) they seek nirodhasatya (p. 534a19), practice
śūnyatāsamādhi, p. 540cll), are disgusted with vedanā (Rūpadhātu) and saṁjñā
(Ārūpyadhātu) (p. 775b3; also p. 35b25; p. 529b4; p. 832a22). The Ratnarāśisutra
(Śikṣāsamuccaya, 55) examines the obligations of the vaiyāvṛtyakara bhikṣu,68 the
intendent and the minister of the monastery, with respect to the āraṇyaka, to the
pindacārika, to the contemplative or yogācārin bhikṣu, to the student or
bahuśrutye'bhiyukta, to the preacher, dharmakathika.
2. Devoted to yoga, to breathing exercises, to dhyāna, etc., the yogācārin
becomes, as the Chinese say, a "master of yoga," a yogācārya: they had theories on
prāṇāyama, on sünyatāsamadhi... The Kośa, iv.18-19, mentions a thesis of this
school of meditators on rūpa which arises through the power of absorption.
3. [This school of meditators became a philosophical school, the Yogācāra
school, when, under the influence of Maitreya-Asanga, it became attached to the
older formula of the Daśabhūmaka: "The threefold world is only mind." One can
indeed see the relationship between the theories of ecstasy and idealism, and we42
Introduction
can see how the practice of the "mindless absorption" can lead to the affirmation
of a subtle mind . . . Asanga utilizes Dārṣṭāntika-Sautrāntika speculations.]
Below are the references in the Kośa to the Yogācārins:
Explaining mixed dhyāna (Kośśa, vi.42) by perfuming, (Vibhāṣā, p. 879c26, as
do the Dārṣṭāntikas).
Related to the Sautrāntikas (Kośa, ii.34, Vyākhyā: "the opinion of the
Sautrantikas or the Yogacarins.").
The Yogācāracitta admits that an agglomeration can be formed from a single
mahābhūta, as a piece of dry earth; from two, the same, but wet ... (Kośa, ii.22,
Vyākhyā, ii.49).
In the yogācāradarśana, there is a manodhātu which is distinct from the six
vijñānas (Vyākhyā, i.40, ad i.17; compare the Tamraparṇīyas).
(The Vijñanavādin denies that the eye sees, Kofa, i.42).
The Yogācāracitta defines adhimukti (Kośa, ii.24, Vyākhyā, ii.51).
According to the Yogācārins, the mindless absorptions are endowed with
mind from the fact of the alayavijñāna (Vyākhyā ad ii.44). Yasomitra speaks here
of the school of Asanga; the same in Kośa, iii.2; Vyākhyā, ad v.8 (the 128 klesas of
the Yogācārins).
(The "ancient masters" of the Kośa, ii.44, should be the Dārṣṭāntikas).
Elsewhere, the Vyākhyā explains the "ancient masters" of the Bhāsya as being
"the Yogācārins" or "the Yogācārins, Asarga, etc." (Vyākhyā ad iii.15, iv.75, vi.4).
vii. The Sariputrābhidharma.
This book, Taishō 1548, is divided into four parts: sapraśnaka, apraśnaka,
samprayukta-samgraha (three titles which correspond to the first four sections of
the Abhidharma according to the Dharmaguptas-Haimavata [J. Przyluski, Concile,
179, 353-4] and reminds us of the Dhātukaya-Vibhanga-Dhātukathā, above p. 27;
and "succession" (karma or nidāna?).
This is, properly speaking, a śāstra, without any appearance of a sutra, with its
beginning phrase, "Thus have I heard. . ." It was compiled by Sariputra, either
during the lifetime of the master (according to the Ta-chih-tu-lun) or after his
Nirvāṇa, to put an end to heresy, for some have "counterfeited the Dharma"
(dharmapratirūpaka).
However this may be, it is a very extensive and old treatise, much in the style
of the Pali Vibhanga.
The Ta-chih-tu lun establishes some relations between the Abhidharma of
Sariputra and the Vatsiputriyas. 69 But I have not encountered, in the work of
Śäriputra, any mention of the pudgala in the Vatsiputriya sense of the word.Poussin
43
Kyokuga Saeki (Kośa, viii.3) mentions the fact that the Sāriputrābhidharma
admits the existence of rūpa and Arūpyadhātu. See in fact p. 552a, at the end of
the chapter on the skandhas. This rūpa is avijñapti. The book admits the
avijñapti, which is a Sarvāstivādin invention.
But it is not orthodox Sarvästivädin. It believes that anuśaya is disassociated
from the mind (p. 690; Kośa, v.2). It does not contain anything on the existence of
the past and the future,70 nor on "unconditioned" space. It explains prahāṇa-
dhātu, "which should be abandoned" (576c; Kośa, vi.78). Its system of pratyayas,
very developed (p. 679b), and its list of the dhātus (p. 575) have nothing
Sarvāstivādin about them.
We can get an idea of the style of the Sāriputrābhidharma by comparing its
description of rūpaskandha (p. 543) with the Kośa, i. 20 and Vibhanga, 1 and
following; its definition of dharmadhātu (p. 535) with Vibhanga, 89; and its
definition of nirodhasatva (p. 553) with Vibhanya, 103.
1. Dharmadhātu.
The dharmadhātu is first defined as identical to the dharmāyatana; then, as
made up of vedanāskandha, saṁjñāskandha, saṁskāraskandha, invisible and
impalpable (anidarśana, apratigha) rūpa, and the asaṁskṛtas (compare Vibhanga,
86). A third definition enumerates, after vedanā and saṁjñā, the series of
saṁskāras associated with the mind (beginning with cetana and ending with
kleśānusaya); the series of the samskäras disassociated from the mind (viprayukta,
see p. 547b): jati, jarā, maraṇa . . . nirodhasamāpatti; finally: pratisamkhyāniro-
dha, apratisamkhyānirodha, niyamadharmasthiti[tā], ākāśāyatana, vijñānāyatana,
ākiṁcanyāyatana, naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana,"¹ that is to say the list of the
asaṁskṛtas: "this is what is called the dharmadhatu."
On the one hand, the viprayuktas are not those of the Sarvāstivādins;
although there is some doubt with respect to the equivalents of the translators
(Dharmagupta and Dharmayasas, 414 A.D.), the nāmakāya . . . are missing.
On the other hand, the asaṁskṛtas of Śāriputra recall those of the Maha-
sāṁghikas and the Mahisāsakas (Siddhi, p. 78).
2. Nirodhasatya.
To the question: "What is duḥkhanirodha āryasatya?", our text answers in
canonical terms: yo tassā yeva tanhāya asesavirāganirodho cago patinissagqo mutti
anālayo (Vibhanga 103), and adds: "already cut off, not to arise anew: this is what
is called duḥkhanirodha āryasatya."
The question is repeated: "What is duḥkhanirodha āryasatya? Pratisamkhyā-
nirodha is called duḥkhanirodha āryasatya. This duḥkhanirodha āryasatya is in44
Introduction
truth like that, not like that, no different, not a different thing. As the Tathāgata
has well spoken the truths of the Aryans, it is āryasatya.”
But, "what is pratisaṁkhyānirodha?” The question is repeated three times: "If
a dharma is destroyed when one obtains the Aryan Path, the destruction of this
dharma is called pratisaṁkhyānirodha” . . . “The four śrāmaṇyaphalas are called
pratisamkhyanirodha."
"What is srotaapannaphala? If the three kleśas to be cut off by Seeing are cut
off; if satkāyadṛṣṭi, vicikitsā and filavrata are exhausted, this is called srotaapanna-
phala." 72 Säriputra takes up the question again, "What is srotaäpannaphala? The
three kleśas to be cut off by Seeing being cut off, satkāyadṛṣṭi-vicikitsā-śīlavrata
being exhausted: if one obtains amṛta, this is what is called srotaäpannaphala."
It appears that what we are encountering here is a terminology alien to the
Abhidharma and to the Sarvästivāda.
viii. The Abhidharmasāra.73
1. Before Vasubandhu, many masters undertook to summarize the doctrines of
the Abhidharma. We possess notably three works: 1. The Abhidharmasara of
Dharmasri in ten chapters, made up of kārikās (probably in āryan stroph) 74 and a
commentary; 2. a second edition of this same Sāra by Upaśānta, to which the
Chinese give the name of Abhidharmasāra-ching [=sūtra]: the same kārikās with
a more developed commentary; and 3. a third edition of the Sāra, the Tsa
[=Miscellaneous] Abhidharma-ching, by Dharmaṭrāta, which is in fact a new
work, containing a new chapter and many new kārikās.75
2. The preface to the Vibhāṣā (Taishō 1546)76 by Tao-yen places the work of
Dharmaśrī before the Jñanaprasthāna: "After the nirodha of the Buddha, the
bhikṣu Dharmaśrī composed the four volumes of the Abhidharmasāra. Then
Katyayaniputra composed the Abhidharma in eight books . . ."
3. The work of Dharmaśri contains ten chapters: Dhātu, Saṁskāra, Anuśaya,
Ārya, Jñāna, Samādhi, Sūtra, Tsa and Śästravarga or Vädavarga.
Between the ninth and the tenth chapters of Dharmasri, Dharmatrāta places
a new chapter, the Pravicayavarga, which indeed appears to constitute an
independent work.
There is a stanza of introduction: “even though many dharmas have been
spoken of, their meaning remains confused . . .” and four concluding stanzas:
"The author has composed this book based on the book of Dharmaśrī, not
through pride or in order to acquire a reputation . . .”.
It begins with the dharmacakra, the Wheel of the Dharma: "The Muni said
that the darśanamärga is called dharmacakra, either because it goes into the mind
iPoussin
45
of others... (Kośa, vi.54).
There then comes the brahmacakra (vi.54, vii.31), the upāsaka (iv.69 ), the
four parts of sila (iv.29), the prātimokṣa . . . Later (p. 959b), cosmology: the
periods of loss, etc. (iii.99), destruction by fire, etc. (iii. 102); and then there follows
the theory of the three "fallings away" (p. 960c; Kośa, vi.59) and the definition of
the Bodhisattva (iv.108).
Suddenly (p. 961c): "How many types of Sarvästivāda are there?" Presenta-
tion of the four doctrines (Kośa, v.25-26) without mentioning the name of the
four masters. The second and the fourth are bad because they confuse the time
periods. The first (difference in bhāva, translated fen): "One should know that
this is the pariņāma-sarvāstivāda."77
There is a diversity of opinion as to whether the Truths are seen at the same
time (Kośa, vi.27), Sarvāstivādins and Vätsiputriyas on the one hand, Dharma-
gupta on the other; antarabhava (iii.34); then the Sarvästivādin proof. And at the
end of the paragraph, the discussion "whether the Buddha is part of the Samgha."
Finally, the concluding stanzas.
4. The Samskäravarga treats of the simultaneous arising of the citta-caittas
and of atoms (Kośa, ii.22), of the four lakṣaṇas of "conditioned things” (ii.45), of
the hetus and the pratyayas (ii.48, 61).
The Sūtravarga is a collection of notes on the three Dhātus and a calculation of
the places that they contain: sixteen in Rūpadhātu, but, according to some,
seventeen (Kośa, iii.2): the sattvāvāsas (iii.6), the vijñānasthitis (iii.5-6); the three
vartman of pratītyasamutpāda (iii.20, 25), the twelve limbs; the mahābhūtas, the
Truths, the fruits of the Āryans, etc.
The Tsa-varga defines the mind-mental states as samprayukta, sāśraya, etc.
(ii.34); it enumerates the viprayuktas: āsaṁjñika, two non-conscious absorptions,
sabhāgatā, nāmakāyādayas, jīvitendriya, dharmaprāpti, pṛthagjanatva, four
lakṣaṇas (compare ii.35-36); it concludes with half a kārikā on the four bhavas
(iii.13) and a kārikä on "disgust" amd "detachment" (vi.79).
The Sastravaraga (or Vädavarga) is made up of ten questions in verse,
followed by answers in prose, relative to samvara (iv.13), to the results, etc.
Dharmatrāta adds sixteen questions.
masters.
a. Obstacles, Kośa, iv.95-102, Vibhāṣā, p. 599.
5. In order to appreciate the character of the treatises of Dharmaśrī, Upaśānta,
and Dharmaträta, and Vasubandhu's debt with respect to Dharmaträta, which
appears to be notable, we may see how two dharmaparyāyas, the chapter of the
three obstacles (avaranas) and that of avijñapti, are treated by the different46
Introduction
Dharmasri, p. 815: "The Bhagavat says that there are three avaraṇas: karman,
kleśa, and vipāka. What is their definition?
“Anantarya actions which are without remedy, developed defilements, bad
action experienced in the painful realms of rebirth, are the āvaraṇas.
"These three form an obstacle to the Dharma; they hinder the grasping of the
Aryan dharmas; they are thus called 'obstacles.' Which is the worst action?
"The action which divides the Samgha is said to be the worst.
"This action is the worst. One guilty of this remains a kalpa in Avici hell.
Which is the best action?
"The cetanā or 'volition' of Bhavägra is the greatest.
“Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana is Bhavāgra. The volition which belongs to the
realms of this sphere is the greatest and finest: its result is a life of some 80,000
kalpas in length."
Upaśānta, p. 843b-c, has the same two stanzas, but a less meager commentary:
"That which hinders the Path of the Aryans and the means (upaya) to this
path is said to be an obstacle. The obstacles to action are the five anantaryas,
namely, the killing of one's father, etc. . . He who commits such an action is
immediately and necessarily reborn in Avici: thus the action is anatarya. The
killing of one's father and mother destroys goodness, hence it is Avici hell. Those
guilty of the other three are led to injure a field of merit. The obstacles of the
defilements are 'agitated' and 'sharp' defilements: the first is habitual defilement;
the second is the overriding defilement. This refers to the present' defilements,
not to the defilements that one 'possesses' (that one has as potential), for all
beings 'possess' all the defilements . . .'
There is a variant to the second stanza: "Lying which divides the Samgha . . . ;
volition in Bhavagra, among good actions, has the greatest result," which is better.
The commentary notes the differences in the two schisms (cakrabbeda,
karmabheda).
Dharmatrāta is longer (p. 898b-899c) and very close to Vasubandhu:
According to the first stanza of Dharmaśrī: 1. the avarana of klesa is the
worst; the avaraṇa of action, mediocre; and the avaraṇa of retribution, the least; 2.
the division of the Samgha, by nature, is non-concord; this is a viprayukta
saṁskāra of the anivṛta-avyākṛta class; 3. the division is a thing of the Samgha;
the transgression is of him who divides the Samgha; he experiences, in Avici, a
retribution of kalpa; 4. the bhikṣus are divided in their opinion of who is the
Master, of what is the Path: this is the division of the Saṁgha which was united,
and he who breaks it is 'one who possesses views' (drsticarita); 5. in three
continents, a minimum of eight persons is required for karmabheda, inPoussin
47
Jambudvīpa, a minimum of nine persons is required for cakrabheda; 6. cakrabheda
is impossible in six time periods: when a boundary is not delimited; at first;
following; when the Muni has passed into Nirvāṇa; when the running sore has
not been produced; when the pair of chief disciples has not been established (six
pādas); 7. lying which divides the Samgha is the worst of actions; the volition of
Bhavagra is said to bear the greatest result.
b. Avijñapti, Kośa, iv.2, 3.
Dharmaśrī (p. 812c):
"Bodily action is vijñapti and avijñapti. The vijñapti of the body is the
movement of the body, good, bad, or neutral: good when it arises from a good
mind . . . For avijñapti: when one does an action in a firm manner, the mind can
change, but the seed remains. If, for example, a person undertakes the precepts,
his mind can then be bad or neutral: nevertheless the precepts continue . .
Action of the manas is solely avijñapti... because this action is not visible...
vijñapti is good, bad, or neutral; the same for the avijñapti which belongs to the
manas. The other vijñaptis are never neutral."
Upaśānta (p. 840) adds a bit. The hunter is regarded as free from bodily
avijñapti. Mental action is called avijñapti because it does not inform others. Some
say that it is called vijñapti because it is discourse (jalpa?).
Dharmatrata (p. 888b) replaces the terms vijnapti and avijñapti with "doing"
and "not doing" (karaṇa, akaraṇa) (Kośa,iv.14):
"Bodily action is of two types: karaṇasvabhāva, or akaraṇasvabhāva. 'Doing'
(karaṇa): movement of the body, exercise 78 of the body is the 'doing of the body.'
'Not doing' (akaraṇa, wu-tso): when the movement of the body has ended, the
nature (good or bad) of this movement, of this action which is the movement,
continues to arise, simultaneous with minds of a different nature, even as the good
precepts produced by their undertaking (kusalasamādānaśīla) continue to arise
even when bad or neutral minds are present. Like the immoral person (dauḥśilya-
puruşa): even when good or neutral minds are present, his immorality continues
to arise."
"
Action of the manas is cetanā, volition, by nature.
"Not doing' (akaraṇa) is also called nirati (? Vyut. 21, 114), virati; upekṣā,
akriya (pu-tso). Because it does not do, it is called 'not doing.' If one says that this
is not an action (karman), this is wrong, because it does. Good does not do evil,
evil does not do good: this is also an action. As the upekṣā part of Bodhi is not
upekṣā by reason of what is called upekṣā, but the practice of the Path, the
arresting of things, is called upekṣā. The same here. Furthermore, in doing the48
Introduction
cause one does the result: . . .'not doing' is not rupa, but the doing of it (which is
the cause of the 'not doing' or avijñapti) is rūpa; 'not doing' is thus called rūpa. In
this same way then, 'not doing' is action.7⁹Poussin
49
1. Originally printed as a Foreword to de La Vallée Poussin's Cosmologie bouddhique: 1913, and
published 1919 in the four-part Memoires of l'Acadmie royale de Belgique (Luzac, London). This
contained the restoration of the kārikās of the third chapter of the Kośa, the Tibetan kārikās, the
Bhasya, and the text of the Vyākhyā; in the appendix, a summary of the Lokaprajñapti and the
Karaṇaprajnapti.
2. Cullavagga, xi. 1.8. [For a more exact presentation, J. Przyluski, Concile de Rājagṛha, p. 311, 345,
349].
3. Oldenberg, Buddha . . ., 6th edition, p. 202; Fr. trans. Foucher, 2nd edition, p. 177. [Psychology,
yes; but ontology is doubtful].
4. In the Divya, a Sarvāstivādin work, where we encounter the expressions sūtrasya vinayasya māt-
ṛkāyāḥ: “The monks ask with respect to the Sūtra, the Vinaya, and the Mātṛkā” (p. 18, 15), and
sūtram mātṛkā ca, equivalent to āgamacatuṣṭayam (p. 333, 7), Kern (Manual, p. 3) thinks that the
term mātṛkā is employed "as synonymous with abhidharma.” It cannot in any case designate the
Abhidharmas of the Sarvastivadins of which we are speaking below (p. 3) which are treatises; it
fits the Abhidhammas a little less poorly, but without being satisfying. Does it designate some
lists "omitting all the explanations and other details” (Childers, 243), lists of items which form
part of the agama and which are not specifically Abhidharma? The Sautrāntikas, who deny the
existence of an Abhidharma Piṭaka distinct from the Sūtra, certainly had such an "index," exactly
like the Sarvastivādins of that period, and earlier than the Abhidharmas to which the expressions
of the Divya refer. Does it designate some presentations, in the manner of the sutras, like those
that constituted the mātikās of the Vibhanga? In this book, which is the property of the
Abhidharma, it is often a type of commentary in the form of glosses.
5. See the article of Rhys Davids in Hastings' Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics.
6. Developpement de l'Abhidharma, Dogme et philosophie,p. 122; J. Przyluski, Concile, third
chapter and 179, 353; Açoka, 322; Funérailles, 49; Lévi, Seize Arhats, 20, 39.
7. In Hastings' Encyclopedia, I.19-20; Winternitz, Geschichte, 134. Scholastic definitions of the
Abhidharma: Attasālini, 48-50 and following; Sutrālaṁkāra, XI.3.
8. It knows, however, that the author of the Kathāvatthu foresaw and refuted in advance the
heresies to come; see Atthakathā, pp. 6-7. The remark is by Minayeff, and the observations by H.
Oldenberg (Buddh. Studien, p. 633, 676) do not demonstrate that the Kathāvatthu has not been
amplified in the course of time.
9. This is incorrect. The Samgītiparyāya is only the Saṁgītisuttanta. The second part of the
Dhātukāya has a close relationship with the Dhātukathāprakaraṇa. A careful study will show
other points of contact, and one can see that the Sarvāstivādins simply enriched by their
inventions (theory of the viprayuktas, of the mahābhāmikas, etc.) the earlier material of the
Abbidbamma.
10. The account of Buddhaghosa, Kathāvatthu-Atthakāṭhā, p. 6, holds that because of this, at least
the Vibhajjavādins are the orthodox party.
11. This is one of the aspects of the problem of kiriyāvāda.
12. This definition of the two schools is borrowed from the Abhidharmakośa, v.9; see
Kathāvatthu, 1.8 (which does not entirely confirm our interpretation). The controversy of time
and the pudgala in the Vijñānakāya, Etudes Asiatiques, 1925.
13. Geography of the Sarvāstivādin sect, J. Przyluski, Açoka. I know that Sinologists, notably
Takakusu, are not settled on the language in which the first of the Abhidharmas of the50
Introduction
Sarvāstivādins, the Jñānaprathāna, was written: “In what language, however, the original text was
composed we have no means of ascertaining. All we can say is that the text brought by
Samghadeva and Dhammapiya [Dharmapriya] from Kaçmīra [383 A.D.] seems to have been in
a dialect akin to Pali, whereas the text used by Hiuen-tsang [657 A.D.], as in other cases, seems to
have been in Sanskrit. But this supposition rests solely on the phonetic value of Chinese
ideographs employed in these translations, and is not corroborated by any other evidence. . . It
seems to me more than probable that the Jñānaprasthāna at least was written in some dialect:
one thinks naturally of the dialect of Kaçmīra, but we really have no certainty that the
Jñanaprasthāna was not composed in Kosala (JPTS; 1905, p. 84, 86).”
We possess a fragmentary quotation from the Sarvästivādin Prātimokṣa which proves that
some earlier forms, Pāli or dialect, remained in use: "When, in the Poșadha ceremony, the
Vinayadhara asks, 'Are you pure?' (bhikṣupoșadhe hi kacci ttha pariśuddhā iti vinayadhareṇā-
nuśrāvite), if any bhikṣu does not confess his transgression . . .” (Abhidharmakośavyākhyā ad iv.
72; compare the introduction of the Pātimokkha and the remarks of Rhys Davids, Dialogues, II,
p. 257). (See L. Finot, "Prātimokṣasūtra des Sarvāstivādins,” JA, 1913, 2.177–9).
But we possess a fragment of the Jñanaprasthāna, quoted in the Abhidharmakośavyākhyā (ad
i.49): katamad buddhavacanaṁ tathāgatasya yā vāg vacanaṁ vyavahāro gīr niruktir vākpatho
vägghoṣo vākkarma vāgvijñaptiḥ // buddhavacanam kuśalam vaktavyam athāvyākṛtaṁ vak-
tavyam / syāt kuśalaṁ syād avyākṛtam // katarat kuśalam / kuśalacittasya tathāgatasya vācaṁ
bhāṣamāṇasya yā [vāg]vijñaptiḥ // katarad avyākṛtam / ... pūrvavat // punas tatraivānantaram
uktam / buddhavacanam ka eşa dharmaḥ / namakāyapadakāyavyañjanakāyānāṁ yānupūr-
vavacanā anupūrvasthāpanā anupūrvasamayoga iti /
14. Invention of the prāptis, of sabhāgatā, of the existence of the past and the future, of diverse
types of cause, of apratisamkhyanirodha, not to mention the nirvedhabhagiyas, etc.
15. The Abhidharmakośavyākhyā speaks of satpädābhidharma-mātrapāṭhina Abhidhārmikas,
Ābhidhārmikas "who read only the six-legged Abhidharma," which we understand to mean "who
do not read the Vibhāṣā.” These are Sarvāstivādins; but all Sarvāstivādins are not "followers of
the Vibhāṣā" (Vaibhāṣikas). We know, for example, that there were four ways of understanding
"all exists," those of the Sarvästivādins Dharmatrāta, Ghoșaka, Vasumitra, and Buddhadeva: the
Vaibhāşikas of Kaśmir condemn the first, the second and the fourth; and the first for the serious
reason that it is confused with the non-Buddhist teaching of the Saṁkhyas.
p. 328.
16. Better, "after the reign of Kanișka,” Inde sous les Mauryas.
17. See this Introduction, Dārṣṭāntikas, and Index, Sautrāntikas.
18. I omit here the rather long note where the bibliography on the “dating" of Vasubandhu is
summarized, and where the texts proving the existence of an "earlier Vasubandhu" were brought
together; see below.
19. All the opinions, or almost all the opinions, marked in the Kośa or in the Bhāṣyam by the
adverb kila (“certain,” “it is said,” grags so), are erroneous opinions of the Vaibhāṣikas. A correct
translation would be: "The School says, wrongly, that . . ."
20. N. Péri, "A propos de la date de Vasubandhu,” BEFEO, 1911, p. 374. The Tibetan Siddhantas
also take a great deal from the Kośą. Note that it was translated into Chinese only in 563, and the
Tibetan version, by Jinamitra and Śrīkūṭaraksita, during the period of Ral-pa-can (816-838).
21. This does not exist in extenso in Chinese (JPTS, 1905, p. 77). This is the treatise the first two
parts of which are analyzed in the Appendix of Cosmologie bouddhique.
22. The Vyākhyā, the commentary on the Bhāṣyam by Yaśomitra, adds many details.Poussin 51
23. It is from this point of view that Oldenberg recommends the study of the Abhidharmakośa, in
Buddhistische Studien, ZDMG; LII; p. 644 (1898).
24. According to P. Demiéville, BEFEO, 1924, p. 463.
25. With reference to Guņamati, see H. Ui, Studies in Indian Philosophy [=Indo-tetsugaku
Kenkyu], 5th volume, pp. 136–140.
26. Missing in the two treatises of Samghabhadra, the Āryan quoted in Vyākhyā i.31, which is a
criticism of Kośa i, kārika 11.
In the two treatises of Samghabhadra, the first chapter is entitled Mülavastunirdeśa, the
second Viseșanirdeśa, the third Pratītyasamutpādanirdeśa. As is proper, the Pudgalapratiședha-
prakaraṇa, an appendix to the Kośa, is ignored.
27. It has been preceded by Susumu Yamaguchi [September 1931].
28. See Kośa i.1. Obermiller, in the preface to his translation of the Uttaratantra (Asia Major,
1931), digresses from the thesis of Ui.
29. Perhaps because the work of Dharmatrāta enjoyed, for a long time, a great reputation;
because, in the eyes of the Sarvāstivādins, the Kośa passed, with good reason, for heretical and
tendentious.
30. Quoted iii.59, on the explanation of the word utsada.
31. See below.
32. Şaṭpādābhidharmamātrapāṭhinas, a good reading for the Kośa, v.22, note 80.
33. An account of the council in Ta-chih-tu-lun. Przyluski, Concile de Rājagṛha, p. 72.
34. Translated in 383 by Gotama Samghadeva of Kasmīr, and by Hsüan-tsang.
35. Watters, i.294; S. Lévi, Catalogue geographique des Yakṣas, 55; J. Przyluski, Açoka, 263.
36. On the language in which the Jñānaprasthāna was written, see Takakusu, p. 82, 84, 86. See
above P. 3.
37. On the laukikāgradharmas, Kośa, vi. 19c, and "Pārāyaṇa quoted in the Jñānaprasthāna,”
Mélanges Linossier (where we see that the Jñānaprasthāna poorly presents the problem of the
nirvedhabhāgīyas).
38. Same text, Small Vibhāṣā, p. 5b.
39. Compare Kośa. i.3, and Documents d'Abhidharma; Vibhāṣā, p. 236b.
40. The controversy of time and of the pudgala in the Vijñānakāya, in Etudes Asiatiques, 1925,
i.343–376; Inde sous les Mauryas, 1930, 138; Note in Bouddhique, ii. AC. Belgique, Nov. 1922.
The fourth volume of the Japanese translation reached me in September, 1931. It contains the
Vijñānakāya. The translator, Bunʼyu Watanabe, in a short preface, treats of the philosophic
import of the book, of its compilation, and its relation with the Abhidhammas.
41. One must be more precise with respect to the remarks made by Barth (ii.355): in truth the
editors of the Dipavaṁsa are alone in knowing a Tissa Moggaliputta "who must have presided
over the council of Ashoka and composed the Kathāvatthu.” But the Sarvästivādin tradition
knows of a Mu-lien to whom it attributes, in the controversy of the past and the future, the
position that the Dīpavaṁsa assigns to Tissa. There is certainly much legend in Singhalese
hagiography.
42. The enigmatic Gopāla of Hsüan-tsang? Our sources are in agreement in attributing to the52
Introduction
Sammitiyas, and to the Vatsiputrīyas, the doctrine of the pudgala. See Madhyamakavṛtti, pp.
275-276.
43. Kathāvatthu: saccikaṭṭhaparamaṭṭhena puggalo upalabbhati. The Sanskrit formula is not
restored with any certainty. We have tattvārthataḥ (satyārthataḥ?) paramārthataḥ pudgala
upalabhyate sākṣīkriyate saṁpratividyate (?) saṁvidyate. The edition of Devasarman, more
developed than that of Tissa, appears to be later.
44. Sanskrit sources like the expression purusapudgala, for example, the Sanskrit edition of
Majjhima, iii.239 (chadhāturo ayam puriso) has ṣaḍdhātur ayaṁ puruṣapudgalaḥ. See Madhya-
makavṛtti, pp. 129, 180, etc
45. The expression that I translate as "Recognize the contradiction into which you fall!", ju t'ing
tuo fu, corresponds to a Sanskrit original ājānīhi nigraham. Tuo fu is in fact translated by nigraha
sthāna in a word list (Tetsugaku Daijisho, Tokyo, 1912) abstracted by Rosenberg ("Introduction to
the study of Buddhism,” i, Vocabulary, Tokyo, 1916). Thus we have here the exact equivalent of
the formula ājānāhi niggaham of the Kathāvatthu and the Milinda.
46. The doctrine of the Bhagavat is a path between two extremes. It avoids the extreme theory of
permanence by saying that he who eats the fruits of the action is not the same person who carried
out the action (sa karoti so’nubhavati?): it avoids the theory of annihilation by denying that he
who eats the fruit is anyone other than he who carried out the action. Compare Samyutta, ii. p. 23.
47. The edition of the Dirgha has only four octades: vimokṣa, abhibhū, lokadharma and samyag-
märga (which recalls the Pali samattas).
48. On the different Vasumitras, see Watters, i.274-5; the Introduction to the Traite sur les Sectes,
Masuda, Asia Major, ii. p. 7; Tāranātha, 174.
49. Who (Vibhāṣā, p. 152a) declares that all citta-caitta disappears in nirodhasamāpatti?
50. Perhaps Taishō 1556, anonymous: Sarvāstivādasamaya-pañcavastuka, notable for its enumera-
tion of the viprayuktas; 997c: prāpti, asaṁjñisamāpatti, nirodhasamāpatti, āsaṁjñika, jivitendriya,
sabhāgată, desaprāpti (?), ayatanaprāpti, jāti jarā, sthiti, anityatā, nāma-pāda-vyañjanakāyas.
51. It quotes the Abhidharma-ācāryas. It admits the mahābhūmikas, p. 994b3, and also avijñapti,
p. 992c, which it explains, along with the samvaras, exactly as the Kośa does. But the formula,
"There are two gates to amṛta, the contemplation of the loathsome and the regulation of the
breath," is to be noted, p. 989b.
52. On the anāgāmin, Vibhāṣā, p. 879b; on the meaning of bhava, p. 960b; on the absorptions
which follow a good mind of Kāmadhātu, p. 961c.
53. One gloss says that the word signifies "Bodhi-taking," which would give Bodhilāta.
54. The Dārṣṭāntikas deny the caittas; the Sautrāntikas admit the caittas, but differ on their
number.
55. See above, p. 30.
56. Sautrāntikā Bhadantādayaḥ; sautrāntikadarśanavalambin.
57. According to Wassiliew, 279, Saṁgharaksita differs a little. We do not know this master, nor
the Bhūmisena of p. 280.
58. The opinion on seeing through the visual consciousness, on the number of the caittas, on the
non-existence of avijñapti, are clearly non-Vaibhāṣika. Moreover, the Vibhāṣā carefully notes the
opinions of the Bhadanta.Poussin 53
59. See also Vibhāṣā, p. 219.
60. However Dharmatrāta, in Abhidharmasāra, p. 885, explains the causes of the viprayuktas.
61. See the references to the Mahāsāṁghikas, the Vātsīputrīyas, the Mahiśāsakas, and the
Dharmaguptas in the index.
62. Ch'uan-yü, Ch'uan translates āgama or avavāda.
63. Vasubandhu, Kosa, iv. 56, as well as Samghabhadra, p. 572 (which is surprising enough), do
not take into account the second alternative and follow the doctrine of the ch'uan-yü.
64. A note translated imprecisely in Kośa, v. 9d, note.
65. The truth is that Paramartha wrote one word for another.
66. This is obscure; the Samgraha quotes the Agama of the Mahīśāsakas and ignores the
Vibhajyavādins; the Vibhāṣā, it appears, ignores the Sāmmitīyas.
67. This is the meaning of yogācāra in the Saundarananda, and in the Mahāvastu.
68. Or vaiyapṛtya, Avadānaśataka, ii.235.
69. "Some say: 'When the Buddha was in this world, Śāriputra, with an end to explaining the
words of the Buddha, compiled the Abhidharma. Later, the monk Vätsiputriya recited [this work].
Up to the present day, this is what is called the Abhidharma of Śāriputra,"" J. Przyluski, Concile,
P. 73.
The only book of the Abhidharma which teaches the doctrine of the pudgala appears to be
Taishō vol. 32, no. 1649, the Sāṁmitīya-nikāya-śāstra, Kośa, ix.
70. "The past is that which has arisen and is destroyed; the future is that which has not arisen, not
appeared," p. 543b.
71. For the last terms, compare the variant p. 526c: the Sanskrit reading is doubtful:
ākāśāyatanajñāna . . . and ākāśāyatanapratyaya[jñāna).
72. Compare the doctrine of the Dhammasangaṇi, Kośa v.4, note.
73. Taishō volume 28, numbers 1550, 1551, 1552, Abhidharmahṛdaya; see above P. 16.
74. We have the Sanskrit text of one of the kārikās, Kośa, v, note 14.
75. For example, the ninth chapter: Dharmatrāta takes up twenty kārikās of Dharmaśrī and
interpolates six new kārikās; he continues with twenty-two new kārikās.
76. Taishō 1546; mentioned by Takakusu, p. 128.
77. The third doctrine, difference in avasthā, (trans. fen-fen).
78. We have fang-pien, which should translate vyāyāna (see Demieville, Milinda) more often than
upaya.
79. See above p. 33.paberi ve
CHAPTER ONE
The Dhatus
1. Below ad ii.2a, ādhipatya = adhikaprabhutva, sovereignty or predominating power. See
Siddhantakaumudī quoted in Dict. de Saint-Petersbourg; Garbe, Sāṁkhya-Philosophie, 257.
Compare the explanation of the indriyas in the Atthasālinī, 304, etc.
2. Kārikā ii.1, in the Samayapradīpikā, omits the word kila by which Vasubandhu indicates that he
does not share this doctrine of the School. Kārikās ii.2-4, where Vasubandhu presents the teaching
of the Sauträntikas, are omitted in the Samayapradīpikā.
3. Buddhaghosa explains in Atthasālinī (641) that boys' games are not the same as girls' games.
4. According to the Vyākhyā, Ancient Masters (pūrvācārya).
5. Samyutta, i.39. Asanga (Sūtrālamkāra, xviii.83, p. 151 ed. Levi) demonstrates the predominance
of the mind over the saṁskāras: cittenāyaṁ loko nīyāte cittena parikṛṣyate cittasyotpannasya vaše
vartate. (Anguttara, ii.177).
6. Hsüan-tsang: "for all the pure dharmas arise and develop following them.”
7. "The mind of one who experiences agreeable sensation is recollected." An extract from the
Sutra on the Vimuktyāyananas, quoted in Vyākhyā, p. 56 ad i.27; Mahävyutpatti, 81.
8. "Faith arises from suffering," Samyutta, ii.31. For this sense of the word upanișad, “cause," see
below ii.49 (note on hetu and pratyaya), Anguttara, iv.351 = Suttanipāta (Dvayatānupas-
sanasutta) (. . . kā upanisā savanāya), Sūtrālaṁkāra, xi.9 (yogopaniṣad = having effort for its
cause). In the sense of "comparision," "to being together," Pāṇini i.4.79, Vajracchedikā, 35.10, 42.7
and Hoernle, Manuscript Remains, i. p. 192 (upaniśāṁ na kṣamate), Sukhāvatīvyuha, 31.9,
Mahāvyutpatti, 223.15 (where the Tibetan has rgyu). In the sense of upāmśu, "secret," Yaśomitra
(ad ii.49) mentions Dīgha, ii.259 (sūryopanisado devāḥ = suriyassūpanissā devā): upaniṣacchabdas
tu kadācid upāṁśau kadācit prāmukhye tadyathā sūryopaniṣado devā ity upāṁśuprayoga
upanişatprayoga iti. (E. Leumann, ZDMG, 62, p. 101 supposes upaniśrā upanissä = Grundlage,
Nahe, from whence the adjective upanissa). See Minaev, Zapiski, ii.3, 277); Wogihara, ZDMG,
58, 454 (dānopanişadā šīlopaniṣadā ... prajñayā) and Asanga's Bodhisattvabhūmi, p. 21; S. Lévi,
Sūtrālamkāra, ad xi.9.
=
9. The Sūtra says: cakṣurvijñeyāni rūpāṇi pratityotpadyate saumanasyaṁ naiskramyāśritam
/... manaḥ pratītya dharmāṁś cotpadyate saumanasyam /... daurmanasyam . . . upekṣā.
Naiskramya = "pure or impure path," or rather "departure (niskramaṇa) or detachement
from one sphere of existence (dhātu) or from saṁsāra.” See also iv.77b-c.
Aśrita = "having for its object," or rather "favorable to."
We have then: "There is, by reason of visible things, etc., six sensations of satisfaction, six
sensations of dissatisfaction, and six sensations of equanimity, favorable to naiskramya.”
Compare Majjhima, iii.218, Samyutta, iv.232, Majjhima, iii.217, Milinda, 45 (nekkhammasita).
10. Vasubandhu says: "Some other masters . . .”
11. Compare Dhammasangani, 633, and Atthasālini, 641.
12. The Japanese editor, Kyokuga Saeki, refers to the Madhyamāgama TD 1, p. 458a24. Compare
Samyutta, iv.208: yo sukbāya veda nàya rà gànusayo so anuseti.
13. Sensation-of-pleasure (sukhā) also means sensation-of-satisfaction (saumanasya); see ii.7.
Compare v.23 and 54; also Yogasutra, ii.7-8: sukhānuśayi rāgaḥ /duḥkhānuśayi dveṣaḥ.
14. In the worldly (laukika) path faith and the other moral faculties disturb the defilements; in the
nirvedhabhāgīyas (vi.45c), they “lead to” the Path; pure, they constitute anājñātamājñāsyāmi, etc.
(ii.9b, vi.68).Footnotes 327
15. Paramartha and Hsüan-tsang translate the first line: “By reason of their predominence with
respect to the acquisition of higher and higher paths, of Nirvāṇa, etc."
Dhammasangani, 286, 505, 553; Nettipakaraṇa 15, 60; Compendium, p. 177.
16. Ajñātāvīndriya is confused with the quality of Arhat; it includes kṣayajñāna and
anutpādajñāna: knowledge that the defilements are destroyed and will no more arise, etc. (vi.45,
Nettipakaraṇa, p. 15); he is “delivered” (vimukta) through deliverence from the defilements
(kleśavimukti) and through deliverence from existence (saṁtānavimukti): it is thus predominant
in relation to parinirvāṇa or nirupadhiseṣanirvāṇa.
17. Objection of the Samkhyas. Samkhyakārikā, 34.
18. This kārikā becomes kārikā 2 in the Samayapradipikā.
19. We encounter this expression i.35 (see also note 20). The six supports of the organs
(indriyādhiṣṭhāna), that is to say the visible eye, etc., and the six consciousnesses (sad
vijñānakāyaḥ) are also sattvadravya, constituents of the living being, but not primary (maula)
constituents, for they depend on the predominating quality of the six organs.
20. Şaḍāyatana is essentially the living being who is said to transmigrate: it is thus the support of
transmigration.
21. Only two ayatanas, kāya and manas, exist from conception (ii.14).
22. The newborn infant can see, but cannot speak. Words are action (karman) of the tongue
which is the support (adhiṣṭhāna) of the organ of taste (jihvendriya). For the Sāṁkhyas, the
organs of action (karmendriya) are, like the organs of consciousness, suprasensible substances
(atīndriya). "Voice" is the power to speak, "hand" is the power to grasp, etc.
23. You affirm that snakes possess subtle (sūkṣma) hands and feet, but you must prove it.
24. Upastha is conceived as distinct from the male or female organ, which is one part, one place,
of the organ of touch (käyendriyaikadeśastripuruṣendriyavyatiriktakalpita).
"Pleasure" (ānanda) is kliṣṭa saukhya.
25. Compare the definitions of the Vibhanga, p. 123.
26. The body is the organ of sight and the four other organs of sense consciousness: these organs,
in fact, are collections (kāya) or accumulations (samcaya) of atoms. Sensation which is produced
in a "body," or which accompanies a “body” upon which they are supported, is called bodily. (See
ii.25, or bodily praśrabdhi).
27. Sukha is sāta, the agreeable, that which does good (sātatvād hi sukham ucyate); in addition,
satisfaction supposes joy (prīti).
This problem is taken up again viii.9b.
28. One should make an exception of agreeable mental sensation which proceeds from absorption
(samadhi) or which is the result of retribution (vipākaphala) (ii.57).
29. It is solely vipäkaphala and naisyandikī (ii.57c).
30. In fact, the group (kalāpa) which is made up of the three pure indriyas includes only seven
indriyas, for the three sensations never coexist. When an ascetic, in order to cultivate the Path,
abides in the first two Dhyānas, he possesses a single sensation of satisfaction (saumanas-
yendriya); he possesses a single sensation of pleasure (sukhendriya) when he cultivates the Path
in the third Dhyana; and he possesses a single sensation of indifference (upekṣendriya) when he
cultivates the Path in the other stages (anāgamya, dhyānāntara, Fourth Dhyāna, first three
Arūpyas). See ii.16c-17b.328 Chapter Two
31. Darśanamārga includes the first fifteen moments of the comprehension of the Truths
(abhisamaya), moments in the course of which one sees that which one has not previously seen
(vi.28c-d). It is exclusively pure, anāsrava, vi.1.
32. In the Abhidhamma, we have anaññātaññassāmītīndriya (Vibhanga, p. 124).
33. The term bhāvanā has many meanings. In the expression bhāvanāmaya, it is synonymous
with samādhi or absorption. Some other meanings are studied vii.27 (compare ii.25.2). In the
expression bhāvanāmārga, “Path of Meditation,” bhāvanā signifies “repeated view, meditation."
There are two bhāvanāmārgas:
a. Pure (anāsrava) or supermundane (lokottara) bhāvanāmārga, which is under consideration
here: this is a meditation on the Truths which have already been seen in darfanamārga. This path
begins with the sixteenth moment of the comprehension of the Truths (vi.28c-d) and terminates
with the acquisition of the quality of Arhat.
b. Impure (sāsrava) or worldly (laukika) bhāvanāmārga; it does not have the Truths for its
object (vi.49); it disturbs (viskambh) the defilements without uprooting them; it can precede and
follow darśanamārga.
34. Dhatupatha, i.631.
35. Paramartha differs from Hsüan-tsang.
36. The Japanese editor quotes on this subject Harivarman's Ch'eng-shih lun, TD 32, p. 282a18.
37. According to the Japanese editor, the Mahīsāsakas; the Hetuvādins and the Mahiṁsāsakas in
Kathāvatthu, xix,8. Compare ibid. iii.6.
38. Samyutta, vi.204: yassa kho bhikkhave imāni pañcindriyāṇi sabbena sabbaṁ sabbathā sabbaṁ
natthi tam aham bāhiro puthujjanapakkhe ṭhito ti vadāmi. See ii.40b-c.
39. This text is quoted in the Vijñānakāya, TD 26, p. 535b29 and foll, with some elaboration.
40. Compare Sumangalavilāsinī, p. 59, on the two types of prthagjana, the andha and the kalyāṇa.
41. Dīgha, ii.38, Majjhima, i.169. The Kathavatthu quotes Digha, ii.38 (... tikkhindriya
mudindriye ...).
42. Samyuktāgama, TD 2, p. 183al. Compare Samyutta, v.193 and following. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
8a14.
43. Compare Vibhanga, p. 125; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 741b19.
44. On life and death, see ii.45.
45. Commentary: tad ayuḥ praṇidhāya cetasikṛtvā. Vibhāṣā,TD 27, p. 656b17-c3.
46. Vyākhyā: The Buddha for the good of others, the Śrāvaka for the duration of the Law. See
Lévi and Chavannes, “Les seize Arhats protecteurs de la Loi,” J.As. 1916, ii.9 and following.
47. One should understand roga, gaṇḍa, and falya, corresponding to the three sufferings, vi.3.
48. Literally: "his series is not supported by the defilements." These are the kleśas which support
and make the series last. A samayavimukta Arhat is free from the defilements, but does not have
mastery of absorption; a dṛṣṭiprāpta Arhat possesses this mastery, but he is not free from the
defilements (vi.56).
49. Compare Divyāvadāna, 203; atha Bhagavāṁs tadrūpaṁ samādhiṁ samāpanno yathā
samāhite citte jīvitasaṁskārān adhiṣṭhāya āyuḥsaṁskārāna utsraṣṭum ārabdhaḥ. We have the
singular in the Mahāvastu, i.125.19.Footnotes 329
Dīgha, ii.99: yan nūnāhaṁ imaṁ ābādham viriyena paṭippaṇāmetvā jīvitasaṁkhāram
adhiṭṭhāya vihareyyam; ii.106 . . . āyusaṁkhāram ossaji. (Compare Samyutta, v.152, Anguttara,
iv.311, Udāna, vi.1). Burnouf, Lotus, 291.
50. The Pali has the plural in other contexts, Majjhima, i.295 (aññe āyusaṁkhārā aññe vedaniyā
dbam mà), Jataka, iv.215 (āyusamkbà và khônyant).
51. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 657c10 and foll., enumerates fourteen opinions on this point.
52. Eleventh opinion in the Vibhāṣā.
53. Sixth opinion in the Vibhāṣā.
54. Doctrine of the Sāṁmitīyas, according to the Japanese editor.
55. Opinion of the Sautràntikas.
56. According to the Japanese editor, this is the opinion of the author.
57. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 657c5, the fifth of the six opinions.
58. According to the very clear version of Paramārtha, “a kalpa or more than a kalpa," but
customarily translated as "a kalpa or the rest of the kalpa" (Windisch, Rhys Davids, 0. Franke).
Dīgha, ii.103, iii.77; Divya, 201. Kathāvatthu, xi.5.
59. They adopt the sixth opinion of the Vibhāṣā.
60. Dharmasaṁgraha, lxxx; Mahāvastu, iii.273, 281; Šikṣāsamuccaya, 198.10; Madhyamakavṛtti,
49 n. 4, xxii, 10; Bodhicaryāvatāra, ix.36 (The Blessed One is a jina because he has conqured the
four Māras); Yü-chia chih-ti lun, xxix, translated by S. Lévi, Seize Arhats, p. 7 (J.As.. 1916, ii). In
inconography (Foucher, École des Hautes Études, XIII, ii.19), the Buddha is flanked by four
Māras, blue, yellow, red and green. The list of the four Māras in word-lists, Zachariae, Gel. Gott.
Anz. 1888, p. 853. See also the lists of Childers (five Mâras with the addition of abhi-
saṁskāramāra). The Nettippakaraṇa distinguishes kilesamāra and sattamāra (=devaputra).
61. The sensation of suffering (duḥkhendriya) is never airyāpathika, etc.
62. Ekottarāgama, TD 2, p. 602b13. The Tipitaka speaks of sukhavedaniya karman, “which is
retributed in pleasure” (Anguttara iv.382, etc.) (see iv.45); sukhavedanīya, daurmanasyavedaniya
sparsa (Samyutta, v.211, etc.). See iv.57d.
63. According to the etymology of the author, saumanasyavedanīya signifies "action allowing
satisfaction to be experienced by right of retribution (saumanasyaṁ vipākatvena vedaniyam asya).
According to the Vaibhāṣikas, "action in which satisfaction should be experienced” (saumanasyaṁ
vedaniyam asmin): this is samprayogavedanīyatā (iv.49).
64. According to the Sūtra, those "non-detached” have two thorns, physical suffering (kāyika
duḥkha) and mental suffering (caitasika daurmanasya); those "detached" are free from mental
suffering.
65. Thus persons who are detached do not possess all the indriyas which are retribution.
66. Omitted by Hsüan-tsang.
67. The quality of an androgyne, that is the possession (pratilambha) of the two organs, is a
dharma disassociated (viprayukta) from the mind, ii.35.
68. This is to implicitely say that the first eight indriyas, as well as the last three, are always
without retribution. Hsüan-tsang completes the kārikā in order to explicitely fix this point.330
Chapter Two
The kārikā has tat tv ekaṁ savipākam: tu in the sense of eva, and out of place; the meaning
would appear to call for: tad ekaṁ savipākam eva = only dissatisfaction exclusively "possesses
retribution."
69. Hsuan-tsang: The last eight are solely good; dissatisfaction is good or evil; the mind and the
other sensations are of three types; the first eight are solely neutral.
Compare Vibhanga, p. 125.
70. See the definition of the Tathagatabalas in Vibhanga, p. 336: aṭṭhānam etaṁ anavakāso yaṁ
itthi sakkattaṁ kāreyya mārattaṁ kāreyya brahmattaṁ kāreyya n'etaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati.
71. Dīgha, iii.262, Anguttara, iv.408, v.150.
72. Compare i.40; Vibhanga, p. 133.
73. Compare Kathāvatthu, xiv.2, Abhidhammasaṁgaha (Compendium, p. 165).
74. Which we should understand as, “because the rūpas are luminous (accha = bhāsvara) there,"
or rather "because the rūpas, not the kāmaguñas, are important there.” See i.22a-b, no. 4, a
different doctrine.
75. Compare Samyutta, ii. 123.
76. Compare Abhidhammasangaha, Compendium, p. 166.
77. On the psychological state at death, see iii.42-43b. In what part of the body the mental
consciousness is destroyed, iii.43c-44a. How the vital parts perish, iii.44b.
78. Indriyaprakarane. Some understand: "in the exposition that we give here of the indriyas;"
other understand: "in the Indriyaskandhaka," the sixth book of the Jñānaprasthāṇa (Takakusu,
Abhidharma Literature, p. 93).
79. For, at the moment when he obtains the fruit of Srotaāpanna, the ascetic is always in the state
of anagamya absorption (vi.48), which includes the sensation of indifference.
80. The fruit of Srotaāpanna is obtained in the sixteenth moment of the comprehension of the
Truths; the first fifteen are ājñāsyāmi, the sixteenth ājña.
81. The first moment is ānantaryamārga; the second, vimuktimārga; and thus following. But one
can consider all the moments which preceed the sixteenth moment as anantaryamarga in
relationship to this moment.
82. Ānantaryamārga destroys the defilements and leads to the possession of disjunction from
defilement: it drives out the thief. Vimuktimārga closes the door. The Japanese editor here quotes
the Vibhāṣā TD 27, p. 465c9, where the masters of the West, followers of a non-Kaśmirean
doctrine, are quoted.
83. The fruit of Arhat is obtained at the moment of vajropamasamādhi (vi.44c-d), or
ānantaryamārga, which is ajñedriya. Thus ājñendriya is actually present. Kṣayajñāna, or
vimuktimärga, which is ajñātāvīndriya, is in the process of arising (utpädäbhimukha). Sensation
of satisfaction, etc. according to the nature of the absorption in which the ascetic realizes
vajropamasamadhi.
84. This doctrine of the wordly path is condemned in the Kathāvatthu, i.5 and xviii.5.
Buddhaghosa attributes it to the Sammitiyas.
85. Only the ānupūrvaka changes from absorption, not the vītarāga. This later, in fact, if he begins
the comprehension of the Truths (satyābhisamaya) in the absorption of anāgamya, will not pass
to the sixteenth moment in the First Dhyāna. What interests him is the comprehension of theFootnotes 331
Truths, not the Dhyāna with which he is familiar. On the contrary, the ānupūrvaka is interested
in dhyāna which is new to him.
86. The Anāgāmin who falls from the detachment of the higher spheres, up to and including the
Second Dhyana, will not fall because of this from the result of Anāgāmin: he remains an
Anāgāmin when he falls from the detachement of the First Dhyana: having thus fallen, he cannot
reobtain the result by the indriya of pleasure, for this indriya is of the Third Dhyāna, and the
Third Dhyāna is beyond his scope.
Would one say that he can reobtain this result through the indriya of satisfaction? He would
be able to if, setting out again to obtain this result in the absorption of anagamya, he would be
capable of passing, in the last moment, into the First Dhyāna. But he does not lose it: only an
ascetic whose mental faculties are active can carry out this passage, and the ascetic that is under
consideration here is of weak mental faculties, since he has fallen. Only ascetics of weak faculties
fall from a result.
Would one say that, having fallen, an ascetic can carry out the transformation of his faculties
(indriyasaṁnicāra, vi.41c-61b) and make them active? Without doubt, and he will obtain the
result with eight or nine indriyas accordingly as his path is worldly or pure, as we have said, for, in
no case will he reobtain this result with the indriya of pleasure.
87. The Āryan possesses the "pure" organ of pleasure, for he does not lose this organ by changing
his sphere (see note 93).
88. Omitted by Hsüan-tsang. See viii.12a-b.
89. There is, in Kāmadhātu, an organ of pleasure in relation to the five sense consciousnesses; in
the First Dhyana, an organ of pleasure in relation to three sense consciousnesses (smell and taste
being excluded, i.306); in the Second Dhyāna, there is no organ of pleasure (viii.12); and in the
Third Dhyana, there is an organ of pleasure related to the mental consciousness (ii.7c-d). Thus a
being born in the heaven of the Second Dhyāna, if he does not practice the absorption of the
Third Dhyāna, he will not possess the organ of pleasure, for, by being reborn in the Second
Dhyana, he has lost the organ of pleasure in the lower spheres. Response: according to the
Vaibhāṣika doctrine (siddhānta) every being born in a lower sphere possesses the defiled (kliṣṭa)
organ of the higher spheres if he has not abandoned it.
90. See iv.80a which quotes the Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 997a16 and 1000c3. Ad iv.79d, the
number of the organs in the first Dvipas.
91. How is a possessor of ajñendriya,—which means a Śaikṣa,-necessarily in possession of the
organs of pleasure and satisfaction? He can in fact be found in the heaven of the Fourth Dhyāna
or in Arūpyadhātu.
An Aryan necessarily obtains the organ of satisfaction when he is detached from Kāmadhātu;
he necessarily obtains the organ of pleasure when he is detached from the Second Dhyāna; even
when he transmigrates (bhūmisaṁcāra), he does not lose the good (śubha) that he has obtained
(according to iv.40); he loses the good obtained (iv.40), but this is in order to obtain the same type
of good of a superior quality.
92. But can he be without sex? This is a difficulty, for we have seen (p. 154) that beings without
sex cannot obtain either the discipline, nor a result, nor detachment.
According to one opinion, the person who has obtained the discipline can obtain a result; now
this person preserves the discipline even though he loses his sex, for the Abhidharma specifies
that he loses the discipline by becoming an androgyne (iv.38c) and it does not specify that he loses
it by losing his sex. One can again envision gradual death: a person who has practiced the
nirvedhabhāgīyas (vi.17) could, after the loss of the sexual organ, see the Truths at the moment of
his death.332
Chapter Two
Second opinion. The possessor of ajñāsyāmīndriya is never without sex. But he does not
possess the female organ when he is a male, and she does not possess the male organ when she is
a female. Thus one cannot say that one necessarily possesses the one or the other.
93. See i.48c.
94. On the meaning of this term, see below page 187.
95. According to Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 799a24-29): Among the rupas "susceptible of
resistance" (sapratigha), the most subtle part, which is not susceptible of being divided again, is
called paramāṇu; that is to say: the paramāņu is not susceptible of being divided into many parts
by another rūpa, or by the mind. This is what is called the smallest rūpa; as it has no parts, it is
called the "smallest." In the same way a kṣaṇa is called the smallest amount of time and cannot be
divided in half-kṣaṇas (iii.86).
An agglomeration of these anu, which is not susceptible of disaggregation, is called
samghātānu.
In Kāmadhātu, a minimum of eight things (dravya) arise together in order to constitute a
saṁghātāṇu which is not sound, nor an organ. What are these things? Four mahabhūtas and four
upādāyas, namely, rūpa, rasa, gandha, and spraṣṭavya.
96. The molecules into which the organ of touch, the organ of sight, etc., enter, are not the
"atoms" which are mentioned i.44a-b.
97. Vasubandhu follows Dharmottara, Abhidharmahṛdaya, TD 28, p. 811b5, Upaśānta, Abhi-
dharmahṛdaya, TD 28, p. 837c15, and Dharmatråta, Abhidharmahṛdaya, TD 28, p. 882b4: "The
atoms which reside in four organs are of ten types; in the organ of touch, of nine types; elsewhere,
of eight types, when there is smell (that is to say: in Kāmadhātu).” Upasanta: external, of
eight types: in a stage where there is smell."
An analogous doctrine is the Abhidhamma of Buddhaghosa (Atthasālinī, 634) and the
Compendium (p. 164). See below i.13, 43c and Th. Stcherbatiski, The Soul Theory of the
Buddhists, p. 953.
98. One molecule of sound produced by the hands is made up of the four primary elements, the
four derived matters, sound, and the organ of touch: or of ten substances; produced by the tongue,
eleven substances, with the addition of the organ of taste whose invisible atoms are arranged over
the tongue (Note of de La Vallée Poussin).
99. See J. Bloch, Formation de la langue marathe, p. 42: sinka (śikya), “a cord to suspend objects."
100. Elemental water (abdḥātu) exists in wood (dāru): it is elemental water which holds things
together (samgraha) and which prevents them from dispersing. Elemental fire (tejas) matures
(pakti) and rots wood. And it is by elemental wind that wood moves (vyūhana, prasarpana).
Elemental earth exists within water, since water supports (dhṛti) ships, etc. See i.12c-d, Vyākhyā,
p. 34.
101. Fire creates by reason of its heat, and so contains elemental water; water becomes solid by
cold, and so contains elemental earth; solid bodies, rubbed one against the other, become hot; thus
they contain elemental fire, etc.
102. One the meaning of dhātu, i.20.
103. A presence which results from the definition, "The molucule includes eight substances."
104. See also i.13c-d.
105. Blue is a dravya.Footnotes
333
106. Rūpa possesses the characteristic of "resistance" (rūpyate) which is common to color and
shape, to blue, etc.
etc.
107. We have seen (i.13) that an atom or monad never exists in an isolated state. The Japanese
editor quotes on this point the six chapter Commentary of Hui-hui. Pelliot discovered this
quotation in T'ao 83.5, for. 414 (=vol. 83, p. 414 recto b of the Zoku zōkyō), where it is
accompanied by a gloss that justifies the number of 1,379 atoms in one molecule of a visible thing,
Here, barring error, is the meaning of this gloss:
An atom never exists in an isloated state. We have, at a minimum, groups or molecules-of
seven atoms: four faces, top and bottom: six sides; plus the center; thus seven. A molecule of
derived matter (mahābhūtāny upādāya rūpam, bhautikaṁ rūpam, for example a molecule of
"visible matter" (rūpa) or of smell (gandha), consists of seven atoms of visible matter and of
smell.
Each of these seven atoms is supported by complexes of seven atoms, seven atoms having for
their natures the four primary elements, seven atoms where the four great elements are present.
Each of these seven atoms included four atoms, atoms of earth, water, fire, and wind: the
atoms of earth includes seven atoms of earth, etc.
Thus we have (1) seven atoms of earth, water, fire, and wind,—in all twenty-eight atoms,—
which constitute an atom of four-primary-elements.
(2) An atom of four-primary-elements does not exist in an isolated state: seven are grouped
together (7 x 28 = 196 atoms) in order to support one atom of derived matter.
(3) The atoms of derived matter, with its supports, atoms of four-primary-elements (1 x 197
= 197 atoms), form a group with six other similar atoms: each atom of derived matter is thus
made up of 1,379 atoms (7 x 197).
(But all derived matter possesses visiblity, smell, taste, and tangibility. Thus this number
should be multiplied by four in order to obtain the smallest part of matter existing in an isolated
state.)
108. Citta = manas = vijñāna; caitta = caitasa = caitasika = cittasamprayukta.
109. A. Theory of caittas according to Vasubandhu, and according to the Sauträntikas.
B. Prakaraṇapāda and Dhātukāya.
C. The Abhidhamma.
A. The commentary of the Vijñaptimātraśāstra says that the Sautrântikas have two systems.
One, the Dārṣṭāntikas, maintain that only the mind exists, that mental states do not exist, in
agreement with Buddhadeva (see i.35 note); others admit the existence of mental states and are
divided into many opinions: that there are three mental states: vedanā, saṁjñā, cetanā; that there
are four (with the addition of sparśa), ten (the ten mahābhūmikas), fourteen (with the addition of
lobha, dveșa, moha, māna); furthermore certain Sautrāntikas admit all the mental states of the
Sarvāstivādins. (The references of Wassilief, p. 309, differ; read "the Bhadanta Sautrāntika"
instead of Bhaṭṭopama).
See ii.26c-d; iii.32a-b.
Vasubandhu presents his doctrine of the mental states in his Pañcaskandhaprakaraṇa, TD 31,
p. 848c3-9: "What are the caittas? The dharmas associated (saṁprayukta) with the mind, namely
(1) five universals (sarvaga): sparſa, manaskāra, vedanā, saṁjñā, and cetanā; (2) five particulars
(pratiniyatavişaya): chandra, adhimukti, smṛti, samādhi, and prajñā; (3) eleven good: fraddhā,
hrī, apatrāpya, alobha kuśalamüla, adveșa kuśalamūla, amoha kuśalamūla, vīrya, praśrabdhi,
apramāda, upekṣā, and ahiṁsā; (4) six defilements (kleśa): rāga, pratigha, māna, avidyā, dṛṣṭi, and
vicikitsa; (5) the others (feșa) are upakleśa: krodha, upanāha, mrakṣa, pradāsa, īrṣyā, mātsarya,
māyā, śāṭhya, mada, vihiṁsā, āhrikya, anapatrāpya, styāna, auddhatya, afraddhya, kausidya,334 Chapter Two
apramāda, mușitasmṛtitā, vikṣepa, and asamprajanya; (6) four, of unstable character (gzhan du
yan'gyur ba): kaukṛtya, middha, vitarka, and vicāra.”
B. According to the Prakaraṇapāda (TD 26, p. 692b20):
There are five dharmas: 1. rūpa, 2. citta, 3. caittadharma, 4. cittaviprayuktasaṁskāra, 5.
asaṁskṛta . . . What is citta? Citta is manas, vijñāna, that is to say the six categories of vijñāna,
consciousness of sight, etc. What are the caittas? All the dharmas associated with the mind. What
are these dharmas? They are vedanā, saṁjñā, cetană, sparśa, manasikāra, chanda, adhimukti,
smṛti, samādhi, prajñā, śraddhā, vīrya, vitarka, vicāra, pramāda, apramāda, kuśalamūla,
akuśalamüla, avyakṛtamüla, all the saṁyojanas, anuśayas, upakleśas, paryavasthānas (v.47), all
knowledge (jñāna, vii.1), all opinion (drșți), all comprehension (abhisamaya, vi.27); furthermore
all dharmas of this type, associated with the mind, are caitta.
Later on (p. 698b28; see also Dhātukāya, TD 26, p. 614b10): "There are 18 dhātus, 12
ayatanas, 5 skandhas, 5 upādānaskandhas, 6 dhātus, 10 mahābhūmikas, 10 kuśalamahābhūmikas,
10 kleśmahābhūmikas, 10 parīttakleśabhūmikas, 5 kleśas, 5 saṁsparśas, 5 dṛstis, 5 indriyas, 5
dharmas, 6 vijñānakāyas, 6 sparśakāyas, 6 vedanākāyas, 6 saṁjñākāyas, 6 cetanākāyas, 6
tṛṣṇākāyas, What are the 18 dhātus? . . . What are the six dhātus? The primary element of earth
(Kośa, i.28). What are the ten mahābhūmikas? Vedanā prajñā. What are the ten
kusalamahābhūmikas? Śraddhā, vīrya, hrī, apatrapā, alobha, adveșa, praśrabdhi, upekṣā, apramāda,
ahimsā. What are the ten kleśamahābhūmikas? Aśrāddhya ... pramāda (list quoted above
ii.26a-c). What are the ten parittakleśabhūmikas? Krodha, upanāha, mrakṣa, pradāsa, īrṣyā,
mātsarya, śāṭhya, māyā, mada, vihiṁsā. What are the five kleśas? Kāmarāga, rūparāga,
ārūpyarāga, pratigha, vicikitsā (v.1). What are the five dṛṣṭis? Satkāyadṛṣṭi, antagrāhadṛṣṭi,
mithyadrsti, drstiparāmarfa, śīlavrataparāmaría (v.3)What are the five samsparsas? Prati-
ghasaṁsparfa, adhivacanasamsparía, vidyāsaṁsparśa, avidyāsamparśa, naivavidyānāvidyasaṁ-
paría (iii.30c-31a). What are the five indriyas? Sukhendriya, duḥkhendriya, saumanasyendriya,
daurmanasyendriya, upekṣendriya (ii.7). What are the five dharmas? Vitarka, vicāra, vijñāna,
āhrīkya, anapatrāpya. (In the Kośa, ii.27, vitarka and vicāra are classified as aniyata; ii.26d, āhrīkya
and anapatrāpya are classified as akuśalamahābhūmika, a category conceived later, see iii.32a-b;
the vijñāna refered to here in the Prakaraṇa and the Dhātukāya, without doubt refers to the six
vijñānakāyas.)What are the six vijñānakāyas? Cakṣurvijñāna . . . manovijñāna. What are the six
saṁparśakāyas? Cakṣuḥsaṁsparśa . . . manaḥsaṁsparśa (iii.30b). What are the six vedanākāyas?
Cakṣuḥsamsparśajavedanā. . . (iii.32a). What are the six saṁjñākāyas? Cakṣuḥsaṁsparśajasaṁjñā
What are the six cetanākāyas? Cakṣuḥsaṁsparśajacetană . . . What are the six tṛṣṇākāyas?
Cakṣuḥsamsparśajatṛṣṇā... The Dhatukaya proceeds by explaining the mahābhūmikas: "What
is vedanā?" (See ii.24, note IIIB).
C. Kathāvatthu, vii.2-3, the Rājagirikas and the Siddhatthikas deny the samprayoga of the
dharmas, and deny the existences of the caitasikas; ix.8, the Uttarāpathakas make a mahābhūmika
of vitarka (the technical term is missing). Visuddhimagga, xiv. Abhidhammasaṁgaha, ii. In
Compendium, p. 237, S. Z. Aung and C. A. F. Rhys Davids have some interesting observations on
the development of the doctrine of the cetasikas.
110. According to the Vibhāṣā TD 27, p. 80b8, quoted by the Japanese editor: What is the
meaning of the expression mahābhūmikadharma?
a. The mind is great; these ten dharmas are its bhūmi, the locus of the origin of the mind;
being the bhumi of the "great," they are called mahābhūmi. Being mahābhūmi and dharmas, they
are mahābhūmikadharmas.
b. Some say: The mind is great, due to the superiority of its nature and its activity; it is great
and it is bhūmi, and it is called mahābhūmi, because it is the locus which serves as the support of
the caittas. Because one encounters the ten dharmas, vedanā, etc., throughout the mahābhūmi,
they are called the mahābhūmikadharmas.
c. Some say: The ten dharmas, vedanā, etc., are found everywhere with the mind, and so areFootnotes 335
called "great;" the mind, being their bhūmi, is called mahābhūmi; vedanā, etc., being inherent in
the mahābhūmi, are called mahābhūmikadharmas.
Vasubandhu reproduces the third etymology.
We shall see (iii.32a-b) that Śrīlābha does not admit this definition of the term mahābhūmika.
111. A. Hsuan-tsang corrects: Vedanā, saṁjñā, cetană, sparśa, chandra, prajñā, smṛti, manaskāra,
adhimukti, and samadhi.
The order of the Abhidharma (Prakaraṇapāda, Dhātukāya) is: adhimukti, smṛti, samādhi, and
prajñā. Vasubandhu (Pañcaskandhaka) distinguishes five universals (sarvaga): sparśa, manaskāra,
vedanā, saṁjñā, and cetanā, and five particulars (pratiniyatavişaya): chandra, adhimukti, smṛti,
samadhi, and prajñā.
The order of Mahāvyutpatti 104 (which reads adhimokṣa) differs from other sources.
B. The Dhātukāya (TD 26, p. 614c22) gives some definitions which are completely in the
style of the Abhidharmma. For example, samādhi is defined: "The sthiti of the mind, samsthiti
(teng-chu), abhisthiti (hsien-chu), upasthiti (chin-chu ), aviksepa (pu-
luan TL), aghaṭṭana (pu-san T# ), Mahāvyutpatti, 245.226) saṁdhāraṇa (?she-
ch'ih), Samatha, samādhi, and cittasyaikāgratā, is what is called samādhi.” (Vibhanga, p.
217, Dhammasaṁgani, 11).
In the same way vedanā is vedanā, saṁvedanā, pratisaṁvedanā, vedita, that which feels, that
which is included within vedanā. Smṛti is smṛti, anusmṛti, pratismṛti, smaraṇa, asaṁpramoṣatā
cetaso'bhilapa.
112. The word kila shows that the author is presenting the opinion of the School. He explains his
own doctrine in the Pañcaskandhaka (Vyākhyā).
113. Compare Atthasālinī, 329: kattukamyatā. According to the Pañcaskandhaka: abhiprete
vastuny abhilāṣaḥ. (See ii.55c-d, iii.1, where chanda is defined as anāgate prārthanā).
114. Pancaskandhaka: upaparīkṣye vastuni pravicayo yogāyogavihito'nyathā ca.
115. Pañcaskandhaka: saṁstute vastuny asaṁpramoṣaḥ / cetaso' bhilapanată. See i.33.
116. On ābhoga, S. Lévi ad Sūtrālaṁkāra, i.16, and Muséon, 1914.
117. This term presents a difficulty. Vyākhyā: adhimuktis tadālambanasya guṇato'vadhāraṇāda
(-nam?) rucir iti anye / yathāniścayaṁ dhāraneti yogācāracittāḥ: "Adhimukti is the consideration
of the object from the point of view of its qualities; according to others, complaisance; according
to the Ascetics (the Yogācārins), the contemplation of the object in conformity with the decision
taken." (This last point is explained ad ii.72, adhimuktimanaskāra).
According to the the Pañcaskandhaka, adhimokṣa is niścite vastuny avadhāraṇam.
See the Prakaraṇapāda, TD 26, p. 693a17.
Paramārtha translates: “Adhimukti (hsiang liao ) is a dharma which makes the mind
lively (ming liao, patu) with respect to the characteristic of the object." This is a gloss, not
a translation.
Hsuan-tsang translates: “Adhimukti, that is neng yü ching yin-k'o ¯ .” We can
translate: "that which makes a sign of approbation with respect to the object." The expression yin
(=mudrā) k'o (possible) is mentioned by Rosenberg in many word lists. A. Waley, who has
consulted the Japanese glosses, translates: “the sign of approval given to a disciple who has
understood what has been taught him." We would thus have k'o = k'o-i = "this is allowable”(A.
Debesse). Adhimukti is the approbation of the object, the dharma by reason of which one grasps
the object under consideration; it marks the first stage of the act of attention. See the note of
Shwe Zan Aung, Compendium, p. 17 and 241, on adhimokkha: "... the settled state of a
mind . . . ; it is deciding to attend to this, not that irrespective of more complicated prodedure as
to what 'this' or 'that' appears to be."336
Chapter Two
Saṁghabhadra (TD 29, p. 384b9): Approbation (yin-k'o) with respect to an object is called
adhimukti. According to other masters, adhi signifies "superiority, sovereignty;" mukti siginifies
vimokṣa. Adhimukti is a dharma by virtue of which the mind exercises its sovereignty over an
object without any obstacle; like adhiśīla. Adhimukti is a separate object, for the Sūtra says: "The
mind, by reason of adhimukti, approves of (vin-k'o) the object." When the mental states arise, all
approve (vin) the object:; as a consequence adhimukti is a mahābhūmika. Nevertheless the
Sthavira says: "It is not proven that adhimukti is a separate thing, for we see that its characteristic
is not distinguished from that of knowledge (jñāna): the characteristic of adhimukti is that the
mind is determined (niścita) with respect to its object. But this is not different from the
characteristic of knowledge (jñāna). Consequently adhimukti is not a separate thing." This is not
correct, for approbation (yin-k'o) brings about determination.
Some say: "Adhimukti is determination (avadhāraṇa, niścaya).” This is to give the cause of
determination (namely adhimukti) the name of its effect. If this is the case, then adhimukti and
determination would not be simultaneous. No: for these two mutually condition one another: by
reason of discernment (pratisaṁkhyā) there arise approbation, and by reason of approbation
there arises determination (niscaya). There is no contradition: thus there is no obstacle to their
being simultaneous. If all thought include these two, then all the categories of mind will be
approbation and determination. This objection is worthless, for it happens that their activity is
damaged when they are dominated by dharmas: even if there is approbation (vin) and
determination, they are small and recognized only with difficulty.
118. Pancaskandhaka: upaparīkṣye vastuni cittasyaikāgratā.
119. According to the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 220b2, and the Prakaraṇa: śraddhā, vīrya, hrī, apatrapā,
alobha, adveșa, praśrabdhi, upekṣā, apramāda, avihiṁsā. The Mahāvyutpatti (104) lists the third
root (amoha) and places vīrya after the roots. The Pañcaskandhaka also lists the third root and
has the same order as the Mahāvyutpatti with the exception that it places apramāda before
upekṣā.
120. In other words, fraddhā is the dharma by which (yadyogāt) the mind, troubled by the klesas
and the upaklesas, becomes clear, as troubled water becomes clear by the presence of
a gem
which
purifies water (udakaprasādakamaṇi). Same example in Atthasālinī, 304.
121. Explanation adopted by Vasubandhu in the Pancaskandhaka.
122. Bhāvanā signifies "taking possession," "frequentation" (pratilambha, nişevaṇa) according to
vii.27.
123. The Mahāsāṁghikas. Diligence holds the mind safe from the dharmas of defilement
(sāṁkleśika).
124. The Abhidhamma distinguishes passaddhi and lahutā (Dhammasaṁgani, 40-43) which the
Abhidharma appears to identify. Praśrabdhi in the dhyānas is analyzed viii.9.
125. According to the Japanese editor. Pañcaskandhaka: "Praśrabdhi is an attitude of the mind
and body, a dharma opposed to dauṣṭhulya” (S. Lévi, Sūtrālaṁkāra, vi.2, Wogihara, p. 29).
126. Prašrabdhisambodhyanga is twofold, cittapraśrabdhi and kāyapraśrabdhi (Prakaraṇapāda,
TD 26, p. 700a16). Samyuktāgama, TD 2, p. 191c5: . . . tatra yāpi kāyapraśrabdhis tad api
praśrabdhisambodhyañgam abhijñāyai sambodhaye nirvāṇāya saṁvartate / yapi cittapraśrabdhis
tad api saṁbodhyangam . . . A shorter recension in Samyutta, v.111. In the presence of this text,
say the Sautrāntikas, how can you define praśrabdhi as solely "an attitude of the mind?"
127. Compare Saṁyutta, v.108.
128. The Blessed One said that the nine āghātavastus (Añguttara, iv.408) are vyāpādanīvaraṇa.Footnotes 337
129. When the Path is made up of three elements, šīlaskandha, samādhiskandha, and
prajñāskandha, resolution and effort are placed within the prajñāskandha with Seeing which,
alone, is prajna by its nature. We read in the Prajñāskandhanirdeśa: prajñāskandhaḥ katamaḥ /
samyagdṛṣṭiḥ samyaksaṁkalpaḥ samyagvyāyāmaḥ.
130. This samskäropekṣa is to be distinguished from vedanopekṣa (i.14, ii.8c-d) and from
apramāṇopekṣa (viii.29). The Atthasālinī (397) lists ten upekṣas: here we have a definition of
jhānupekkhā: majjhattalakkhaṇṇṇā anābhogarasā avyāpārapaccupaṭṭhānā . . . (p. 174.2).
131. Literally: There are some things difficult to know that one can know. But it is quite difficult
to know (or to admit) that there is no contradiction (opposition, impossibility of coexistence)
between contradictory dharmas: asti hi nāma durjñānam api jñāyate / idam tu khalu
atidurjñānaṁ yad virodho'py avirodhaḥ.
132. According to Hsüan-tsang and the glosses of the Japenese editor:
The Vaibhāṣikas. What contradiction is there in that attention is flexion of the mind, and that
indifference is non-flexion of the mind? In fact, we consider attention and indifference to be
distinct dharmas.
The Sautrāntikas. Then attention and indifference will not have the same object; or rather
one should admit that all mental states (greed, hatred, etc.) are associated.
We encounter other dharmas (vitarka, vicāra) which present the same characteristics of
opposition...
133. The Pancaskandhaka places amoha among the kuśalamahābhūmikas (by the fact that prajñā
can be "erroneous”). Alobha is the opposite of lobha, udvega and an-upādāna (?). Adveṣa is the
opposite of dveșa, namely goodwill (maitrī, viii.29). Amoha is the opposite of moha,
samyaksamkalpa (vi.69).
134. Pañcaskandhaka: "Avihiṁsā is compassion (karuṇā, viii.29), the opposite of vihimsãā."
135. Endurance is good action (kufalakriyā); for endurence in evil action is not vīrya, but kausidya.
The Blessed One said: "The virya of persons foreign to this religion (itobāhyaka) is kausīdya”
(ii.26a). Pañcaskandhaka: "Vīrya is the endurance of the mind in good, the opposite of kausidya."
136. According to the gloss of the Japanese editor, the Path of Seeing expells avidyā, the Path of
Mediation expells ajñāna, and the Path of Asaikṣa expells non-clearness.
137. Compare Dhammasangani, 429.
138. See above note 109.
139. Ko'yam devānāṁpriyo nāma / rjukajātīyo devānāṁpriya ity eke vyacakṣate /aśațho hi
devānāṁ priyo bhavati /mūrkho devānāṁpriya ity apare /yo hīśvarāṇām iṣṭaḥ sa na tāḍanena
śikṣata iti mūrkho bhavati (Vyākhyā). The Japanese editor quotes numerous glosses.
140. Pāṭhaprāmānyamātreṇa daśa kleśamahābhūmikāḥ prāptā ity etām eva prāptiṁ jānīte
(Vyākhyā).
Vasubandhu reproduces the formula of the Mahābhāṣya ad ii.4.56 (the story of the
Grammarian and the Cow-herder).
See S. Lévi, J.As. 1891, ii.549 (“Notes de chronologie indienne. Devānāṁpriya, Açoka et
Katyāyana"). According to Kern, Manual, 133, the meaning of “idiot" derives from the sense of
"harmless, pious": this appears to be somewhat possible. See de La Vallée Poussin's note in the
Bulletin de l'Academie de Bruxelles, 1923.
141. Vyākhyā: ābhidhārmikāḥ.
Perhaps by the plural (āhuḥ) Vasubandhu is designating Dharmatrāta, the author of338
Chapter Two
Samyukta-Abhidharmahṛdaya, TD 28, number 1551, and his followers. This appears to result
from the passages which follow (TD 28, p. 881b17):
The klesamahābhūmikas are: mithyādhimokṣa, asamprahanya, ayoniśomanaskāra,
aśraddhya, kausidya, vikṣepa, avidyā, auddhatya, and pramada.
"Mithyadhimokṣa consists of the ten kleśamahābhūmikas which are found in all defiled
minds. Ahrī and atrapā are called akuśalamahābhūmikas.
"The ten kleśamahābhūmikas are found in all defiled minds. The ten dharmas the first of
which is mithyadhimokṣa, accompany all defiled minds, sense consciousnesses or mental
consciousnesses, of Kāmadhātu, Rūpadhātu, and Ārūpyadhātu. They are thus klefamahā-
bhūmikas. Question: Styāna is found in all defiled minds; why is it not counted among the
kleśamahābhūmikas? Answer: Because it is favorable to samadhi. This is why styāna is not
counted in the list. Is a dharma which is a mahābhūmika also a kleśamahābhūmika? Four
alternatives: 1. mahābhūmikas without being kleśamahābhūmikas . . .”
142. The author does not admit this opinion. Torpor (styāna, laya) and dissipation, which are
defiled dharmas, are opposed to the "white" dharmas, like samādhi.
143. According to the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 220b4, there are five akusalamahābhūmikas: avidyā,
styāna, auddhatya, ahri, and anapatrapya. See iii.32a-b and above note 102.
144. Hsüan-tsang translates: ... the dharmas of this nature (=iti) are termed parīttakleśa-
bhūmikas."
Samghabhadra: The text says "the dharmas of this nature," in order to include akṣānti, arati
āghāta, etc. (TD 29, p. 392a6).
145. Dharmatrăta: Because they are abandoned through Meditation and not through the Seeing
of the Truths, because they are associated with the mental consciousness and not with the five
other consciousnesses, and because they do not arise with all minds and exist separately, they are
parittaklefabhumika.
146. According to the Chinese. The Japanese editor explains the final et cetera by rāga (v.2),
pratigha, māna (v.10), and vicikitsā.
The Vyākhyā reads: "kaukṛtya, middha, etc." and explains "etc." by arati, vijṛmbhitā, tendrī,
bhakte'samatā, etc. It continues: The kleśas, rāga, etc., are also indeterminate, for they are not
classified in any of the five categories: they are not mahābhūmikas, because they are not found in
any minds; they are not kuśalamahābhūmikas, because they are repugnant to the good; they are
not kleśamahābhūmikas, because they are not found in any defiled mind: for there is no rāga or
lust in a mind full of hatred (sapratigha).
The Acarya Vasumitra has written a summary, mnemonic śloka: "The tradition (smṛta) is
that there are eight aniyatas, namely vitarka, vicāra, kaukṛtya, middha, pratigha, śakti (=rāga),
māna, and vicikitsa”. But we do not admit this number of eight. Why are the drstis (v.3a) not
aniyata? There is no mithyādṛṣṭi in a mind full of hatred or scepticism.
147. Compare Kathāvatthu, xiv.8.
148. Dhammasangaṇi, 1161, Atthasālinī, 784-787.
149. Compare i.37.
150. Avenika = rāgādipṛthagbhūta.
151. All drsti is samtini là prajna (i.41c-d, vii.1).
152. The mind of the First Dhyana, when it is good, contains twenty-two mental states; defiled-
neutral, it contains eighteen mental states whether it is independent of, or associated with dṛsti,
nineteen when it is associated with rāga, māna or vicikitsā . . .Footnotes 339
153. Literally: The word “also” (api) shows that in addition to vicāra, one should exclude sathya
and māyā.
154. According to the Japanese editor, the Saddharmasmṛti upasthāna sūtra, TD 17, P. 193b16.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 670b24.
155. By adding: "I am the great Brahmä”, he distinguishes himself from the other Brahmas.
156. Compare Dīgha, i.219, and below iv.8a, v.53a-b.
157. Jñānaprasthāna, i. Para. 5 (according to Takakusu, p. 87). See TD 26, p. 924c26 and
following.
158. Pratisa = guru, because sisyam pratistaḥ.
159. Compare the definition of adhiśīla: . . . aṇumātreṣv apy avadyeṣu bhayadaršī . . .
160. These masters observes that the two roots hrī and trap (Dhātupāta, iii.3 and i.399) are
synonyms and signify shame (lajjā): from whence one cannot see how abrī would be disrespect
and atrapă the absence of fear in the commission of transgressions.
161. Vasubandhu, in the Pañcaskandhaka, adopts this definition.
162. Jñānaprasthāna, i. Para. 4 (according to Takakusu, p. 87). See TD 26, p. 923a13 and
following.
163. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, P. 151a15.
164. For one cannot have respect for impure (sāsrava) dharmas. (Note of the Japanese editor).
165. This definition comes from a Sūtra which is not designated in our sources. See i.33.
166. Seventh opinion of the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, P. 219b3.
167. Argument presented in the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 269b10, and attributed to the Dārṣṭāntikas.
168. That is, "it makes the voice surge forth,” vāksamutthāpaka.
169. Compare Majjhima i.301, Saṁyutta ov.293: pubbe kho... vitakketvā vicāretvā pacchā
vācam bhindati. On the other hand, Vibhanga, 135: vācīsaṁcetanā = vācīsaṁkhāro.
170. Samghabhadra says that vitarka and vicāra are associated with each thought; but these two
dharmas do not enter into activity, do not reveal themselves by their action (udbhūtavṛtti) at one
and the same time: the mind and mental states are grosser when vitarka, which is always present,
enters into activity . . . In the same way rāga and moha are coexistent: but a person is termed
rāgacarita, acting though rāga, when rāga manifests itself. . .
171. Vitarka and vicara do not exist simultaneously, but successively (paryayeṇa). What is the
difference between vitarka and vicara? The ancient masters (pūrvācārya) say: "What is vitarka? A
mental conversation (manojalpa) of inquiry (paryeșaka), which has for its support volition
(cetanā) or the speculative consciousness (prajñā) depending on whether it does or does not
contain deduction (abhyüha). This is the grosser state of mind. What is vicāra? A mental
conversation of appreciation, of judgment (pratyavekṣaka), which has for its support volition . . .”
According to this theory, vitarka and vicāra constitute almost two identical psychological
complexes: they differ in that the first includes "inquiry" and the second "judgment.” Some give
an example: Someone feels numerous pots in order to know which one is well baked, and which
one is soft: this inquiry (ūha) is vitarka; finally, this person arrives at the conclusion, "There are
such a number of each category:" this is vicara.
The Vyākhyā, ad i.37, quotes Vasubandhu's Pañcaskandhaka which is very close to the opinion340 Chapter Two
of some ancient masters: vitarkaḥ katamaḥ /paryeṣako manojalpaś cetanāprajñāviśeṣaḥ / yā
cittasyaudārikatā // vicāraḥ katamaḥ / pratyaveksako manojalpaś cetanăprajñāvišeṣaḥ / ya
cittasya sūkṣmatā. // The Vyākhyā adds: anabhyūhāvasthāyāṁ cetanā abhyūhāvasthāyāṁ prajñeti
vyavasthāpyate.
See Dhammasangani, 7-8, Compendium, p. 10-11, Milinda, 62-63. Atthasālinī, 296-297
defines vitarka as ūhana and gives it as olarika, whereas vicāra is sukhuma. Vyāsa ad Yogasūtra,
i.17: vitarkaś cittasyālambana sthūla ābhogaḥ / sūkṣmo vicāraḥ; i.42-44.
172. Paryādīyate = saṁnirudhyate; see Śikṣāsamuccaya, 177.15, Divya, Sūtrālaṁkāra, i.12.
Samghabhadra's definition: yaḥ svadharmeşv eva raktasya darpaś cetasaḥ paryādānam
kuśalānyakriyābhyupapattisaṁhāro madaḥ.
173. Mada is sensation, "defiled satisfaction” (kliṣṭa saumanasya). The Vaibhāṣikas do not admit
this explanation: in fact, satisfaction does not exist beyond the Second Dhyana: but, according to
v.53c, mada exists in the three spheres of existence.
174. Compare Digha, i.21, Samyutta, ii.94.
175. Its meaning is that it accumulates good and evil (Vyākhyā). Tibetan: 'byed pas: because it
distinguishes. Atthasālinī, 293: ālambanaṁ cintetīti cittam.
176. Dhātupāṭha, 4.67.
177. The Vyākhyā adds: bhāvanāsaṁniveśayogena sautrāntikamatena yogācāramatena vā.
Paramartha reads: citaṁ śubhāśubhair dhātubhis tān vā cinotīti cittam. The Tibetan translates
in the same way: "because it is charged (bsags-pas) with good and evil dhātus.”
178. The consciousness (vijñāna) discerns a blue object, etc.; sensation feels it as agreeable, etc.;
ideas grasp its characteristics, etc. Or rather: consciousness perceives the object, in a general
manner, as a perceptible (upalabhyatārūpaṁ gṛhṇāti); mental states perceive its specific
characteristics (višeșarūpeṇa): sensation is susceptible of being agreeably experienced (anu-
bhavanīyatārūpam); ideas are susceptible of being defined (paricchedyatārūpam), etc. (i.16a).
179. That is to say saha vistaraprabhedābhyām or aha vistaraprabhedena.
180. The iti indicates that one should add other viprayuktas like saṁghabheda (iv.99), etc. to this
list. The Prakaraṇa says: ye’py evaṁjātīyakāḥ: “The dharmas which are of this type are also
cittaviprayukta." Same formula in the Skandhapañcaka.
According to the Prakaraṇa, the saṁskāras disassociated from the mind are: prāpti,
asaṁjñisamāpatti, nirodhasamāpatti, āsaṁjñika, jīvitendriya, nikāyasabhāga, āśrayaprāpti, dravya-
prāpti (?), āyatanaprāpti, jāti, jarā, sthiti, anityatā nāmakāya, and vyañjanakāya and all the other
dharmas of this type disassociated from the mind.
Prāpti is defined as dharmāṇāṁ prāptiḥ; āśrayaprāpti is āśrayāyatanaprāpti; dravyaprāpti (?)
is skandhānāṁ prāptiḥ; āyatanaprāpti is ādhyātmikabāhyāyatanaprāpti (TD 26, p. 694a19).
Prakaraṇapāda (p. 694a14): What is prāpti? Prāpti of the dharmas. What is asaṁjñisamā-
patti? The cessation of the mind and mental states having for its antecedent the idea of departure
attached to the abandoning of the defilement of the Subhakṛtsanas but not to the abandoning of
higher defilements. What is nirodhasamāpatti? The cessation of the mind and mental states
having for its antecedent the idea of calm attached to the abandoning of the defilement of
ākimcanyāyatana. What is āsaṁjñika? The cessation of the mind and mental states of those who
are born among the Asaṁjñisattva gods. What is jīvitendriya? Ayus of the Three Dhātus. What is
nikāyasabhāga? The resemblance of beings.
181. See i.38c-d, ii.59b.
The terms läbha and samanvāgama do not have the same meanings in the Abhidharma andFootnotes 341
in the Kathāvatthu, ix.12. For the Theravādins, lābha signifies "possession," for example the
power that the Saints posses to realize at their will any given absorption; samanvāgama is
understood as the actual realization. Elsewhere (iv.4) pațilābhasamannāgama and samangi-
bhāvasamannāgama, possessor of power (samanvāgama of the Abhidharma) versus its actual
possession (sammukhībhāva of the Abhidharma) are distinguished. See also xix.4.
182. There is in me prāpti or aprāpti relative to my defilement, to my action . . ., that is to say, I
possess or do not possess my future or past defilement... But there is no relation of possession
or of non-possession between me and the defilement of another.
183. Hairs should be regarded as "belonging to a living being," for they are bound (saṁbaddha) to
the material organs.
=
184. A person "bound with all the bonds" (sakalabandhana) is one who has not obtained, by the
worldly (laukika) path, the abandoning (=pratisamkhyanirodha) of any of the nine categories of
defilements of Kāmadhātu. An Aryan, at the first moment(ādikṣaṇa duḥkhe dharma-
jñānakṣānti) has not yet obtained the abandoning of the defilements abandoned through the Path
(vi.77). A person who has obtained the abandoning of one category of defilement is called
ekaprakāropalikhita (vi.30a).
185. Dravyadharmaḥ = dravyato dharmaḥ, or rather dravyaṁ ca tad dharmaś ca sa dravya-
dharmaḥ, that is to say vidyamānasvalakṣaṇo dharmaḥ See below p. 211-212.
186. These ten dharmas are the eight parts of the Path, plus samyagvimukti and samyagjñāna
(Anguttara, v.222); the five abandoned items are not the group of satkāyadṛṣṭi, šīlavrata-
parāmarśa, vicikitsā, kāmacchanda, and vyāpāda, for this group has been abandoned with the
acquisition of the result of Anāgāmin; rather, it is a group relative to the higher spheres,
rūparāga, ārūpyarāga, auddhatya, māna, and avidyā.
187. Dīgha, iii.59: Dalhanemi . . . sattaratanasamannāgato.
188. According to Scripture, things (vastu) are either dravyasat or prajñaptisat, "really existant,"
or "existing as designation."
189. The cause of arising of a thought of greed is the "possession" of this future thought of greed.
190. The pure dharmas, duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti, etc.
191. The undefiled and defiled dharmas of Kāmadhātu respectively.
192. These definitions answer the questions of the Vaibhāṣikas: “Is the seed a thing (dravya)
different from the mind, or not different from the mind?," "Is this series a permanent (anasthita)
thing within which different dharmas successively arise?," "Should pariņāma be included as is the
pariņāma of the Samkhyas?"
See ii.54c-d. The doctrine of the evolution of the series is presented again iv.3c.
193. Tibetan and Paramārtha. Hsüan-tsang: "The two paths (the doctrine of the Sautrantikas and
the doctrine of the Vaibhāṣikas) are good. How is this? The first is not in contradiction with
reason; and the second is our system."
Pañcaskandha: prāptiḥ katamā? pratilambhaḥ samanvāgamaḥ / bijam vasitvam
saṁmukhībhāvo yathāyogam. (According to the Tibetan).
194. The prapti of past dharmas is (1) either past, that is: "which has arisen and which has
perished:" it was either earlier (agraja), or later (paścātkālaja), or simultaneous (sahaja) to these
dharmas; (2) or it is future, that is: "that which has not arisen:" it will be later than these
dharmas; (3) or present, that is: "that which has arisen and which has not perished:" it is later
than these dharmas. And thus following.342 Chapter Two
No dharma is susceptible of this threefold prapti. For example, the prāpti of the dharmas "of
retribution" is solely simultaneous to these dharmas (ii.38c). One does not "possess" these
dharmas before they have arisen, nor after they have perished.
195. The impure dharmas belong to the planes of existence, dhātvāpta, dhātupatita.
196. These are the apariyāpannas of the Abhidhamma.
197. Pratisaṁkhyānirodha or “disjunction of defilement” (visamyoga, i.6a-b, ii.57d) can be
obtained by a Prthagjana or by an Aryan. In the first case, the prapti is of Rūpadhatu or
Arūpyadhatu depending on whether the nirodha is obtained by a (worldly) path of Rūpadhātu or
Ārūpyadhātu. In the second case, it is of Rūpadhātu and pure, when the nirodha is obtained by a
Rūpadhātu (or worldly) path; of Arūpyadhātu and pure, when the nirodha is obtained by a path
of Arūpyadhātu; and pure, when the nirodha is obtained by the pure Path (according to the
principle formulated vi.46).
198. The Saikṣa dharmas are the pure dharmas of the Saikṣa, of the saint who is not an Arhat; the
dharmas of an Asaikṣa are the pure dharmas of the Arhat.
199. Paramārtha: "The same way as the prāpti, obtained by a non-Ãryan, of apratisaṁkhyāni-
rodha and pratisaṁkhyānirodha.” Hsüan-tsang: “. . . the prāpti of pratisaṁkhyānirodha obtained
through a non-Aryan path."
200. One case is not envisioned: the prāpti of pratisaṁkhyānirodha, by means of a worldly path,
by an Āryan. This prāpti is at one an the same time pure and impure, as we shall see vi.46.
201. Durbalatvāt: anabhisaṁskāravattvāt, because it is not the result of an effort.
202. Vyākhyā: The Vaibhāṣikas. For example, Viśvakarman, the heavenly artisan, possessess past,
present, and future śailpasthānikas; the Sthavira Aśvajit possesses the airyāpathikas.
203. The non-possession of the defilements is not defiled, for, in this hypothesis, it would be
lacking in a person liberated from the defilements: but it is not good, for it is lacking in the person
who has cut off the roots of good (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 799a21).
204. If an aprāpti can be pure, this would be the aprāpti of the pure dharmas; now the definition
of a Prthagjana proves that the aprāpti of the pure dharmas is not pure.
On the prthagjana, see i.40, 41a, ii.9b-d, iii.41c-d, 95a, vi.26a, 28d, 45b.
205. Second masters of the Vibhāṣā.
206. Compare Kathāvatthu, iv.4.
207. Aprāpti or alābha belongs to the sphere of existence (dhātu) to which the person belongs
who is endowed with it (ii.40a). Thus a being in Kāmadhātu is solely endowed with the quality of
Prthagjana (which is aprāpti, ii.40b-c) of the sphere of Kämadhātu. Thus one cannot say that, by
the acquisition of the Path, this being loses the quality of Pṛthagjana of the sphere of the three
realms of existence. Nevertheless, by the acquisition of the Path, any quality of Prthagjana, of
whatever sphere, becomes impossible. One can thus say that this quality, under its triple form (of
Kāmadhātu, etc.), is abandoned, even though a given being is endowed with it under but one
form.
Two aspects of its abandoning are distinguished, vihāni and prahāṇa.
208. A Prthagjana, detaching himself from Kāmadhātu, passes into the First Dhyāna: he loses the
quality of Prthagjana of the sphere of Kāmadhātu, but he does not become, by this fact, an Aryan:
for another quality of Pṛthagjana, of the sphere of the First Dhyāna, appears. The same way for
the other stages, whether one ascends or descends.Footnotes 343
209. By taking possession of the good dharmas of hearing and reflection of Kāmadhātu, one loses
the aprāpti of these dharmas; by taking possession of the innate good dharmas (ii.71b), one loses
the aprapti of the roots of good which have been cut off (samucchinnakuśala). When, dying in
Kāmadhātu, one is reborn in the First Dhyāna, one loses the aprapti of the dharmas of the First
Dhyāna... This theory raises some delicate problems which the Vyākhyā summarily examines.
210. Compare ii.45c-d: the play of birth (jāti) and the arising of birth (jātijāti).
211. The case of the neutral (avyākṛta) dharma is not examined here, because this dharma is
possessed solely at the moment when it exists (tasya sahajaiva prāptiḥ): the numbers differ.
212. The Japanese editor observes that one should add four lakṣaṇas and four anulakṣaṇas
(ii.45c-d) for each of these three dharmas; we thus have twenty-seven dharmas of the first
moment.
213. At the fourth moment one possesses twenty-seven prāptis, namely the praptis of the
dharmas produced at the three preceeding moments, three, six, and eighteen, plus twenty-seven
anuprāptis, or forty-four dharmas. At the fifth moment, eighty-one prāptis and as many
anuprāptis.
214. Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 694a23:"What is nikāyasabhāga? The commoness of nature (t’ung-lei
hsing) of living beings."
215. Each living being possesses his own sattvasabhāgatā. Nevertheless sattvasabhāgatā is said to
be general because it is not differenciated. To conceive of it as unique and eternal is an error of the
Vaibhāşikas.
216. By et cetera one should understand: upāsikā, bhikṣuṇī, the naivaśaikṣanāśaikṣa, etc.
217. "It is by reason of their dharmasabhāgatā that the dhātus are of Kāmadhātu . . .”
218. Compare Anguttara, iv.247, etc. The Daśabhūmaka replaces the formula sa ced... with
atha cet punar manuşyeşüpapadyate.
Divya, 194.30: manuṣyāṇāṁ sabhāgatāyaṁ upapanna iti (Maḥāvyutpatti, 245.54); 122.16:
brahmalokasabhāgatāyāṁ copapanno mahābrahamā saṁvṛttaḥ. Śikṣāsamucacaya, 176.9: sarva
nikāyasabhāge devamanuṣyāṇāṁ priyo bhavati.
219. Hsuan-tsang translates: "This is not admissible, for it is in contradiction with our system;" he
omits the formula "The Vaibhāṣikas say” (The Vaibhāṣikas say: “This is not admissible . . .”
220. Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 694a19. Dīgha, iii.263: sant’āvuso sattā asaññino appatisaṁvedino
seyyathāpi devā asaññasattā. i.28, iii.33 . . . saññuppādā ca pana te devā tamhā kāyā cavanti. One
of the nine sattvāvāsas, Anguttara, iv.401; Kośa, iii.6c.
221. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 615a5, five opinions.
222. But the foreigners pretend that there are nine divisions in the heaven of the Fourth Dhyāna.
On the Vrhatphalas (Vehapphalas), see Burnouf, Introduction, p. 614.
223. Opinion of the Andhakas, condemned in the Kathāvatthu, iii.14.
224. On the meaning of the word samāpatti, see p. 232.
225. The complete name is samjñāveditanairodhasamāpatti, see p. 230.
Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 694a19: Asaṁjñisamāpatti is an arresting of the mind and mental states
which has for its antecedents the idea of deliverence (niḥsaraṇamanasikārapūrvaka) and which is
obtained by a person free from defilements of the Subhakṛtsnas, but not from higher defilements.
Nirodhasamāpatti is an arresting of the mind and mental states which has for its antecedents the344 Chapter Two
idea of calmness, and which is obtained by a person free from the defilements of akiñcanyāyatana.
Vasubandhu, in his Pañcaskandhaka, draws his inspiration from these definitions.
226. One obtains apratisaṁkhyānirodha or the definitive disappearance of bad realms of rebirth,
āsaṁjñika, birth among the Mahābrahmas and the Kurus, and an eighth rebirth by entry into
niyāma.
227. Whoever enters into the Fourth Dhyāna obtains in the same body the prapti of all the four
Dhyānas which he has cultivated or will cultivate in the course of his transmigration.
228. The future good mind is the object of a former prāpti.
229. On nirodhasamāpatti, saṁjñāveditanirodhasamāpatti (see below p. 230, see vi.43c-d, viii. 33a
(vimokṣa), Kathāvatthu, vì.5, xv.7. In the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 777a14 numerous opinions on this
absorption: for some, it is only one thing (dravya), nirodhasākṣātkāra; for others, eleven things:
the ten mahābhūmikas and cittanirodha; for others, twenty-one things: the mahābhūmikas, the
kusalamahābhūmikas and cittanirodha . . .
230. Vihāra = samādhivišeṣa.
231. It is "retributed later:” when an existence in Rūpadhātu in interposed between an existence
in Kamadhātu in the course of which one produces it, and an existence in Bhavagra which is its
result.
232. This absorption takes place in Bhavāgra, from whence matter (rūpa) is absent. Pṛthagjanas
fear that the arresting of the mind and mental states is, under these conditions, annihilation. They
do not have the same fear with respect to asamjñisamāpatti, which takes place in the Fourth
Dhyana, where matter persists. By this fact, there remains, within nirodhasamāpatti, nikāyasa-
bhāga, jīvitendriya and other saṁskāras disassociated from the mind; but Pṛthagjanas do not see
them.
233. According to one varient, followed by the Chinese translaters, dṛṣṭadharmanirvāṇasya .
That is, “The Āryan hopes to obtain, aims to obtain Nirvāṇa-at-death by means of this
absorption, within this absorption."
234. The Vyākhyā quotes a stanza of the Stotrakāra, i.e., Mātṛceṭa (Varṇanārhavarṇana, 118: F. W.
Thomas, Indian Antiquary, 1905, p. 159): na te prāyogikaṁ kimcit kuśalaṁ kuśalānuga /
235. The Japanese editor quotes different opinions of old commentaries on the Kośa: the
Westerners are the Sarvästivādins of Gandhāra, or the Sautrāntikas, or the masters of the land of
Indhu. They are called "Westeners"because they are to the west of Kásmir, and "foreigners"
(bahirdeśaka) because they are tside of Kasmir. See below note 237.
236. See iv.24c-d. Compare Kathāvatthu, i.5, xviii.5.
237. The Masters of the land of Indhu, of the same opinion as the Westerners.
238. Vyutthānāśaya = vyutthānābhipraya: "having a resolution susceptible of giving up, of
surrending." According to another interpretation, āśaya = kuśala = kuśalamūla; thus: “having
roots of good susceptible of giving up, of being interrupted." Now the roots of good of the
Bodhisattvas are such that, once they have begun to be actualized, they do not cease before Bodhi
is obtained.
Vyutthāna also signifies "departure from absorption" (Samyutta, iii.265, etc.).
239. See Vibhāṣā TD 27, p. 204b3-c4: All the attitudes are good. Why does the Bodhisattva take
up the sitting attitude? ...
240. Hsüan-tsang adds: “The first doctrine is the best, because it is our system."Footnotes 345
241. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 773bll. Three opinions: solely in Kāmadhātu; also in the three lower
Dhyānas; and also in the Fourth Dhyāna.
According to the Vibhāṣā, nirodhasamāpatti cannot be prolonged beyond seven days-and-
nights.
242. The Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 1024a8, posits a fourfold question: Is there an existence in
Rūpadhātu which does not include the five skandhas? Is there an existence including the five
skandhas and which is not Rūpadhātu? Is there an existence in Rūpadhātu which includes the five
skandhas? Is there an existence which is neither in Rūpadhātu and which does not include the
five skandhas?
243. The Jñānaprasthāna and the Kośa do not emply the word skandha but a synonym, a word
that the MSS of the Vyākhyā transcribe as both vyavahāra and vyavacāra. Hsüan-tsang translates
this is hsing, the equivalent of saṁskāra, viharaṇa, etc.; Paramārtha translates this as
p'an , the equivalent of nīti, naya, “to judge,” “to decide.” The reading vyavakāra appears
certain according to Pali sources.
a. Pali sources. Vokāra = khandha (Childers); Vibhañga, 137: saññābhavo asaññābhavo
nevasaññānāsaññābhavo ekāvokārabhavo catuvokārabhavo pañcavokārabhavo; Yamaka, accord-
ing to Kathāvatthu, trans. p. 38; Kathāvatthu, iii.11: if non-conscious beings possess an existence
including vokāra or five vokāras. (Buddhaghosa explains: vividhena visuṁ visuṁ karīyatı).
b. Vyākhyā. Vyavakāra is the name that the Buddha Kasyapa gives to the skandhas.
Vyavakāra (višeṣeṇāvakāra) signifies savyavakāra according to Panini, v.27.127; thus, "that which
deceives, that which contradicts (visaṁvādanī) by its impermanence," a definition which applies
to the skandhas according to the stanza “Rūpa is like foam . . .” (Saṁyutta, iii.142).
c. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 959bll. The former Tathāgatas Sämyaksambuddhas called the skandhas
vyavakāras; but the Tathagata Samyaksambuddha Šakyamuni calls the vyavakāras skandhas. The
former Buddhas spoke of five vyavakaras, Śākyamuni speaks of five upādānaskandhas. Here, in
the Abhidharma, one speaks of existence “having five vyavakāras,” (pañca-) in order to show that
the five skandhas of which Śakyamuni speaks are the five vyavakāras of which the former
Buddhas spoke. Why did the former Buddhas use the term vyavakāra, whereas the present
Buddha uses the word skandha? Because the Buddhas see that this is suitable to say to their
followers... Why this expression vyavakāra? By reason of pravṛtti (saṁcāra?, liu-ch'uan
the skandhas which have formerly arisen develop by reason of the later skandhas, or rather the
skandhas which have arisen later develop by reason of former skandhas ...
244. When these beings, conscious by nature, become non-conscious in one of the two absorption,
they are visabhāgacitte sthita, "placed in a mind contrary to their nature."
245. This Sūtra was preached by Sariputra: it bears the name of Udayin, because the adversary of
Sariputra is Udayin. The Sanskrit redaction is very close to the Pâļi text. Madhyamāgama TD 1, p.
449c7 and Anguttara, iii.192. śrāvastyāṁ nidānam /tatrāyuṣmān śāriputro bhikṣün āmantrayate
sma / ihãyuşmanto bhikṣuḥ filasampannaś ca bhavati samādhisaṁpannaś ca prajñāsaṁpannaś ca
/ so'bhikṣṇam saṁjñāveditanirodhaṁ samāpadyate ca vyuttişthate ca /asti caitat sthānam iti
yathābhūtaṁ prajānāmi /sa nehaiva dṛṣṭa eva dharme pratipattyaivājñām ārāgayati nāpi
maraṇasamaye bhedāc ca kāyasyātikramya devān kavaḍīkārabhakṣān anyatamasmin divye
manomaya kaya upapadyate /sa tatropanno . . .
Vyākhyā: pratipattyaiva = pūrvam eva.
This Sūtra is discussed viii.3c (the thesis of the existence of rupa in Ārūpyadhātu). Compare
Dīgha, i.195.
246. Ājñām ārāgayati, as in Mahāvastu, iii.53.9. Paramārtha: "He does not obtain ājñatāvīndriya."
Hsüan-tsang: "He does not apply himself in the manner to obtain the quality of Arhat ...
""346 Chapter Two
247. It is termed manomaya or mental, because it arises independently of the elements of
generation; but this does not mean that it is a body created from ideas, saṁjñāmaya (Dīgha,
i.195), and belonging to Arūpyadhātu, as Udāyin thinks.
On the "mental bodies" of the Bodhisattva in the Mahāvastu, see Opinions sur l'histoire de la
dogmatique, p. 258.
248. Note of the Japanese editor: i. The mental body gods of which the Sūtra speaks are (a) of
Rūpadhātu, for the Sarvāstivādins (same opinion, Dīgha, i.195); (b) of Rūpadhātu and
Ārūpyadhātu, for the Sautrāntikas; or (c) the Asaṁjñisattvas, for Udāyin. ii. According to the
Sarvāstivādins there is falling from the absorption of extinction; but there is no falling, according
to the Sauträntikas and Udāyin.
But, according to the Vyākhyā, the Sautrāntikas admit a falling from absorption; they
nevertheless deny that a Saint falls out of Āryamarga (contra the Sarvāstivādins), from whence
the difficulties that the Vyākhyā resolves.
249. The Mahāsāṁghikas, etc., according to P'u-kuang, TD 41, P. 99c15.
250. Dirgha, TD 1, p. 110a24; Dīgha, iii.266; Mahāvyutpatti, 68.7: navānupūrvasamāpattayas: the
four dhyānas, the four ārūpyas and the absorption of extinction.
251. Prathamakalpikaḥ = āditaḥ samāpattividhāyakaḥ.
252. One prepares himself for asaṁjñisamāpatti by thinking: “Saṁjñā is a sickness, a thorn, an
abscess; the cessation of saṁjñā is tranquil, excellent."
253. The preparation includes the resolution "I shall know the mind of another."
254. The philosphical systems (siddhānta) are in disagreement. The Vaibhāṣikas, etc., hold that
the absorptions and asaṁjñika are lacking mind (acittakāny eva ….. ): the Sthavira Vasumitra, etc.,
hold that they are endowed with mind (sacittakāni) from the fact of a non-manifested mental
conciousness (aparisphuṭamanovijñāna); and the Yogācārins hold that they have mind from the
fact of the alayavijñāna (Vyākhyā).
255. This question is posed by the Sautrāntikas. For them, the mind which has just perished, and
the mind which perished a long time ago, are equally non-existent: however the mind which has
just perished is the cause of the mind which immediately follows it: compare the movement of
the beam of a balance (tulādaṇḍonnāmāvanāmavat, comp. Sälistamba in the Bodhicaryāvatāra,
483.3).
256. The author indicates the name of the treatise because Vasumitra (called either the Sthavira or
Bhadanta) wrote other books, the Pañcavastuka, etc. (Vyākhyā). There a commentary on the
Pañcavastuka by Dharmatrāta, TD 28, number 1555.
The Japanese editor remarks that this does not refer to the Vasumitra of the Vibhāṣā, but to a
Sautrāntika. (See P’u-kuang, TD 41, p. 100b12.)
257. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 774a14: "The Dārṣṭāntikas and the Vibhajyavādins maintain that there is
a subtle mind which is not interrupted in the absorption of extinction. They say, "There are no
beings who are at one and the same time without mind and without rūpa; there is no absorption
which is without mind. If an absorption were without mind, then the vital organ would be cut off;
one would not term this established in absorption, but rather "dead."""
258. Samyuktāgama, TD 2, p. 74b20 and following; compare Samyutta, ii.72 and sources quoted as
Kośa, iii.30b.
259. Samyuktāgama, TD 2, p. 83a2; Samyutta, iii.96.
260. This formula occurs in the Mahāvyutpatti, 68.9.home animal estatger
Footnotes
347
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 782a22: One who is in nirodhasamāpatti cannot be burned by fire,
drowned by water, wounded by the sword, or killed by another (Compare the legends of Samjiva,
Khāņu-Koṇḍañña, in the Visuddhi, xii. JTPS, 1891, 112). Why does he possess this quality?
Vasumitra says because this samāpatti cannot be damaged; thus he who is in it cannot be
damaged. Moreover samāpatti produces equality of the mind. Here, there is not mind, so how can
one speak of samāpatti? Samāpatti is of two types: that which produces equality of mind, and that
which produces equaltiy of the primary elements. Even though the two samāpattis cut off the
equality of the mind since they interrupt the mind, they bring about the equality of the primary
elements.
261. Aśraya has been defined ii.5-6; see also p. 209.
262. Hsüan-tsang translates: "This theory is not good, for it is in contradiction with our system."
Let us add: "So say the Vaibhasikas." See above note 218.
263. Buddhaghosa attributes to the Pubbaseliyas and to the Sammitiyas the Abhidharma doctrine
that the jivitendriya is a cittacippayutta arūpadhamma. See Kathāvatthu, viii.10, Compendium, p.
156; Vibhanga, p. 123, Dhammasangaṇi, 19, 635, Atthasālinī, 644.
264. Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 991b25 (Indriyaskandhaka, 1), Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 694a23.
265. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 150b9, Madhyama, TD 1, p. 789al, Samyutta, iii.143 (varients); compare
Majjhima, i.296. Quoted below ad iv.73a-b.
266. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 771a7: This Sūtra is quoted by the Vibhajyavādins in order to prove that
these three dharmas,-life, heat, and consciousness,-are always united and not separated. But
Vasumitra observes that the Sūtra refers to the series of a certain äśraya... Life (äyus) forms part
of the saṁskāraskandha, the dharmadhātu, and the dharmāyatana; heat, of the rūpaskandha and
the spraṣṭavyāyatana; and consciousness, of the vijñānaskandha, the seven dhātus and the
manāyatana: thus one should not take the Sütra literally. Furthermore, if these three dharmas
always go together, there would be heat in Ārūpyadhātu, life and consciousness among non-living
beings, and consciousness in the non-conscious absorption.
267. Hsüan-tsang: "In addition to that we have said. What have you said? In order to avoid this
consequence . . .”
268. Vaišeşikadarśana, v.1.16; H. Ui, Vaiśeṣika philosophy, p. 163. The example of the arrow has
no real value for the Vaiseșikas who hold that vega is a thing in and of itself. Thus the author here
refutes the theory of the Vaiseșikas.
269. Hsüan-tsang: "There is a thing in and of itself, the support of heat and consciousness, called
ayus: this is the best doctrine." Note of the Japanese editor: The author adopts the opinion of the
Sarvāstivādins. But we may suppose that Hsüan-tsang has omited the words "The Vaibhasikas
say:. . . ,” for in his Pañcaskandhaka, Vasubandhu adopts the Sautrântika thesis.
270. Karmaprajñāptiśāstra, Chap. xi (Mdo 72, fol. 240b).
271. On the different results of action, iv.85 and following. On bhoga, Yogasütra, ii.13.
272. Missing in Paramärtha. See above, p. 167. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 103b3.
273. This is an explanation of the Foreigners (Bahirdeśaka). The explanation of the Kasmireans
differs only in its words. Or rather these latter understand that the ayus of the first category is
"bound to its own series (svasamtatyupanibaddha), but susceptible of being hindered."
274. According to Kathāvatthu, xvii.2, the Rajagirikas and the Siddhatthikas deny the premature
death of an Arhat (Kośa, ii.10). According to Rockhill (Life of Buddha, p. 189) and Wassilieff, p.348 Chapter Two
244, the Prajñaptivādins deny premature death. The Bodhicaryāvatāra (ii.55) admits a “natural”
(kāla) death and one hundered premature deaths, due to each of the humors (vāta, pitta, fleşman)
and to the humors joined together, for a total of four hundred and four deaths.
Further (1) samucchedamaraṇa, the death of an Arhat; (2) khaṇikamaraṇa, the constant
disappearance of the dharmas eaten up by impermanence; (3) sammutimaraṇa, the death that
one attributes to a tree, etc. The Abhidhamma distinguishes (1) kālamaraṇa (natural death) (a) by
exhaustion of merit (puñña), (b) by exhaustion of the span of life (āyu), and (c) by exhaustion of
the two; (2) akālamaraña (premature death) by reason of an action which cuts off existence
(upacchedakakammaṇā), in the case of Dūsī Māra, Kalabhū, etc.,
and in the case of persons
assassinated in retribution of a previous action (Visuddhimagga, viii. apud Warren, p. 252;
Commentary on the Anguttara, P.T.S., p. 111; Nettipakaraṇa, p. 29; Milinda, p. 301. Abhi-
dhammasangaha, Compendium, p. 149.
Jain doctrine, Umāsvāti, Tattvärthādhigamasutra, ii.52: dvividhany ayumsi...
275. Literally: taking possession of existence, atmabhāvapratilambha. Majjhima, iii.53 distin-
guishes two types, savyāpajjha and avyāpajjha.
=
276. Digba, iii.231, Anguttara, i.159: atth’avuso attabbavapatilabbo yasmim attabbavapatilabbe
attasaṁcetanā yeva kamati no parasaṁcetanā . . . See Kofa, vi.56. Vyākhyā: ātmasaṁcetanā =
ātmanā māraṇam; parasaṁcetanā = pareṇa māraṇam.
277. Dīgha, i.19, iii.31. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 997b9. There is no agreement as to whether this refers
to the Four Kings and the heaven of the Thirty-three Gods, or to other categories of gods in
Kâmadhātu.
278. For example a certain Śuka was sent by the Blessed One to Āmrapālī; the Licchavis were
engaged in military exercises (yogya), and seeing him they covered him with a rain of arrows. But
the messanger of the Buddha cannot be killed before he has completed his mission.
279. Perhaps we should understand: "the persons to whom the Buddha gives an order know that
they will live yet that much more time." The notes of J. Przyluski on Yaśas and Jivaka make this
version plausible enough:
"In Mahāvagga, i.7, Para. 4 is almost incomprehensible. Yasas cries out 'What a danger!' and
we do not know to what danger he is alluding. In the corresponding passage of the Vinaya of the
Sarvāstivādins everything is explained: "Then Yasas, having passed beyond the gate of the village,
arrived at the river of Vārānasī. Then the Blessed One was walking on the bank of this river.
Yaśas, seeing the water, gave forth a cry as he had formerly done. The Buddha, hearing this cry,
said to the young man: "This place has nothing to cause fear. Cross the current and come"" (Tōk.
xvii., 3.26a).
"The wife of Subhadra (comp. Divyāvadāna, 262-270) died before having given birth; the
body was cremated but the infant was not burned. The Buddha told Jivaka to go and take the
infant from out of the midst of the flames: Jivaka obeyed and returned without having had any ill
effect (xvii.1.6a)."
280. Tibetan: gan ga len. The Chinese transcriptions give Gañjila; see the unsuccessful suicide
attempts of Gangika, Avadānafataka, 98.
281. The fact that the word tadyathā is lacking in the response of the Blessed One does not prove
that this response should be understood literally.
282. Paramartha: "Further, there are the lakṣaṇas of the saṁskṛtas . .
Hsüan-tsang: "The lakṣaṇas, are namely the arising, duration, change, and destruction of the
saṁskṛtas."
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 198a8 and following; Dharmottara's Abhidharmahṛdaya, TD 28, p.811b17.
A provisional definition of saṁskṛta has been given i.7a-b.
Footnotes 349
283. But cannot one say that duration is a characteristic of an unconditioned thing? No.
Characteristics are things in and of themselves (dravyāntararūpa) distinct from the dharmas
characterized, which causes arising, duration, decline and the perishing of this same dharma. An
unconditioned thing lasts but does not possess the characteristic "duration," see below P. 239 line
11.
284. This is Trilakṣaṇasūtra (see below p. 242 line 9). Saṁyuktāgama, TD 2, p. 85b10;
Anguttara, i.152: tīņ'imāni bhikkhave saṁkhatassa samkhatalakkhaṇāni /katamāni tīņi / uppādo
paññāyati vayo paññāyati ṭhitassa aññāthattaṁ paññāyati. The Sanskrit redaction has: sthityanya-
thātva (Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 145); Kathāvatthu, trans. p. 55: ṭhitānaṁ aññāthatta.
On anyathābhāva, Samyutta, ii.274. The Abhidhamma only admits three characteristics:
certain masters omit even sthiti (Kathāvatthu, trans., note p. 374).
The four lakṣaṇas of the Vijñānavāda, Bodhisattvabhūmi, I, xvii. Para. 15. (Madhyamakavṛtti,
p. 546).
285. The same comparison, with a different moral, Atthasālinī, 655.
286. Compare Burnouf, Introduction, P. 255.
287. The theory of the lakṣaṇas and anulakṣaṇas is refuted by Nāgārjuna, Madhyamaka, vii.1 and
following. See Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 148, on the theory of the Sammītiyas who admit seven
lakṣaṇas and seven anulakṣaṇas: ut pāda, utpādotpāda, etc.
288. Space is a pure negative, a pure absence of any matter susceptible of resistance. It cannot be
analyzed (vipatyate, vibhidyate).
289. See note 293.
290. See the sources quoted in Madhyamakavṛtti, 268, 598.
291. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 73b23. pravabagata bị vedanas tasya vidità evotpadyante vidita
avatisthante / viditā astaṁ parikṣayaṁ paryādānaṁ gacchanti/na kṣaṇagatāḥ kṣaṇasya durava-
dhāratvāt (Vyākhyā).
Tibetan: The kulaputra Nanda (Comp. Anguttara, iv.166).
Compare Samyutta, vi.180; Majjhima, iii.25 (where the Blessed One says to Śāriputra what he
says here to Nanda): dhammā viditā uppajjanti viditā upaṭṭhaḥanti viditā abbhatthaṁ gacchanti.
292. Majjhima, iii.25 contains the formula evam kila me dhammā ahutvā sambhonti which
becomes the thesis of the Sautrantikas: abhūtvā bhāva utpādaḥ (p. 243 line 17), which we read in
Milinda, p. 51: ahutvā sambhoti, and which is contradicted by the Sarvāstivādins and by Milinda,
p. 52: natthi keci saṁkhārā ye abhavantā jāyanti. Nāgasena is a Vibhajyavādin, p. 50.
293. If one says, "It is by reason of its duration (sthitisadbhāvāt) that a dharma, once arisen, does
not perish for a moment; lacking duration, even this moment itself would not exist," such is not
the case, for the moment exists by reason of the cause which produces it.
If one says, "It is duration which causes, which embraces (upagṛhṇāti) a dharma engendered
by causes," we would ask, "If duration does not accomplish this task, what will happen?" "The
dharma would not exist (ātmasattā dharmasya na bhavet).” “Then say that duration engenders,
not that it cause something to endure."
If one says, “Duration causes the series to continue (avasthāpayati),” then the name of
duration should be reserved for its causes.
294. Smoke is momentary; when it "reproduces itself" in a place higher than that which it first350 Chapter Two
occupied, persons say that it rises (ürdhvagamanākhyāṁ labhate) and they conceive of the rising
(ürdhvagamanatvam) as distinct from the smoke (see iv.2b).
295. If, grasping the unique self nature of a visible thing, I were to grasp it as being conditioned
(saṁskṛtam iti) before knowing of its former non-existence, one could say that "conditioned" is a
mark of a conditioned thing, that a conditioned thing is characterized by a conditioned thing
(tenaive tal lakṣitaṁ syāt). But such is not the case.
296. The Vaibhäşikas are “followers of momentariness” (kṣaṇikavādin): dharmas last only a
moment and perish of themselves. See iv.2b; Wassilief, p. 325. But the difficulty is: what does
kṣaṇa mean?
297. Some other definitions, iii.86a.
298. The Sammitīyas (see iv.2c).
299. In the Introduction we have studied the different theories relative to impermanence
(anityatva) and momentariness (kṣaṇikatva).
300. See above p. 245. A conditioned dharma is engenderd by its characteristic "arising." "Arising"
arises at the same time as the dharma which it engenders; being "future" it engenders it before
arising itself.
301. Causes (hetu) and conditions (pratyaya) are defined ii.49, 61c.
302. The Vyākhyā quotes the response made by the Bhadanta Anantavarman to this objection:
"The eye does not produce the visible consciousness without the coming together of clearness,
etc.; it is no less a cause of the visual consciousness." Response: "We state that the blind do not
see, that the non-blind do see: thus we state the efficacy of the eye. The same does not hold for
arising."
Anantavarman is quoted in the Vyākhyā ad ii.71b-72, iii.35d and vii.32.
303. The nature of the mental states, sparsa, etc. is subtle and difficult to distinguish. Without
doubt, reply the Sautrântikas, but the Blessed One explained the efficacy of sparsa, etc.: "All that
which is vedanā, saṁjñā, and saṁskāras, exists by reason of sparsa . . . ;” but he did not explain
the efficacy of "arising."
304. The idea of "color" has for its object specific characteristics (svalakṣaṇa) of the "color." But
the idea of "arisen," as "the color has arisen," does not bear on the color, since I have the same
idea of arising when it refers to sensation: "sensation has arisen.” Thus the idea of "arisen" bears
on the action produced by a certain dharma, independent of its color, its sensation, and its
"arising."
305. The Buddhists (baudhasiddhānta) believe that sandalwood is only a certain collection of
odors, etc. (gandhādisamūha). The Vaibhāṣikas believe that sandalwood exists in and of itself; this
is why the author gives the example of the bust, an example admitted by the Vaibhāṣikas. See
Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 66; Sāṁkhyapravacanabhāṣya, p. 84, 148, etc.
306. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 198a15: Some maintain that the saṁskṛtalakṣaṇas are not real things,
namely the Dārṣṭāntikas who say: "The saṁskṛtalakṣaṇas are included within the viprayuk-
tasaṁskāraskandha; the viprayuktasaṁskāraskandha is not real; thus the saṁskṛtalakṣaṇas are
not real." In order to refute their opinion . . .
307. Hsuan-tsang: "This theory is best. Why?"
308. Namely the Abhidharmaśāstras.
309. We have four proverbs which have the same meaning, that is, one should not renounce aFootnotes 351
thing in and of itself because of the defects that it presents, or because of the risks that it entails.
a. Na hi bhikṣukāḥ santīti sthālyo nādhiśrīyante.
b. Na ca mṛgāḥ santīti yavā (var. śālayo) nopyante.
These two proverbs, which often go together, have been studies by Col. Jacob, in his Second
Handful of Popular Maxims (Bombay, Nirnayasagar, 1909, p. 42, index sub voc. na hi bhikṣikāḥ),
with the references which follow: Mahābhāṣya, i.99, ii.194, iii.23 (Kielhorn), in the same context
(na hi doṣāḥ santīti praibhāṣā na kartavyā lakṣaṇaṁ vā na praṇeyam / na hi bhikṣukāḥ . . . );
Vacasapatimiśra, Nyāyavārtikatātparyaṭīkā, pp. 62, 441; Bhāmatī, p. 54; Sarvadarśanasamgraha, p.
3 of Cowell's translation. We should add the Kāmasūtra (see Cat. Oxford, 216b), where the two
proverbs are attributed to Vätsyāyana (mentioned by Weber, Indische Studien, XIII, p. 326).
c. Ato'jirnabhayān nāhāraparityāgo bhikṣukabhayān na sthālyā anadhiśrayaṇam doșeșu
pratividhātavyam iti nyayah.
Col. Jacob quotes, for this third proverb, Pañcapādikā, p. 63 (of which the final dosesu
pratividhātavyam is found in Vasubandhu), Jīvanmuktiviveka, p. 8 (which attributes the proverb
to Anandabodhācārya), and Hitopadeśa, ii.50, doṣabhīter anārambhaḥ ...
d. Na makṣikāḥ patantīti modakā na bhakṣyante.
A proverb for which we do not have any other references than Vasubandhu. It appears that
the Buddhists, being bhikṣus, have substituted mendicant (bhikṣuka) and sthālī in the proverb,
making it a proverb less biting than one containing flies and cakes.
310. Surendranath Dasgupta, in his Study of Patañjali (Calcutta, 1920), give in brief (p. 192-201)
the various theories concerning sphoța.
311. The word mjñākaraṇa belongs to popular language (lokabhāṣā); it is the equivalent of
nāmadheya, name or appellation, for one says "Devadatta’ is a saṁjñākaraṇa sound.” But here it
means "That which makes an idea arise." In fact saṁjñā is a mental dharma, “idea,” “notion," or
"concept" (i.14c-d); nāman is what “creates" or engenders this dharma.
312. This does not refer to pada as a declined or conjugated form (Pāṇini, i.4.14).
313. One should consider the entire stanza as a pada:
anityā vata saṁskārā utpādavyayadharmiṇaḥ /
utpadya hi nirudhyante teṣām vyupaśamaḥ sukhaḥ //
that can be explained in different ways:
a. Thesis (pratijñā): “The saṁskāras are impermanent.” Argument (hetu): "because their
nature is to arise and to perish." Example (dṛṣṭānta): “those things which, born, then die, are
impermanent."
b. The argument: "Their nature is to arise and to perish," is proven by the remark: “In fact,
being born, they die."
c. "The saṁskāras are impermanent, in other words, their nature is to be born and to perish;"
"because, being born, they perish” “being impermanent, they are suffering, thus the arresting of
them is happiness:" this is what the Buddha intended to teach to his followers.
This is the stanza that Šakra uttered at the death of the Blessed One, Digha, TD 1, p.26c21;
Saṁyutta, i.158; Dialogues, ii.176; Jātaka, 94; Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 39; Manuscript Dutreuil de
Rhins, J. As. 1898, ii.300 (quoted in part, p. 108); Udānavarga, i.1; Mdo, 26, Anityatāsūtra; J.
Przyluski, Funerailles, p. 9.
314. A type of "nominal phrase."
315. Nāman manifests (dyotaka) unique self characteristics (svalakṣaṇa); pada manifests the
diverse relationships in which the thing whose self characteristic is known is to be found.
316. Compare Amarasimha, iii. Nānārthavarga, 25.
317. That is to say: "given a voice, a word-a dharma disassociated from the mind-arises" (vāci352 Chapter Two
satyam sa cittaviprayukta utpadyate).
318. This means that "a word-a dharma disassociated from the mind-arises with its vocal
sound in the process of arising: the vocal sound manifests it with a view to designating an object"
(ghoseṇotpadyamānena sa cittaviprayukto dharma utpadyate / sa taṁ prakāśayaty arthadyo-
tanāya).
319. Samyuktāgama, TD 2, p. 266b9. Saṁyutta, i.38: nāmasaṁniśritā gāthā. Gāthā is a "phrase"
(vākya); it depends on words, since it exists when sounds have arisen. Consequently, word and
phrase exist in and of themselves.
320. Mahavyutpatti, 245.319, has the word kṛtāvadhi.
321. Panktivat, “like a line of ants;" but the different ants which form the line exist at the same
time; we shall give a new example, cittānupūrvyavat, "like a succession of thoughts."
322. The dharmas which are of the sphere of consciousness of the Tathāgatas (tathāgata-
jñanagocarapatita) are tarkagamya.
323. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 71c25-72a29.
324. Phonemes, etc. are not "voice" by their nature. Nothing prevents their existing in
Ārūpyadhātu, but, as the voice is missing in this sphere of existence, they cannot be pronounced
there. The Vaibhāṣikas: But how can you say that they exist where they are not pronounced?
325. The words that designate good dharmas are not themselves good, for when a person who
has cut off the roots of good speaks of the good dharmas, he then possesses (prāpti) the words
which designate these dharmas.
326. Hsüan-tsang corrects: The präptis are of three types, kṣaṇika (i.38), outflowing, and
retribution.
327. The Vyākhyā makes the following remarks: a. There is no difference between hetu and
pratyaya, for the Blessed One said: dvau hetū dvau pratyayau samyagdṛṣṭer utpādāya / katamau
doan/paratas ca ghosodbyātamam ca yoniso manasikārab. (Anguttara, i.87: dve’me bbikkhave
paccayā sammādiṭṭhiya uppādāya . . . parato ca ghoso yoniso ca manasikāro).
b. Hetu, pratyaya, nidāna, kāraṇa, nimitta, linga, and upanișad are synonyms.
c. Why is a separate exposition of the hetus and the pratyayas given? Because the exposition
of the hetus includes an examination of its cause as "non-obstructing cause," "mutual cause,"
"parallel cause," etc. (ii.49); an exposition of the pratyayas includes an examination of its cause as
betu, immediately antecedent cause, etc. (ii.62).
328. See Abhidharmahṛdaya, TD 28, p. 811c17.
329. In what Sūtra are the six types of hetu taught? In fact the Abhidharma only explains,
appreciates, and comments on the Sūtra (sarvo hy abhidharmaḥ sūtrārthaḥ sūtranikasaḥ
sūtravyākhyānam).
The Vaibhāṣikas say that the Sūtra which treats of this point has disappeared (antarhita). The
Ekottaragama enumerates the dharmas up to the categories of one hundred dharmas; it does not
contain any more than ten categories up to ten (ādaśakāt) (See Introduction).
But there are some Sūtras which characterize each type of hetu, and the Vyākhyā furnishes
some examples borrowed, it would appear, from Saṁghabhadra (TD, 29, p. 79b16).
a) kāraṇahetu: “The visual consciousness arises by reason of the organ of the eye and visible
things" (Samyutta, iv.87, etc.).
(b) sahabhūhetu: “These three parts of the path accompany (anuvart) Right Views.” “Contact
is the coming together of the three; then there arises together sensation, ideas, and volition."Footnotes 353
(c) sabhāgahetu: "This person (pudgala) is endowed with good dharmas, and with bad
dharmas; his good dharmas may perish, his bad dharmas may develop, but an anusahagata root of
good is not cut off (asti cāsyānusahagataṁ kuśalamūlam asamucchinnam), from whence there
arises another root of good: this person, in the future, will become pure” (visuddhidharmā
bhavisyati, cp. Anguttara, iii.315).
In a similar context, Samyutta, iii.131 (compare Kathāvatthu, p. 215) has anusahagata which
Samghabhadra here translates exactly (sui chü hsing); this refers to a strong root of
good, indentified (Saṁghabhadra, TD 29, p. 99b19) with the purāṇa-anu-dhātu (?) (chiu sui
chieh) of the school of the Sthaviras.
But the MSS of the Vyākhyā have anusahagata and we see that, in the Bhāṣyam of iv.79d, the
Chinese translation of the Jñānaprasthāna gives the exact equivalent: wei chü hsing. In
this passage anusahagata is the equivalent of mydu-mrdu: "What are the roots of good termed
anusahagata? Those which are abandoned last of all when the roots of good have been broken;
those through the absence of which the roots of good are said to have been broken. (We have
seen above, p. 210, that, properly speaking, the roots of good are never broken off.)
(d) saṁprayuktakahetu: “Faith (śraddhā) has Seeing (darfana) for its root, and is associated
with avetyajñāna (vi.74): what this person knows (vijānāti), he penetrates to through prajñā
(prajānāti)."
(e) sarvatragahetu: "The bodily actions, the vocal actions, the volition, the resolution, and the
saṁskāras which follow the actions of a person who has false views (mithyādṛṣṭi, v.7), etc.,—all
these dharmas have for their consequence unhappiness and hideousness. Why? Because he has a
transgressed (pāpikā) view, namely false views." (Anguttara, v.212).
(f) vipäkahetu: “He shall savor the retribution of action done here . . ."
330. Since the consciousness of the Truths has taken place, the causes of the defilements are not
completed, because the präpti of the defilements is cut off by this consciousness.
331. Montaigne, iii.9: The princes give me much, if they show me nothing; and it is good enough
for me if they do not do me ill.
332. According to the text: āhārasamudayāt kāyasya samudayaḥ. Compare Samyutta, iii.62.
333. All cause should be an effect: kāraṇe sati kāryeṇa bhavitavyam.
334. The suffix vat in the sense of tadyatha.
335. One does not say that all the coexistent (sahabhū) dharmas are sahabhūhetu. For example,
derived (bhautika) rūpa, blue, etc., coexist with the primary elements: but it is not sahabhūhetu
with them. (See p. 259-260).
336. See i.24, ii.22, 65.
337. A conditioned dharma and its characteristics are sahabhūhetu among themselves; a dharma
is not sahabhūhetu with the characteristics of another dharma.
338. Vyākhyā: Upasaṁkhyānakaraṇaṁ ca mahāśāstratāpradarśanārthaṁ sopasaṁkhyānaṁ hi
vyākaraṇādi mahāśāstram dṛśyate.
339. The first part of this paragraph is based on the Vyākhyā.
340. The ten reasons are not always joined together. For example, in the case of the neutral mind
not destined to arise, its companions are companions for four reasons: (1)same time period, (2)
same result (puruṣakāra), (3) same nisyanda, and (4) same quality of being neutral.
341. Namely the undefiled-neutral (anivṛtāvyākṛta) mind after the second dhyāna; vitarka, vicāra,
the kuśalamahābhūmikas are missing from it.354 Chapter Two
342. The mind reigns (rājayate) over its anulakṣaṇas: these have no action (vyāpāra) over the
mind, as we have seen ii.46.
343. The Japanese editor refers to the Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 745a25. See below p. 265 and p. 273
where the same text is refered to.
The Prakaraṇa examines the relationship between the Four Truths and the belief in a self
(satkāyadṛṣṭi). The Vyākhyā gives the following extract:
A. There are Four Truths. Among the Truths, how many have satkāyadṛṣṭi for their cause
without being a cause of satkāyadṛṣṭi; how many are a cause of satkāyadṛṣṭi without having
satkāyadṛṣṭi for their cause; how many have satkāyadṛṣṭi for their cause and are at the same time
are a cause of satkāyadṛṣṭi; and how many do not have satkāyadṛṣṭi for their cause and are not a
cause of satkāyadṛṣṭi? Answer: Two Truths do not have satkāyadṛṣṭi for their cause and are not a
cause of satkayādṛṣṭi, namely the Truth of Extinction and the Truth of the Path; one must
distinguish the two other Truths.
B. The Truth of Suffering can (1) have satkāyadṛṣṭi for its cause without in turn being a cause
of satkāyadṛṣṭi; (2) have satkāyadṛșți for its cause and not be a cause of satkāyadṛṣṭi; and (3) not
have satkāyadṛṣṭi for its cause and not be a cause of satkāyadṛṣṭi: there are only three alternatives;
the second (to be a cause of satkāyadṛṣṭi without having satkāyadṛṣṭṭi for its cause) is missing.
1. To have satkāyadṛṣṭi for its cause without being a cause of satkāyadṛṣṭi are all the Truths of
defiled Suffering (that is to say, all the dharmas which are suffering and which are kliṣṭa) with the
exception of (a) the past and present defilements (anuśaya) which can be abandoned by the
Seeing of Suffering, and by the Truth of Suffering associated with these defilements (for example
the sensation associated with satkāyadṛṣṭi which is abandoned by the Seeing of Suffering); (b) the
future Truths of Suffering which are associated with satkāyadṛṣṭi (see p. 265 line 22); and (c) the
arising-old age-duration-impermanence of satkāyadṛsti and of the dharmas associated with this
belief (tatsaṁprayuktānāāṁ ca dharmāṇāṁ: these last words are omitted in certain recensions).
2. The Truth of Suffering which has been excluded in the preceeding paragraph has
satkāyadṛṣṭi for its cause and is a cause of satkāyadṛṣṭi.
3. The Truth of undefiled Suffering, (that is, the dharmas which are suffering but which are
good) do not have satkāyadṛṣṭi for their cause and are not a cause of satkāyadṛṣṭi.
The Chinese versions, TD 26, number 1541 (p. 673b20) and TD 26, number 1542 (p. 745a),
correspond to the preceeding texts. Some omissions (the phrases: "To this question, it answers,"
iti praśne visarjanaṁ karoti, and “There are only three alternatives; the second is missing,"
trikoṭikam, dvitīyā koṭir nāsti are missing). There are some sensible enough variations in the
definition of the dharmas which have satkāyadṛṣṭi for their cause and which are a cause of
satkāyadṛṣṭi: (a) past and present defilements which can be abandoned by the Seeing of Suffering,
and the Truth of the Suffering associated with these defilements (TD 26, number 1542: and the
Truth of Suffering associated, coexistent, etc., with these defilements), (b) past and present
universal (sarvatraga) defilements which can be abandoned by the Seeing of Arising, and the
Truth of Suffering which is associated with it (TD 27, number 1542: associated causes, mutually
coexistent causes, etc.), and (c) future Truth of Suffering which is associated with satkāyadṛṣṭi and
of the dharmas associated with it.
344. Where a mahābhūta is found, the other mahābhūtas are found also, etc.
245. I understand: "One moment (kṣaṇa) of the cakṣurindriya is a cause of simultaneous visual
consciousness."
346. See ii.59.
347. According to the samavisiṣṭayoḥ rule, ii.52d. The four non-material skandhas are “best” or
visista, whereas rūpa is "less good," nyūna.Footnotes
355
348. According Paramartha. Missing in Hsüan-tsang.
349. According to the opponent of the Vaibhāṣikas, the Prakaraṇa teaches that future satkāyadṛṣṭi
and the dharmas which are associated with it are at one and the same time the effect and the
cause of satkāyadṛṣṭi. Now future satkāyadṛṣṭi is neither a mutually coexistent cause (sahabhū),
nor an associated cause (saṁprayuktaka), nor retribution (vipāka); the rest, excluding kāraṇahetu,
are similar (sabhāga) and universal (sarvaga) causes.
For the Vaibhāṣikas, the Prakaraṇa speaks here, not of future satkāyadṛṣṭi, but of the dharmas
(sensation, etc.) associated with this satkāyadṛṣṭi as coexistent and associated cause, and the effect
of satkāyadṛṣṭi is considered as coexistent and associated causes.
We have three readings; in addition to the two readings quoted here, there is also the text:
anāgataṁ ca satkāyadṛṣṭisaṁprayuktaṁ duḥkhasatyaṁ sthāpayitvā: "with the exception, fur-
thermore, of the Truth of future Suffering and which is associated with satkāyadṛṣṭi.” (See note
343, section B.1.b).
350. See below note 365.
351. This means: "The dharma which is the cause of a certain dharma is never the non-cause of
this same dharma; the dharma which is the result of a certain dharma . . . ; the dharma (organ of
sight, etc.) which is the support of a certain dharma (visual consciousness, etc.) . . . ; the dharma
(color, etc.) which is the object of a certain dharma (visual consciousness) is never the non-object
of this same dharma.
352. According to Hsuan-tsang: "Cause refers to kāraṇa, sahabhū, saṁprayuktaka and
vipākahetus; result, the adhipati, puruṣakāra and vipākaphalas.” Paramārtha: "Cause refers to the
saṁprayuktakahetu, result, the adhipati and puruṣakāraphalas.
353. The paths of śraddhānusārin, śraddhādhimukta and samayavimukta are the paths of darśana,
bhāvanā (=Saikṣa) and Asaikṣa of the ascetics of weak faculties; the paths of dharmanusārin,
dṛṣṭiprāpta and asamayavimukta are respectively the same path of the ascetics of strong faculties.
354. The second of the first fifteen moments (darśanamārga, vi.27), produced in a lower stage, is
superior to the first moment in a higher stage, because it has for its causes (1) the cause of the
first moment, and (2) its own cause, and thus following; bhāvanāmārga has for its causes (1) the
causes of darśanamārga, and (2) its own causes; and the aśaikṣamārga has for its cause (1) the
causes of darśana and bhāvanāmārga, and (2) it own causes.
Furthermore, in bhāvanāmārga and aśaikṣamārga, the path destroys nine categories of
defilements, strong-strong, strong-mediocre, etc.; it is successively weak-weak, weak-mediocre,
weak-strong, mediocre-weak, etc. Now the weak-mediocre path has for its causes (1) the cause of
the weak-weak path, and (2) its own causes.
357. Vyākhyā: tuśabdo'vadhāraṇe bhinnakramaś ca.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 80b22. Kathāvatthu, vii.2 on the sampayuttas.
355. One can say that the path of śraddhānusārin is the sabhāgahetu of six paths. This thesis gives
rise to a discussion in which the master Vasumitra wrongly maintains that a śraddhānusārin is
capable of making his faculties strong. (Vyākhyā).
356. Paramartha: The masters say. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 89b5.
358. Sama can be understood as tulya, parallel; this is why the author states it precisely.
359. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 81b9, mentions six opinions on this point.
360. The defilements susceptible of being abandoned by the Seeing of Arising, Extinction and the356 Chapter Two
Path, and by Meditation, proceed from the universal causes suceptible of being abandoned by the
Seeing of Suffering. The defilements susceptible of being abandoned by the Seeing of
Suffering, Extinction and the Path, and by Meditation, proceed from the universal causes
susceptible of being abandoned by the Seeing of Arising.
361. They are called "universals" (sarvaga), because they go towards (gacchanti), "occupy"
(bhajante), and have for their object (ālambante) all categories of defilement; or because they are
the cause (hetubhāvaṁ gacchanti) of all categories of defilement.
362. See above p. 259.
363. Since the text has "the defiled dharmas," without specifying otherwise, this refers to the
defiled dharmas of the Prthagjanas and the Āryans.
364. This refers to the neutral saṁskṛtas, nivṛtāvyakṛta and anivṛtāvyākṛta, not to the two neutral
asaṁskṛtas, space and apratisaṁkhyānirodha.
365. The word "future” is missing in Paramartha. See above P.
259.
366. Hsuan-tsang translates: "How should one explain the Prajñaptipādaśāstra,” for “this Bhāṣya
of the Prajnapti" signifies “this explanation that one reads in the Prajñapti." See the Tibetan
version of the Karmaprajñapti, Chap. ix. (Mdo. 63, fol. 229b-236a): Para. 1. Does there exist a
past volition which arises from a past cause, but not from a future cause, nor from a present
cause? ... Para.2: Do there exists good dharmas which arise from good causes? . . . Do there
exist neutral dharmas which arise from bad causes? Yes: (1) the dharmas which are the
retribution of bad action; (2) the dharmas of Kāmadhātu associated with satkāyadṛṣṭi and
antagrāhadṛṣṭi. Para. 3. Do there exist good dharmas which arise solely from good causes? Yes:
the volition associated with the parts of Bodhi... Do there exist bad dharmas which arise solely
from bad causes? . . .”
We know through J. Takakusu (JPTS. 1905, p. 77) that the Karmaprajñapti no longer exists
in Chinese. TD 26, number 1538 is the Kāraṇaprajñapti, TD 32, number 1644 is a treatise
analogous to the Lokaprajñapti: one will find a summary of these two Prajñaptis in Cosmologie
bouddhique, p. 295-350.
367. "At the moment when he falls from detachement, the bad volition of the Āryan has solely
bad dharmas for its cause, causes in the quality of sahabhū and saṁprayuktakahetu, it does not
have neutral dharmas for its cause since the Aryan has abandoned satkāyadṛṣṭi and
antagrāhadṛṣṭi:” such is the interpretation of the objector.
368. Self power (svaśakti) is lacking in neutral dharmas, and a co-factor (sahakārikāraṇa) is
lacking in pure dharmas. See iii.36b.
369. Mahävyutpatti, 245.181.
370. Here Hsüan-tsang has some remarks missing in Paramārtha:
According to the Vaibhāṣikas, the prefix vi indicates difference: vipāka signifies “a different
pāka” (Mahāvyutpatti, 245.182). That is to say only the vipākahetu gives forth a pāka or result
not similar to itself. Sahabhū, saṁprayuktaka, sabhāga, and sarvatragahetus give forth results
similar to themselves (good, bad, neutral); kāraṇahetu gives forth a dissimilar result: vipākahetu
is never neutral but its result is always neutral.
(According to the Sautrantikas,) a result receives the name of vipāka under two conditions: it
should be produced by the last state of the evolution of a series (saṁtānapariṇāmaviśeṣa; see
above p. 211); and it should more or less last a long time by reason of the more or less great force
of its cause. Now, the results that have issued from sahabhū and samprayuktakahetu do not
present the first characteristic, for these causes project and realize their result at the same time asFootnotes 357
they (ii.59); and the results that have issued from the three causes, kāraṇa, sabhāga, and
sarvatragahetu, do not present the second characteristic; for there is no limit to the arising
repeated by these results during the length of their transmigration. Consequently the sole
explanation of vipāka is “transformation (vipariņāma?) and maturation."
371. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 97c7. (Hsüan-tsang: "the action which produces the vital organ, etc.” Et
cetera refers to either nikāyasabhāga or its characteristics).
The Ācārya Vasumitra does not admit this proposition. The vital organ of life (jīvitendriya) is
the result of an action which projects an existence (ākṣepakakarman, iv.95). If the retribution
which constitutes this organ matures (vipacayate) in Kāmadhātu, one necessarily has kāya-indriya
and jivita-indriya in the first stages of his embryonic life; in the last stages five other organs
(indriya) are added. If the vital organ matures in Rūpadhātu, one has seven āyatanas; in
Arūpyadhātu, one has manāyatana and dharmāyatana. Yaśomitra discusses these remarks and
quotes Samghabhadra. The propositions combatted by Vasumitra refers to Ārūpyadhātu: at a
certain moment, there is no mind (manaāyatana) which is retribution for a being born in this
sphere.
372. Never twelve, for the sabdayatana is never retribution (i.37b-c).
373. The retribution of a former action can have begun, can continue in the present moment, and
can prolong itself in the future.
374. The Japanese editor gives the heroic career of the Bodhisattva as an example of a prolonged
action.
375. Compare ii.59.
376. Disconnection (visamyoga) or visaṁyogaphala (ii.57d, vi.46), is pratisaṁkhyānirodha or
Nirvāņa (i.6), one of the unconditioned things (asaṁskṛṛta). It does not have a cause, and it is not
a result; but it is a cause (kāraṇahetu, ii.50a) and it is a result (ii.57d).
377. Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 716b9, which can be reconstructed: phaladharmāḥ katame / sarve
saṁskṛtāḥ pratisaṁkhyānirodhaś ca / na phaladharmāḥ katame / ākāśam apratisaṁkhyāniro-
dhaḥ / saphaladharmāḥ katame / sarve saṁskṛtāḥ / aphaladharmāḥ katame / sarve 'saṁskṛtāḥ:
"What dharmas are result? All conditioned things and pratisaṁkhyānirodha. What dharmas are
not result? Space and apratisaṁkhyānirodha. What dharmas have a result? All conditioned
things. What dharmas do not have a result? All unconditioned things." See also Jñānaprasthān,
TD 26, p. 941bll.
378. Milinda, 268-271.
379. Anantaryamārga cuts off defilements and is followed by vimuktimārga, "the path in which
the defilement is already cut off," within which the ascetic takes possession (prāpti) of
disconnection, vi.28.
380. Certain masters maintain that there are five types of causes: (1) kāraka, efficient cause, the
seed of the bud; (2) jñāpaka, indicating cause, the smoke of the fire; (3) vyañjaka, revealing cause,
the lamp on the pot; (4) dhvaṁsaka, destructive cause, the hammer on the pot; and (5) prāpaka,
the adducent cause.
381. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 2a22: ye hetavo ye pratyayā . . . vijñānasyotpādāya te py anityāḥ.
382. In the pages which follow, Vasubandhu does not do full justice to the arguments of the
Sarvāstivādins-Vaibhāṣikas; he does not mention the texts, for example Udāna, viii.3 (Itivuttaka,
43, Udānavarga, xxvi.21), which at least renders the reality of Nirvāṇa likely. Saṁghabhadra
refutes Vasubandhu and the other masters who deny unconditioned things (Nyāyānusāra, TD 29,358 Chapter Two
p. 431b17-c2). His exposition is too long to include here: we have given a partial translation of it
in the Introduction.
383. a. The extinction of anuśaya is the Extinction of the Arising of Suffering (samudaya-
satyanirodha, Extinction of what is, in truth, the Arising of Suffering): sopadhifeṣanirvāṇa.
The Extinction of Arising or existence (janman) is the Extinction of Suffering (duḥkha-
satyanirodha, Extinction of what is, in truth, Suffering): nirupadhifeșanirvāṇa.
b. Anusaya means the traces (vāsanā) of the ninety-eight anuśayas described in Chapter V.
384. According to the Japanese editor, the Sthaviras.
385. According to the Japanese editor, the Mahasāṁghikas.
386. Svarasanirodhāt, not by the force of prajñā, as is the case for pratisamkhyānirodha.
387. Compare Kathāvatthu, xix.1.
388. That is, chanda (future desire: anāgate prārthanā) and rāga (attachment to what one
possesses: prāpte'rthe'dhyavasanam)
389. The prahāṇa of rūpa is to be understood as ānantaryamārga, and parijñā is to be understood
as vimuktimārga (vi.30). (Gloss of the Japanese editor).
Compare Samyutta, iii.8 (for its doctrine).
390. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 222c4: ye kecid bhikṣavo dharmāḥ saṁskṛtā vā asaṁskṛtā vā virāgas
tesām agra đkbyayate (quoted in Vyākbyā, iv.127) Anguttara, iii.34, Itivuttaka, Para. 90: yêvata
Cundi dhammā saṁkhatā vā asaṁkhatā vā virāgo tesaṁ aggam akkhāyati.
"Detachement" or virāga is rāgakṣaya, pratisaṁkhyānirodha, nirvāṇa. Nirvāṇa is better than
apratisamkhyanirodha and space (iv.127d).
391. Hsuan-tsang differs: One can not say from its non-existence that it exists. The value of the
verb "to be" is thus proven (:this verb does not signify "to exist”). It is thus that Scripture states
that they are unconditioned things.
392. Vyākhyā: tasya virodhasya yo'yam prāpter niyamaḥ / asyaiva nirodhasya präptir nänyasyeti
// tasmin prāptiniyame ko hetuḥ//na hi nirodhasya praptyā sārdhaṁ kaścit sambandho'sti
hetuphaladibhāvāsambhavāt.
393. Dṛṣṭadharmanirvāṇaprāpta, that is "which is to be found in Nirvāṇa with residue"
(sopadhiśeşanirvāṇastha).
394. A varient of the end of Mahāvastu, ii.285: etam fantam etam pranītam yathāvas etam
aviparītam yam idam sarvopadhipratiniḥsargo sarvasaṁskāraśamatho dharmopacchedo tṛṣ-
ṇākṣayo virago nirodho nirvāṇam.
We have Anguttara i.100: parikkhaya pahāṇa khaya vaya virāga nirodha cāga paținissagga;
v.421: asesavirāga nirodha cāga paținissagga mutti anālaya; Saṁyutta, i.136: sabbasaṁkhārasa-
matha . . . ; Itivuttaka, 51: upadhippaținissagga. See also the Sanskrit versions of Majjhima, i.497
in Pischel, Fragments of Indikutsari, p. 8 (vyantibhāva) and Avadānaśataka, ii.187 (vāntībhāva).
395. In other words, aprādurbhava = nāsmin prādurbhāvaḥ. This is an adhikaraṇasādhana
etymology. The Sautrāṇtikas understand aprādurbhāva as aprādurbhūti (an abhāvasādhana
etymology).
The explanation of the Sarvāstivādins is reproduced in Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 525, and
attributed to the philosophy which considers Nirvāṇa as a bhāva, a padārtha similar to a dike
which arrests the process of the defilements, action and arising.
396. In fact the Path destroys the Arising of Suffering, duḥkhasamudaya. Who could imagine a
thing in and of itself called nirodha with respect to the Path?Footnotes 359
397. Dīgha, ii.157; Samyutta, i.159; Theragathā, 906:
Pajjotasseva nibbānam vimokho cetaso abū.
The Sanskrit redaction (Avadānaśataka, 99, Madhyamakavṛtti, 520, Dulva, Nanjio, 118, apud
J. Przyluski, J.As. 1918, ii.490, 509):
pradyotasyeva nirvāṇaṁ vimokṣas tasya cetasaḥ.
This happens at the moment of Nirvāṇa-without-residue. The definition bhavanirodha
nibbānam, Anguttara, v.9, Samyutta, ii.116, etc.
398. See Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 161a10. We read in Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 716a3, a definition that can
be reconstructed: avastukā apratyayā dharmāḥ katame? asaṁskṛtā dharmāḥ (see i.7).
399. This is the text quoted ad i.7.
400. The Vyākhyā ad i.7 (Petrograd edition, p. 22) reproduces all these explanations.
401. The Japanese editor quotes the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, P. 629c4.
There are five types of results: 1. nişyandaphala, 2. vipākaphala, 3. visamyogaphala, 4.
puruṣakāraphala, 5. adhipatiphala.
a. nişyandaphala: good produced by good, bad produced by bad, and neutral produced by
neutral.
b. vipākaphala: vipāka is produced by bad or good-impure dharmas; if the cause is good or
bad, the result is always neutral. As this result is different from its cause and has "matured"
(pāka), it is called vipāka (visadṛśa pāka).
c. visamyogaphala: The ānantaryamārgas cut off the defilements; they have the cutting off of
the defilements for their visamyogaphala and puruṣakāraphala; they have the vimuktimārga for
their nişyandaphala and puruṣakāraphala; and they have all the former paths, equal or higher
than their types, for their nisyandaphala.
See also the Abhidharmāvatāraśāstra (TD 28, p. 988b12) ii.14, where the names of the results
are explained.
402. iv.85a-b, 110a.
403. The "receptacle" or physical world (bhājanaloka, iii.45, iv.1) is produced by the good and bad
actions of the totality of living beings: it is neutral; however it is not retribution vipāka), because
retribution is a dharma “belonging to living beings" (p. 289); consequently, it is the adhipatiphala
of actions considered as kāraṇahetu.
404. Missing in Paramartha.
405. The prefix ud in udbhava signifies “later" (uttarakāla). Absorption (samadhi) produces an
increase of the primary elements of the body: these primary elements are called "of increase"
(aupacayika) because they arise either at the same time as the absorption, or immediately after;
they are not retribution. In this way a mind that can create fictive beings (nirmāṇacitta, i.37,
vii.48) is neutral, belonging to a living being, created by a definite action (i.e., an absorption); but,
arising immediately after the absorption, it is not retribution. Furthermore, the result of
retribution always belongs to the same stage as the action from whence it proceeds.
406. Good dharmas are not the sabhāgahetu of defiled dharmas, etc.
407. The mind at death (maraṇacitta) of a being who dies in Kāmadhātu can have for its virile
result the first moment of an intermediary being of Rūpadhātu. These examples show the
difference between the puruṣakāraphala and the outflowing result (nişyandaphala). Four cases: 1.
puruṣakāraphala which is not nisyandaphala: examples as above; 2. nişandaphala, the result of
sabhāga and sarvatraga causes which do not immediately follow; 3. nisyanda and puruṣakāraphala,
parallel result, of the same stage, but immediate; 4. neither of the two: fruit of retribution.360 Chapter Two
408. See ii.56b and iv.85.
409. Compare ii.55a-b.
410. These definitions are given later (vi.22a7) in the original. De La Vallée Poussin placed them
here for the convenience of the reader.
411. The dharma always exists, whether it is in the past, the present or the future. We say that it
takes or projects a result at the moment when, becoming present, it becomes the cause or seed of
a result. The Vyākhyā observes that the comparison of the seed is a Sautrāntika theory. Also "this
reading does not exist in certain manuscripts" (kvacit pustake nästy esa pāṭhaḥ). Moreover the
Vyākhyā explains: pratigrhṇantīty ākṣipanti hetubhāvenopatisthanta ity arthaḥ.
412. On this subtle point, see Samghabhadra, Nyāyāvatāra, TD 29, 98a3.
413. According to the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, 1 P.
89b13.
414. The last prāptis of good that one cuts off, namely the praptis of the roots of good which are
weak-weak (mṛdumṛdu) project their result (phalaparigrahaṁ kurvanti), but they do not give
forth their result (nisyandaphala), since the “good” moment in which they should give forth or
engender (janya) it is lacking.
415. Vasubhandhu criticizes the doctrines of the Vaibhāṣikas. In fact, this paragraph is poorly
worded (sāvadya): when a person again takes up the roots of good, he acquires, tri-temporally, the
prāptis of the roots of good: the past prāptis acquired at this moment give forth their result, but
they do not grasp it: for they have already grasped it; but how can one say that present prāptis do
not grasp their result? Thus the proposed definition is lacking precision. Samghabhadra defends
the reading of the Vibhāṣā.
416. Compare Abhidharmahṛdaya, ii.12-15.
417. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 79a26: “It is true that these six causes (hetu) are not mentioned in the
Sūtras; the Sūtra only says that there are four pratyayatās."
The Japanese editor quotes Mahāyāna sources, TD 16 number 716 (trans. by Dharmagupta),
the Ghanavyuha, TD 16 number 717 (trans. by Hsüan-tsang), and the Madhyamaka-kärikā (see
Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 76).
With respect to the relation of the hetus and the pratyayas, the first master of the Vibhāṣā
says that (1) the hetupratyaya includes five hetus, with the exception of kāraṇahetu, and (2)
kāraṇahetu includes the other three pratyayas. The second master of the Vibhāṣā says that (1)
hetupratyaya includes five hetus, and (2) kāraṇahetu is only adhipatipratyaya: this is the system
adopted by Vasubandhu. In the Mahāyāna, sabhāgahetu is at one and the same time hetupratyaya
and adhipatipratyaya, whereas the other five hetus are adhiptipratyaya.
The Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 712b12, enumerates four pratyayas. The Vijñānakāya, TD 26, p.
547b22, defines them as functions of the vijñānas: "What is the hetupratyaya of a visual
consciousness? The coexistent (sahabhi) and associated (saṁprayukta) dharmas. What is its
samanantarapratyaya? The mind and its mental states to which it is equal and immediate, the
visual consciousness arisen and arising. What is its ālambanapratyaya? Visible things. What is its
adhipatipratyaya? All the dharmas, with the exception of itself... Of what is the visual
consciousness the hetupratyaya? Of the coexistent and associated dharmas. Of what is it the
samanantarapratyaya? Of the minds and mental states, arisen or arising, equal and immediate to
this visual consciousness. Of what is it the alambanapratyaya? Of the minds and mental states
which grasp it for an object. Of what is it the adhipatipratyaya? Of all the dharmas with the
exception of itself."
The four pratyayas are defined in the Abhidharmahṛdaya, ii.16, as in our book: the
hetupratyaya includes the five hetus; and adhipatipratyaya corresponds to kāraṇahetu.Footnotes 361
For the paccayas of the Abhidhamma, the Dukapaṭṭhāna appears to be the capital authority.
Its points of contact with the Abhidharma are numerous, but the nomenclature differs; for
example, the sahajātādhipatipaccaya is our sahabhūhetu. See also Kathāvatthu, xv.1-2.
418. Namely pratyayaprakāra, as one says gotā, a type of cow (Vyākhyā).
419. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 52a8 and following, the second masters.
420. This refers to avijñaptirūpa. When, after having undertaken the Prātimokṣasaṁvara (an
avijñaptirūpa in Kāmadhātu), a person enters into impure (sāsrava) dhyāna, he produces the
saṁvara of dhyāna (an avijñaptirāpa in Rūpadhātu), whereas the avijñaptirūpa in Kāmadhātu
continues to reproduce itself (see iv.17b-c).
421. In the case where, having undertaken the Prātimokṣasaṁvara, a person enters into pure
dhyāna.
422. This is the second opinion presented in the Vibhāṣā. When, after having eaten, a person falls
asleep or enters into absorption, there arises at the same time a rūpa of increase produced by
sleep or absorption (see i.37).
423. On the Bhadanta, the Sautrāntika Sthavira (Vyākhyā), see note 93. Fourth opinion of the
Vibhāṣā.
424. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 52a21, gives two opinions. Vasubandhu presents the second.
425. Simultaneous dharmas, presenting neither anteriority nor posteriority, cannot be in and of
themselves samanantarapratyaya.
426. The first masters of the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 51b15. Hsüan-tsang: "He infers from the past
and from the present, but sees in a direct manner."
427. Vibhāṣā, ibid. and p. 897b9.
428. Hsuan-tsang: The Blessed One sees that such a result arises from such a past action: such a
dharma immediately arises from such a dharma; that, from such a past action, there arises such a
result: from such a dharma there immediately arises such a dharma. Having seen in this manner,
he is capable of knowing, with regard to future confused dharmas that such a dharma will
immediately arise after such a dharma. Although he knows in this manner, this is not a
knowledge from induction, for the Blessed One, infering according to the sequence of the arising
of the causes and effects of the past and the present, knows then by a direct seeing the confused
dharmas of the future and says, “In the future, such a being will accomplish such an action, and
shall receive such a retribution." This is pranidhijñāna, not anumānajñāna.
429. Second opinion of the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 897b26; the third opinion presented in the
Nyāyāvatāra, TD 29, p. 444b23.
Paramartha (TD 29, p. 194b10) differs: "There is, in the series of beings, a certain
conditioned dharma associated with the mind which is an indication of the future result."
Nyāyāvatāra: "There is presently, within beings, an indication of the causes and results of the
future, similar to a prognostic sign (yin-hsiang E, chaya nimitta), or rather a rūpa, or a
samskāra disassociated from the mind."
; Hsüan-tsang: hsien-chao
,
Paramartha and the Nyāyāvarāra: hsien-hsiang
presage or omen.
430. Japanese editor: by means of the lokadhatusaṁvṛtijñāna (vii.3).
431. Hsuan-tsang: If it were thus, the Buddha would know the future by reason of indications
(chan-hsiang
)...362 Chapter Two
432. According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 52c12; compare Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 764a28 and following.
433. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 983b13.
434. The first two opinions of the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 57a14. Third opinion: the mind is bound to
its support in the past, the present, and the future.
435. According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p..703a3 and following.
436. Hsüan-tsang: "because they cause a result arisen at the same time as they have to possess
operation."
437. Compare Abhidharmahṛdaya, TD 28, P.
812a27.
438. Vyākhyā: İśvara, Puruṣa, Pradhāna, time (kāla), unique or self nature (svabhāva), atoms, etc.
439. Compare Bodhicaryāvatāra, ix. 119; Saddarśanasaṁgraha, p. 11; the Suhṛllekha (JPTS, 1886),
50, etc.
440. Śloka of Vyāsa in the Satarudrīya (Vyākhyā), Mahābhārata, vii.203, 140, xiii, 161.7: yan
nirdahati yat tīkṣṇo yad ugro yat pratāpavān / māṁsaśoṇitamajjādo yat tato rudra ucyate.
Burnouf, Introduction, p. 568, has mentioned this quotation.
441. Vipāka and puruṣakāraphala.
442. Addition of Hsüan-tsang.
443. On the bhūtas, i.12, ii.22.
444. Hsuan-tsang adds that these five causes are all varities of karaṇahetu.
See Vyākhyā, i.11, where the causal relationship between the bhūtas which form part of the
person (āśraya), and that type of bhautika which is avijñapti, is explained.
445. These definitions according to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 663a28. Saṁghabhadra, TD 29, p. 452a19
and following, presents other explanations, and gives other examples.
446. See above ad 59d. First pratiṣṭhāphala.
447. The doctrine of the twelve minds is presented in Vijñānakāya TD 26, p. 593b7 and in the
work of Dharmatrāta, TD 28, p. 954b12 and following: "In Kâmadhātu, four; in Rūpadhātu and
Ārūpyadhātu, three each, also Šaikṣa and Asaikṣa engender nine and it is produced by eight ...
"There follows (kārikās 35-46) the doctrine of twenty minds (Kośa, ii.71b-72) which includes the
exposition, in kārikās, of the rules of succession of the minds. Vasubandhu contents himself, as we
shall see, with giving a bhāṣyam; but Yaśomitra, under the name of samgrahaślokas, furnishes us
with a versified redaction of them which perhaps preserves for us a fragment of the original text
of Dharmatrāta.
448. Compare Kathāvatthu, xiv.1. where the Theravadins maintain, against the Mahāsāṁghikas,
that good is not followed by bad, etc.
449. The four estrangements are afraya, ākāra, ālambana, and pratipakṣadūratā:
a. Persons (aśraya) of Arūpyadhātu cannot "manifest" (sammukhīkar), or assimilate to
themselves, any dharma of Kāmadhātu, whereas beings in Rūpadhātu manifest, or assimilate to
themselves a mind capable of creating fictive beings (nirmāṇcitta) of Kāmadhātu (ii.53b).
b. The mind of the sphere of Ărūpyadhātu does not apply to Kāmadhātu the categories
(ākāra) of "grosser,” etc. (vi.49) as does a mind of the sphere of Rūpadhātu.
c. And in the same way, it does not grasp Kāmadhātu as an object (ālambana).
d. And in the same way it does not oppose the defilements of Kāmadhātu as do the Dhyānas.
On four other estrangements, vi.62.Footnotes 363
450. That is to say 1. śrutamaya, 2. cintāmaya, 3. bhāvanāmaya, produced by hearing or study, by
reflection, and by absorption. One and two exist in Kamadhatu, one and three in Rupadhatu, and
three in Arupyadhatu, as we have seen above p. 269-270 and following; compare p. 322.
451. This is the kusala of which a being, who is reborn in Kāmadhātu or Rūpadhātu, obtains
possession (prāpti) at the moment of the arising of antarābḥava (antarābhavaprastisaṁ-
dhikṣaṇe); at the moment of arising for a being who is reborn in Ārūpyadhātu.
452. A list of the silpathānakarmasthānas (Mahāvyutpatti, 76.5) is quoted in the Divyavadana, p.
58, 100: the art of riding on the head of an elephant, on the back of a horse, the art of archery, etc.
453. The visible things, etc. (1) of the bed and the body, etc. (2) of instruments (bow, arrow, etc.),
and (3) of the thing that one wants to create.
454. Because one learns the arts by listening to instruction. Vipākaja is not mentioned here; thus
it has the five bhautikas, visible things, etc., for its object.
455. In fact the mind relative to walking, etc., takes place after one has seen, felt, etc. Hsüan-tsang
corrects the Bhasya: "Four or five sense consciousnesses are preparatory to airyāpathika and to
śailpasthānika respectively." One should understand that the auditory consciousness is lacking for
airyapathika.
457. Hsüan-tsang: "through airyāpathika and śailpasthānika."
458. First mind of the intermediary existence (antarabhava) of Rūpadhātu.
:
456. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 661a16. The Bhadanta Anantavarman (Vyākhyā ad ii.46c-d), in his
Explanation of the Vibhāṣā (Vibhāṣāvyākhyāna), presents the opinion according to which one
should admit the anivṛtāvyākṛtas not included within the four abovementioned avyākṛtas, namely
the anivṛtāvyākṛtas defined vii.51.
459. By an effort of imagination, by virtue of a decision, the ascetic sees the body as the body really
is not, namely as being made up only of rotten bones, etc.: this is the meditation on the repulsive,
aśubha. In the same way, in the ṛddhis (vii.48), the ascetic imagines that the earth element is
small, and that the water element is great (compare Digha, ii.108).
460. Samyuktāgama, TD 2, p. 197b3: aśubhāsahagataṁ smṛtisaṁbodhyangam bhāvayati.
"Mindfulness" forms part of the Path; sahagata signifies "immediately following."
461. The Vibhāṣā discusses whether the kusala mind of which one thus takes possession is solely
upapattiprātilambhika (acquired through birth), or also prayogika (acquired through effort).
462. This is a kārikā from the hand of Dharmatrāta, TD 28, p. 944bll-12: “If one obtains nine
types of dharmas, he should know that this is with a kliṣṭa mind; the kuśala mind obtains six
types; the avyākṛta mind, avyākṛta” (Trans. of Saṁghavarman). Paramārtha: “When the kliṣṭa
mind is produced, one obtains, it is said, nine types of mind; with the kuśala mind . . .” (TD 28, p.
198a6).HA SEPERT
VASUBANDHU , POUSSIN PRUDEN
ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYAM
ABP
Teles
CBEDUAR
KOSA
BHASYAM
VASUBANDHU
TRANSLATED INTO FRENCH BY LOUIS DE LA VALLÉE POUSSIN
ENGLISH VERSION BY LEO M. PRUDEN★
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam
Volume IIAbhidharmakośabhāṣyam
of Vasubandhu
Volume II
Translated into French by Louis de La Vallée Poussin
English Version by Leo M. Pruden
ASIAN HUMANITIES PRESS
[An imprint of Jain Publishing Company]
Web Site - www.jainpub.comASIAN HUMANITIES PRESS
Asian Humanities Press offers to the specialist and the general reader alike the best in
new translations of major works and significant original contributions to enhance our
understanding of Asian religions, cultures and thought.
Vasubandhu.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
[Abhidharmakośabhāṣya. English]
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam / [translated] by Louis de La Vallée Poussin; English
translation by Leo M. Pruden. Berkeley, Calif.: Asian Humanities Press, 1988-
1990.
4 v.; 23 cm.
Translation of: Abhidharmakośabhāṣya.
Includes bibliographies.
ISBN 0-89581-913-9 (set).
1. Vasubandhu. Abhidharmakośa. 2. Abhidharma. I. La Vallée Poussin,
Louis de, 1869-1938. II. Title.
BQ2682.ESP78 1988
294.3'824-dc19
87-71231
AACR 2 MARC
Copyright 1991 by Asian Humanities Press. All rights reserved. No part of this book may
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the written
permission of Asian Humanities Press except for brief passages quoted in a review.Translator's Introduction
This work is Volume II of a translation of Vasubandhu's Abhi-
dharmakośabhāṣyam, a work first translated into French by the great
Belgian scholar Louis de La Vallée Poussin, and now here translated into
English from the French and the Sanskrit.
This present volume contains Chapter III and Chapter IV of the
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam.
Chapter III, the Loka-nirdesa of "Instruction concerning the World"
is a description of the physical world, its inhabitants, and its various
hells and the heavens of the gods.
Some interesting topics are raised in Chapter III: how rebirth or
transmigration takes place; an analysis of each of the parts of the schema
of dependent origination; whether there can be such a thing as
premature death in a world ruled by karma; the various measurements
of time and space; the cosmic cycle or kalpa; and the career of the
Bodhisattva. There is also a discussion of whether there are one or many
Buddhas in the cosmos, a recurring debate topic in Far Eastern
Buddhism. This chapter also contains a discussion on whether the
intermediate state of existence (antarabhava) exists or not. This
intermediate state is well known to students of Tibetan Buddhism as the
bardo state, a state discussed at length in the Tibetan Book of the Dead.
Chapter III is a very interesting chapter.
Chapter IV, the Karma-nirdeśa or "Instruction concerning Karma"
is, as its title indicates, a presentation of the Buddhist teaching of karma,
or consciously willed action, its moral tone, and its subsequent results.
This Chapter contains the teaching on the precepts for the seven types
of Buddhist believers, both lay and clerical; it also contains a discussion
of avijñaptirūpa, the physical matter that does not inform anyone of its
presence except through the cultivation of morality. The concept of
avijñaptirūpa later became an important topic of discussion in Far
Eastern Buddhism.
Vasubandhu was also concerned with the nature of karma and of the
problem of the subsistence of the influence of karma, given theBuddhist teaching of the non-substantiality and perpetual imper-
manence of all things. In order to discuss this matter further,
Vasubandhu also composed a work, the Karmasiddhi-prakarana, which
has recently been published in an English translation. ¹
Chapter IV is a very important chapter, detailing as it does the
moral life of the Community, and its related philosophical problems.
Leo M. Pruden
1. See the Karmasiddhi Prakaraṇa, the Treatise of Action by Vasubandhu, by Etienne Lamotte,
English translation by Leo M. Pruden, Asian Humanities Press, Berkeley, 1988.CONTENT S
Chapter Three: The World
I. Living Beings and the Physical World: Introduction
A. The Three Dhātus
1. General Comments
2. Kāmadhātu.
3. Rūpadhātu.
4. Ārūpyadāatu
5. Definition of Terms
6. Characteristics of Dharmas and Minds in
the Three Dhātus
B. The Five Realms of Rebirth
C. The Seven Abodes of Consciousness
D. The Nine Dwellings of Sentient Beings
E. The Four Abodes of Consciousness
II. The Variety of Sentient Beings; Their
Transmigration
A. The Four Types of Birth
B. Intermediate Existence
C. Discussion: Does Intermediate
Existence Exist?
Proof from Reasoning
Proof from Scripture
D. The Form of the Intermediate Existence
E. The Characteristics of Intermediate
Existence
F. How Transmigration Takes Place
a. Its Support
G. Intermediate Existence and the Four Methods
of Entering the Womb
a. Three Methods
H. The Doctrine of No-Soul, Intermediate
Existence, and Transmigration
365
365
365
365
365
366
368
369
371
374
378
378
380
380
383
383
383
386
390
392
394
395
397
398
399III. Dependent Origination and Transmigration
A. The Twelve Parts of Dependent Origination
and the Three Time Periods; the Two Time
Periods
B. Nature of the Twelve Parts of
Dependent Origination
C. The Four Types of Dependent Origination
D. Dependent Origination Applied Only to
Sentient Beings
E. Cause and Result and Dependent Origination
in the Three Time Periods
1. Defilement, Action, and Foundation
2. Their Eternal and Mutual
Interdependence
F. Pratityasamutpäda versus Pratītyasamutpanna
G. Definition of the Term Pratītyasamutpāda
H. Ignorance
1. Is Ignorance a Substantial Entity?
I. Nāmarūpa
J. Contact
1. The Six Types of Contact: Are Any of
Them Substantial Entities?
2. Actual and Denominational Contact
3. The Six Types of Contact and the Three
Types of Contact
K. Sensation
The Six Types of Sensation
2. The Relationship Between Contact and
Sensation
3. The Eighteen Upavicāras
4. The Eighteen Upavicāras and the
Three Dhātus
5. Varient Opinions Concerning the
Eighteen Upavicāras
L. A Summary Presentation of the Remaining
Items in Dependent Origination
401
401
404
405
406
406
407
409
413
419
419
422
423
423
423
425
425
426
426
427
431
433
436
437IV. The Lifespan and the Death of Sentient Beings
A. The Four Types of Food
B. The Consciousness at Death
C. The Three Categories of Beings
V. The Physical World; The Size and Lifespans of
Sentient Beings
A. The Three Cakras
B. The Nine Mountains
C. The Eight Oceans
D. The Four Continents
E. The Geography of Jambudvipa
F. The Hells
1. The Eight Hot Hells
a. The Sixteen Utsadas of Hell
b. The Guardians of the Hells
2. The Eight Cold Hells
G. The Dwelling Place of Animals and Pretas
H. The Sun and the Moon
I. The Heavens and Their Various Gods
1. General Remarks
2. The Four Terraces of Mt. Sumeru
3. The Heaven of the Thirty-three Gods
4. The Gods of Aerial Abodes
5. Sex Among the Gods
6. Birth as a God; the Size and Speech of
the Gods
7. Arising of Desire and Arising of Pleasure
8. The Location of the Various Heavens
9. The Rising and Falling of Gods and
Humans
J. The Dimensions of the Heavens
K. The Cosmos
L. The Size of Human Bodies
M. The Lifespan of Humans
1. The Lifespan of Beings in Pleasurable
Realms of Rebirth
439
439
447
448
451
451
452
454
455
455
456
456
457
458
459
460
460
462
462
462
463
465
465
465
466
467
467
468
468
469
470
470a. Kāmadhātu
b. Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu
2. The Lifespan of Beings in Painful
Realms of Rebirth
3. Premature Death
VI. The Dimensions of Time and Space; the Cosmic
Cycle
A. The Method of Calculating Space (Physical
Matter) and Time
1. The Smallest Dimension of Physical Matter,
Words, and Time
2. The Dimensions of Space
3. The Dimensions of Time
B. The Four Kalpas
1. General Remarks
2. The Kalpa of Disappearance
3. The Kalpa of Creation
4. The Kalpa of Duration
5. Small Kalpas
C. The Buddha and Bodhisattva
1. The Length of Time it Takes a
Bodhisattva to Become a Buddha
a. Why Does it Take So Long?
2. When Do Buddhas and Pratyekabuddhas
Appear in the World?
a. Pratyekabuddhas
3. The Cakravartin Monarch
a. Discussion: Are There One or Many
Buddhas in the Cosmos?
D. The Appearance of Beings At the Beginning of
the Kalpa; the Establishment of Kingship
E. The Calamities
1. The Three Minor Calamities
2. The Three Major Calamities
a. Discussion: A Whole and Its Parts
3. The Limits of the Calamities
4. The Order of the Calamities
470
471
472
473
474
474
474
474
475
475
475
475
477
478
478
479
479
480
481
482
484
484
487
489
489
490
491
494
495Chapter Four: Karma
I. Karma
A. General Introduction
B. Definition
C. Informative and Non-Informative
Action
1. Different Theories of Vijnapti
a. Discussion: The Impossibility
of Movement
2. The Sautrāntika Theory
D. Avijnaptirupa
1. Introductory Remarks: The
utrāntika Theory
2. The Vaibhāṣika Theory
3. The Sautrāntika Refutation
4. The Vaibhäşika Position
5. The Sarvästivādin Response
E. The Primary Elements
1. The Dhātus and the Primary
Elements
F. Avijnapti and Vijñapti and the Primary Elements
1. Avijñapti
2. Vijnapti
3. Their Moral Tone
4. The Dhātus and Bhūmis
G. The Moral Tone of the Mind and
the Dharmas
H. The Two Types of Absorption and
Avijnapti
I. The Three Types of Avijñaptirupa
J. Discipline
1. The Prātimokşa Precepts
2. The Upāsaka, Upavāsaka, Śrāmaṇa,
and Bhikṣu Precepts
a. Synonyms of "Prātimokṣa"
551
551
551
552
553
553
556
560
560
562
562
564
565
568
568
569
569
570
571
571
573
575
580
580
581
581
5833. Mental Discipline and Indriya
Discipline
4. Vijñapti and Avijñapti
5. Discipline and Undiscipline
a. The Intermediary Person
b. Synonyms of "Undiscipline"
6. Conditions for Acquiring the
Precepts
7. The Length of Time One Undertakes
the Precepts
a. The Prātimokṣa Precepts
i. Discussion: What is Time?
b. The Duration of Undiscipline
8. The Upavāsatha Precepts
a. How to Acquire these Precepts
b. The Reason for these Precepts
c. Qualifications for Receiving
these Precepts
9. Upāsakas and the Upāsaka Precepts
a. The Three Refuges
i. The Meaning of Prāṇāpeta
ii. The One Rule Upāsaka
b. Nature and Function of the
Three Refuges
i. The Upāsaka Precepts and
Sexual Misconduct
ii. Deluded and Abusive Speech
iii. Strong Liquor
iv. The Removal of Transgressions
K. The Acquiring of Discipline and
Undiscipline
1. The Scope and Motivation for
Acquiring the Precepts
2. How One Acquires Undiscipline
a. Discussion: On Acquiring
Discipline and Undiscipline
L. Discarding Discipline
586
587
588
588
590
591
592
593
593
594
595
595
596
597
598
598
598
599
601
603
605
605
606
608
608
611
612
6131. Discarding the Prātimokṣa
Precepts
2. Discarding the Dhyana and the
Undefiled Precepts
3. Discarding Undiscipline
4. Discarding Avijñapti
5. Discarding Non-Material Good, and
the Defiled Dharmas
M. Beings Susceptible to Discipline and
Undiscipline
II. Karma as Taught in Various Scriptures
A. The Three Types of Karma
B. Meritorious Action, Demeritorious
Action, and Non-Agitated Action
C. Sensation as Retribution
1. Five Modes of Sensation
2. Determinate and Indeterminate
Actions
D. Karma in the Three Time Periods
1. Four Alternatives
2. The Simultaneity of the Four Karmas
a. Projecting Karma
3. Karma in the Three Dhātus and the
Five Realms of Rebirth
4. Karma in Antarābhava
E. Necessarily Retributed Karma
1. Karma Experienced in the Present Existence
a. Its Cause
F. Karma as Sensation
G. Painful Mental Sensation
1. The Three Dhātus
H. The Three Crookednesses, the Three
Corruptions, and the Three Stains
I. The Four Karmas
1. Black and White Karma
2. Black and White Karma and
Undefiled Karma
613
616
617
618
618
619
621
621
621
622
624
625
625
626
627
627
627
628
629
630
631
632
633
634
634
635
635
6363. The Three Silences
4. The Three Purifications
5. The Three Bad Practices
6. The Morality of Views
III. The Courses of Action
A. The Ten Courses of Action, and Good
and Bad Practices
B. Vijnapti and Avijñaptirupa
1. Preparatory and Subsequent Action
2. An Act of Murder and the Time of
Death of the Victim
a. Discussion: Can One Course of
Action be a Preparatory or a
Subsequent Action?
C. The Three Good and Bad Roots
1. A Bad Course of Action.
2. A Good Course of Action
D. The Roots of a Bad Course of Action
E. Murder and the Prāpti of its
Transgression
1. When a Murderer Dies at the Same
Time as, or Earlier than His Victim
2. When a Murderer is a Member of an
Organization
F. The Characteristics that Determine
a Course of Action
1. Killing
a. Refutation of the Jain Idea of Karma
2. Robbery
3. Sexual Misconduct
4. Lying
a. "Seen, Heard, Cognized, or Known"
5. Malicious Speech
6. Greed, Anger, and Ignorance
G. The Meaning of "Course of Action"
1. Discussion: Is Volition a Mental Action?
638
638
639
640
640
641
641
642
643
644
645
645
647
647
648
648
649
649
650
650
651
651
652
653
655
657
657
658H. Cutting Off the Roots of Good
1. What Roots are Cut Off?
I. Volition and the Course of Action
J. Courses of Action in the Three Dhātus
and the Realms of Rebirth
K. The Results of the Courses of Action
L. Wrong Speech, Wrong Action, and
Wrong Livelihood
IV. Karma and its Results
A. The Five Results
B. The Moral Tone of the Results
C. The Three Time Periods
V. Karma as Taught in the Commentaries
A. Proper Action, etc.
1. Discussion: Does One Action Project
One or Many Births?
B. The Three Obstacles
1. Definition of Ananatarya
2. Their Sphere
C. Schism
D. Conditions for Moral Transgressions
1. Volitional Intention
2. Mortal Transgression and Detachment
E. The Relative Gravity of the Mortal
Transgressions and their Results
1. The Best of Good Moral Actions
2. Mortal Transgressions and Rebirth in Hell
3. Killing a Bodhisattva
VI. The Bodhisattva
A. When is One a Bodhisattva?
B. His Cultivation
C. His Marks
D. The Buddhas that He Met
E. The Paramitās
659
659
664
666
670
671
672
672
673
674
677
677
677
678
680
680
681
685
686
687
688
689
689
690
690
690
690
691
692
693VII. The Three Meritorious Actions
A. Definition of Meritorious Action
B. Giving
1. Its Results
2. Giving Different Objects
3. Different Recipients
4. The Highest Form of Giving
5. The Eight Gifts
6. Non-Aryan Fields of Merit
7. The Karma of Giving
a. The Six Causes
b. Action Done versus Action Accumulated
c. Offerings Made to a Caitya
d. A Gift Made to a Bad Field of Merit
C. The Meritorious Actions of the Precepts
D. The Meritorious Actions of Absorption
E. "Brahmin Merit"
F. The Gift of the Dharma
G. The Three Types of Good
VIII. Miscellaneous Discussions
A. The Value of Writing, Carving,
Eloquence, Poetry, and Calculation
B. Synonyms of Various Dharmas
694
694
695
696
697
698
698
699
700
700
700
701
702
703
703
705
706
706
706
707
707
707CHAPTER THREE
The World
Om. Homage to the Buddha.
1. The authors of the Vinayavibhāṣā say: (1) there is a Buddha who is not a Bhagavat, namely the
Pratyekabuddha, because he is svayambhū, that is because he has obtained Bodhi by himself,
because he has not fulfilled the task of dānapāramitā, etc. (vii.34); (2) there is a Bhagavat who is
not a Buddha, namely the Bodhisattva in his last existence; (3) there is a Buddha Bhagavat; and
(4) there are persons who are neither Buddha, nor Bhagavat (Vyākhyā, 3.12). One can also say
that the Śrāvakas, or Disciples, are Buddhas (Aryadeva, Sataka, 270), for they have acquired Bodhi
(vi.67).
2. Śäriputra did not know the five pure skandhas (the precepts, etc.) of the Tathāgata.
3. Maudgalyāyana did not see that his mother was reborn in Maricilokadhātu.
Śāriputra did not discover the roots-of-good of a candidate for the state of Bhikṣu (see vii.30);
but the Buddha declares:
mokṣabījam aham hy asya susûkṣmam upakṣaye /
dhātupāṣāṇavivare nilīnam iva kāñcanaṁ ||
Compare Huber, Sūtrālaṁkāra, p. 286.
4. As the stanza says:
sarvākāraṁ kāraṇam ekasya mayüracandrakasyāpi nāsarvajñair jñeyaṁ sarvajňajñāna-
balam hi tat.
5. The Pratyekabuddhas and the Śravakas have also abandoned (prahīṇa) non-defiled ignorance
(akliṣṭam ajñānam), in exactly the same way as they have abandoned the organ of sight, etc., that
is, by abandoning all desire (chandarāga) with respect to it. But this non-defiled ignorance
remains active within them (samudācarati) even though it is abandoned, exactly like the organ of
sight.
Such is not the case for the Buddha: this is why the author says that he has destroyed (hata)
obscurity in such a manner that it will not arise again.
6. "As much as possible,” yathābhavyam. This holds for oneself, as when one says, "He gives food
for the Brahmins to eat."
7. We have the plural because the persons to be saved are numerous.
8. Expression of Aryadeva, Šataka, 265.
9. First explanation: through the power of ṛddhi (vii.48), like Viṣṇu; through the power of giving,
like Maheśvara. Second explanation: through ṛddhi, through giving, and through its prabhāva
(vii.34).
It is true that the Buddhas perform miracles (rddhiprātihārya) in order to draw believers to
themselves (ävarjanamātra); but it is through the miracle of the teaching (anufasani) that they
save the world by destroying its defilements (vii.47a-b).
10. The dharmas are mixed, like flowers; one discerns them and places them in bouquets: these
are pure, those are impure, etc.
In this operation, a certain dharma associated with the mind (caitta, caitasika, ii.23), which is
called prajñā, plays a primary role. As a consequence prajñā is defined as "discernment of the
dharmas."
11. mala, stain, is a synonym for äsrava, vice. We translate anāsrava by "pure." The asravas are
defined v.35. See below i.4.
12. The name "Abhidharma” signifies not only the pure consciousness which discerns the nature
of things, but also all of the pure elements of the psychological moment in which this
consciousness is produced: sensation, etc. (i.14c). One of these elements is material (rūpa) and is
called "pure discipline” (anāsrava saṁvara, iv.13c).Footnotes 133
13. Vyākhyā: paramārtha eva pāramārthikah / paramārthe vā bhavaḥ pāramārthikaḥ /
paramarthena vā dīvyati caratīti pāramārthikaḥ
14. The Treatise is (1) an Abhidharma Šāstra or an Abhidharma Pițaka. In either case, some think
that it should not be understood as "The Treatise, with its attendant works, receives the name of
Abhidharma," for a book does not have any attendants; some believe that its attendants are made
up of the lakṣaṇas (ii. 45c-d); (2) or the Jñānaprasthāna, considered as the body of the
Abhidharma and having for its feet (and "attendants") the six books, Prakaraṇapāda,
Vijñānakāya, Dharmakāya, Prajñāptiśāstra, Dhātukāya, and Saṁgītiparyāya (Burnouf, Introduc-
tion, p. 448).
15. The first two lines are quoted, with the reading yad upaśāntaye, in a commentary (the
Amṛtakaṇikā) on the Nāmasaṁgīti, 130; the third is quoted in the Vyākhyā.
16. The word kila shows that Vasubandhu presents here an opinion, the opinion of the
Vaibhāṣikas, that he does not accept. The Abhidharma treatises are not the word of the Master
for the Sautrāntikas and for Vasubandhu. The problem of the authenticity of the Abhidharma
treatises is studied in the Introduction.
17. The Tibetan version of the Udānavarga (Mdo XXVI) has been translated by W. Rockhill
(London, 1883) and published by H. Beck (Berlin, 1911). A good part of the original has been
discovered in Turkestan, JRAS, 1912, pp. 355–377; J. As. 1912, I.311, showing the correspondence
with the Pali sources). S. Lévi, J. As. 1912, II.215–222.
18. J. Takakusu, "On the Abhidharma Literature of the Sarvāstivādins,” JPTS, 1905, p. 75.
19. The conditioned dharmas, with the exception of those which form part of the Path, are
termed säsrava, "in a relationship with the defilements."
How and why are they "in a relationship with the defilements?"
1. One cannot say that they are "associated" (samprayukta) with the defilements, for only the
mind andmental states which are defiled (klista) are associated with the defilements (i.23).
2. One cannot say that they coexist (sahotpāda) with the defilements. In this hypothesis (1)
neither the external (bāhya,i.39a) dharmas, (2) nor the five upādānaskandhas (i.8) of a person
within whom the defilements are not presently active would be "in a relationship with the
defilements."
3. One cannot say that they are the support (aśraya) of the defilements, for only the six organs
of consciousness are the support of the defilements.
4. One cannot say that they are the object (ālambana) of the defilements: in this hypothesis,
Nirvāṇa (=nirodhasatya) would be “in a relationship with the defilements," for one can have false
views with respect to Nirvāṇa; in this hypothesis too, a higher sphere would be "in a relationship
with the defilements" through the fact of the defilements of a lower sphere which grasps them as
its object (opinions condemned v.18).
The author thus explains that a dharma is termed "in a relationship with the defilements"
because the defilements adhere to it (anuśerate), that is, grow in them (pușțiṁ labhante) or take
their dwelling and support in them (pratiṣṭhā), as a foot can stand on the earth but not on red hot
fire. The defilements (anuśaya) develop (saṁtāyante) taking their growth in or support from the
dharmas which are “in a relationship with the defilements.”
According to another opinion, in the same way that one says “This food suits me" (mama
anufete), meaning “This food is convenient to me, is favorable to me (anuguṇībhavati),” in this
same way the defilements "come to these dharmas,” “are favorable to these dharmas." One thus
terms the dharmas to which the defilements are favorable, namely conditioned things with the
exception of the Path, to be "in a relationship with the defilements," in fact, conditioned things
are created by action aroused by the defilements; the defilements are thus favorable to them.134 Chapter One
(Vyākhyā)See v.1, 18, 29, 39, 40.
The various schools are not in agreement on the question: Is the body of the Buddha "in a
relationship with the defilements?" See i.31d.
20. The Truth of the Path is the totality of the dharmas which constitute Seeing and Meditation
on the Truths (vi.25d., vii3b).
On the asaṁskṛtas, i.48b, ii.55c-d, and the Introduction.
21. Certain philosophers, namely the Vatsiputriyas, say that there is only one asaṁskṛta, namely
Nirvāṇa. The Vaiśeṣikas admit many asaṁskṛtas: the paramāņus, etc. (Vyākhyā). Some admit
three asaṁskṛtas; others consider the funyata which is tathatālakṣaṇā as an asaṁskṛta
(Madhyamaka, vii.33, p. 176). Wassilief, p. 282. Kathāvatthu, ii.9, vi.3.
22. On the two nirodhas, i.6, ii.55c; on the five nirodhas, i.20a-b.
23. On the difference between space (ākāśa) and a void (ākāśadhātu), see i.28; on the non-
existence of an asaṁskṛta called "space” (a Sautrāntika theory), see ii.55c-d. Kathāvatthu, vi.6-7.
The opinion of the Mādhyamikas on space and other unconditioned things, an opinion
identical to that of the Sautrântikas, is presented by Aryadeva, Śataka, ix.3 (Madhyamaka-vṛtti,
505; Catuḥśatikā, 202, As. Soc. of Bengal, iii, p. 483, 1914): “Where there is no matter (rūpa),
there is nothing which opposes the arising of material dharmas: the absence of matter receives
the name ākāśa, because things shine brightly there (bhṛśam asyāntah kāśante bhāvāh). The
Vaibhasikas suppose, in the Abhidharmaśāstra, that ākāśa is a reality (vastu), not seeing that
Scripture must give a name to an unreal thing, to a pure negative (avastusato'kiṁcanasya) . . .”
24. Compare the discussion Kathāvatthu, xix.3.
The Sarvästivādins consider that "disjunction from a defilement," "the suppression of future
defilement or suffering” (visaṁyoga or nirodha) is a thing in and of itself, a real dharma, an entity
(dravya). "Disjunction" is not produced by causes, and so is eternal. rough pratisamkhya
(comprehension of the Truths) one obtains the acquisition (prāpti, ii.36b) of disjunction.
25. The Blessed One compared an impure (sāsrava) object to a post, that is to say, an object which
the defilements, desire, hatred, etc. can adhere to; the defilements of bonds, samyojana, are a rope;
the pudgala is the animal. (Compare Samyutta, iv.282). A sāsrava object is a samyogavastu, the
saññojaniya.
26. Dharmadinna was questioned by her former spouse the householder Viśākha: kimsabhāga
ārya nirodhaḥ? She answered: asabhāga āyuṣman viśākha. (Madhyamāgama, TD 1, p. 788c16,
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 162bll). Compare Majjhima, i.304: nibbānassa panʼayye kim patighāgo.
27. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 164b13. The Kathāvatthu, ii.9, attributes to the Mahimsasakas (Wassilief,
p. 282) and the Andhakas the distinction between pațisaṁkhā- and appaṭisaṁkhānirodha.
Samkara discusses the two nirodhas ad ii.2, 22 (see Kern Album, iii) but he confuses
apratisamkhyanirodha and anityatanirodha (i.20a-b).
28. This classification rests on two principles: 1. There can be pratisaṁkhyānirodha, (disjunction,
detachment) from impure dharmas, of any time period whether they have been, are now or are
not now destined to arise. 2. There is apratisaṁkhyānirodha of all dharmas, pure or impure,
which are not destined to arise: future dharmas exist: they will arise if the causes of arising cause
them to pass from the future into the present; they will not arise if one obtains their
apratisamkhyānirodha. For example, at a certain moment, a Saint obtains not being able to arise
in an animal womb: he obtains apratisaṁkhyānirodha of the animal womb, which for him is
henceforth "not destined to arise" (anutpattidharman).
The Blessed One said of the Srotaäpanna, "He has surpressed (niruddha) the hells, the animal
wombs, existences as a preta" (Comp. Samyutta, v.356, khīṇanirayo khīṇatiracchānayoniko ... )Footnotes
135
Apratisaṁhyānirodha is a dharma in and of itself which makes absolutely impossible, in one who
possesses (prāpti) it, the arising of a certain dharma. This absolute non-arising does not result
from an insufficiency of causes, for, if the causes should present themselves someday, the dharma
would arise: thus it is the possession of apratisaṁmkhyānirodha which makes the sufficient
coming together of causes, and arising, definitely impossible.
See ii.55c-d and v.24.
29. The term skandha is explained i.20.
30. According to the Sūtra: trīņīmāni bhikṣavaḥ kathāvastūny acaturthāny apañcamāni yāny
āśrityāryāḥ kathāṁ kathayantaḥ kathayanti / katamāni trīņi / atītam kathāvastu anāgataṁ
kathāvastu pratyupannam kathāvastu.
Compare Anguttara, i.197.
31. TD 26, p. 728a24: “The three paths, the three kathāvastus are embraced within eighteen
dhātus, twelve āyatanas, and five skandhas; they are known by the nine knowledges, with the
exception of nirodhajñāna; they are discerned by six consciousnesses; and they are affected by all
the anusayas."
32. Why is not the unconditioned a “foundation of discourse?" Because it is not the cause of
discourse (ii.55); because there is no history of an unconditioned thing, in the same way that one
can say "Dipamkara was such ... ; Maitreya will be...; King Kapphina (?) is such."
(Vyākhyā)
33. According to the Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 716b23, which can be reconstructed: saniḥsārā
dharmaḥ katame? sarve saṁskṛtā dharmāḥ, one should "leave," not only the impure dharmas, but
also the Path. The Vyākhyā quotes the text on abandoning the raft, Majjhima, i.135,
Vajracchedikā, para. 6: kolopamaṁ dharmaparyāyam ājānadbhir dharmā api prahātavyāh prāg
evādharma iti (Compare Bodhicaryāvatāra, ix.33; Kaṭha, ii.14).
34. According to the Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 716a3: savastukāḥ sapratyayā dharmāḥ katame?
saṁskṛtā dharmaḥ. See ii.55 end.
35. Vastu signifies hetu according to the etymology: vasanty asmin prāk kāryāṇi paścāt tata
utpatteḥ.
The Vyakhya quotes here a fragment of the Bhāṣyam ad ii.55 on the five meanings of the
word vastu in Scripture (Vibhāṣā TD 27, p. 980b12) For Vasubandhu savastuka signifies "real":
conditioned things are real; unconditioned things are unreal.
36. The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 386c12 and foll., presents fourteen explanations of the term
upādānaskandha. Vasubandhu quotes the first three.
On khandha and upādānakkhandha, Visuddhimagga, xiv, apud Warren, p. 155.
37. On raṇa, saraṇa, araṇā (vii.35c), see Muséon, 1914, p. 35; Walleser, Die Streitlosigkeit des
Subhūti (Heidelberg, 1917).
38. asmin eva rohita vyāyāmamātre kalevare lokaṁ prajñapayāmi lokasamudayaṁ ca (Anguttara
ii.48: rohitassadevaputta). The Blessed One further said: luhyate praluhyate tasmāl lokaḥ
(Samyutta, iv.52). Astasabasrikā-, p. 256; Mabavyet patti, 154.16 (Wogihara, Bodhisattvabbūmi,
Leipzig 1908, p. 38). The root is luji, not loki.
39. Vyākhyā: According to the text: bhavaḥ katamaḥ / pañcopādānaskandhāḥ.
Hsüan-tsang translates, "They are the threefold existence."
Vasubandhu's source appears to be the Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 715a9: “Which dharmas are
bhava? Impure dharmas. Which dharmas are not bhava? Pure dharmas."
40. Compare the Prakaraṇapāda, Chapter I, translated in the Introduction.136 Chapter One
41. The five organs (indriya) are suprasensible (atīndriya), transparent (accha), distinct from the
object of the organs, distinct from visible things, from tangible things, etc. It is through reasoning
or deduction that we cognize their existence. They have for their support (adhiṣṭhāna) what
popular language calls the eye, etc. (i.44a-b).
On pasādacakkhu, cakkhupasāda, see Dhammasangani, 616, 628.
42. See the Sūtra quoted i.35. Compare Vibhanga, 122, Psychology, 173.
43. The first interpretation according to the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 369b21.
44. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 64a5: Mahāvyutpatti, 101; compare Dhammasangani, 617.
45. The Sautrantikas deny that shape is anything other than color.
46. Vijñānakāya, TD 26, p. 583a14, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 390b24.
47. Dhammasangani, 636.
48. Dhammasangani, 624.
49. Sattvākhya = sattvam ācașțe, any dharma which denotes a living being is called sattvākhya.
When one understands the sound which constitute vocal action (vägvijñapti, iv.3d), one knows
"This is a living being." Any sound different from speech is asattvākhya.
50. According to the Dharmaskandha, TD 26, p. 500b24, it is of fourteen types. Compare
Dhammasangani, 629.
51. Dhammasangani, 625.
52. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 661c14 and foll., Dhammasaṁgaṇi, 648. See i.35.
53. Dhammapada, 194; Udānavarga, xxx.23. The appearance of the Buddhas is a cause of
happiness, not happiness itself.
54. See i.30b.
55. According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 64all.
56. The manovijñāna, or mental consciousness, grasps the totality of the objects of the sense
consciousnesses, visual consciousness (cakśurvijñāna), etc.; this is why one considers that it has
samanyalakṣaṇa for its sphere; in other words, it is not specialized with respect to its object.
If, in the same way, one says that the visual consciousnesses bears on blue, yellow, red and
white, we should say that it has the samānyalakṣaṇa for its sphere, because the characteristics of
the "visible" rūpāyatana are its object; the same for the auditory consciousness, the olfactory
consciousness, etc. Now this is in opposition to Scripture.
Answer: When Scripture teaches that each one of the five sense consciousnesses has a
svalakṣaṇa for its sphere, this refers to the unique or self (sva) characteristics (lakṣaṇa) of the
ayatanas, namely the quality of being rūpāyatana, that is, the quality of being visible, the "quality
of being cognizable by the visual consciousness," or the quality of being fabdāyatana, the “quality
of being cognizable by the auditory consciousness," etc. Scripture does not refer to the unique
characteristic of things, namely the "quality of having a blue aspect" or the "quality of being
cognizable by a visual consciousness having a blue aspect," etc. It is not from the point of view of
the unique characteristics of these objects that the five consciousnesses are said "to have
svalakṣaṇa for their sphere," or in other words, are called "specialized with respect to their
object."
57. Avijñapti will be described in detail iv.3d etc. This can be translated as "non-information" or
"non-informative." This is an action which does not cause anything to be known to another, andFootnotes
137
in this it resembles mental action; but it is matter (rūpa), in that it resembles bodily and vocal
action. We shall see that the Sauträntikas and Vasubandhu do not admit the existence of a specific
dharma called the avijñapti.
Samhghabhadra thinks that the definition of avijñapti, as formulated by Vasubandhu, does not
conform to the Vaibhāṣika doctrine. His objections (in the Nyāyānusāra) are reproduced, and
refuted, by Yasomitra (Vyākhyā, 31.16 -34.5). In the Samayapradīpikā, he substitutes a new kārikā
for one by Vasubandhu, which Yasomitra quotes:
krte'pi visabhäge'pi citte cittatyaye ca yat / vyäkṛtāpratighaṁ rūpaṁ sã hy avijñaptir
isyate //
58. Saṁghabhadra explains: Why are the mahābhūtas termed dhātu? Because they are the place
of origin of all the rūpadharmas; the mahābhūtas themselves have their origins in the
mahābhūtas. Now, in the world, a place of origin receive the name of dhātu: it is thus that gold
mines, etc., are called dhātus of gold, etc. Or rather they are called dhātu because they are the place
of origin of the variety of sufferings. Example as above. Some say that they are called dhātu
because they bear the unique characteristics of both the mahābhūtas and derived rūpa (TD 29, p.
335c13-17).
The dhātus also bear the name of mahābhūta. Why bhūta? Why mahābhūta?
At the moment when the diverse types of derived rūpa (blue, etc.) arise, each one of them
comes forth under different aspects: this is why they are called bhūta.
According to other masters it is by reason of the predominating (adhipati) power of the
action of living beings, in the course of eternal saṁsāra, that they always exist: this is why they are
called bhūta. Or rather, the appearance (utpāda) of the dharmas is what is called bhava …..
59. The etymological explanation of bhūtāni is bhūtaṁ tanvanti.
60. Water (in the popular sense of the word) supports vessels: thus the earth element manifests
its own, proper activity; it is warm, it moves, etc.
See ii.22; Dhammasangaṇi, 962–966; Compendium, Appendix, p. 268.
61. Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 757a23. The Mahāvyutpatti (101) has khakkhaṭatva, dravatva, uṣṇatva,
and laghusamudiraṇatva.
62. deśāntarotpādanasvabhāvā . . . īraṇā, compare the source quoted in the Compendium:
desantaruppattihetubhāvena.
63. The Sanskrit and the Tibetan have the plural. Hsüan-tsang: the Prakaraṇapāda; Paramartha:
the Fen-pieh tao-li lun. Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 699c5, vāyudhātuḥ katamah? laghusamudīraṇatvam.
64. The Sūtra in question (Samyuktāgama, TD 2, p. 72c, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 388a18) is perhaps
the Garbhāvakrāntisūtra (Majjhima, III.239, below note 120). In the redaction known through
the Śikṣāsamuccaya (p. 244), there is (1) for earth kakkhaṭatva kharagata (compare Mahāvastu,
i.339, Divyāvadāna, 518.2; Dhammasangaṇi, 648; Harşacarita, JRAS. 1899, p. 494); (2) for water:
āpas abgata aptva sneha snehagata snehatva dravatva; (3) for fire: tejas tejogata uşmagata; (4) for
wind: vāyu vāyugata laghutva samudīraṇatva.
65. This is to say: light (laghu) is derived rūpa; lightness (laghutva), which by its nature is
movement (īraṇa) is the wind element; the wind element is thus laghusamudīraṇatva: that which
produces lightness and motion.
66. Quoted in Vyākhyā, viii.35.
See viii.36b (väyukṛtsnāyatana). Two opinions in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 441a, p. 689b3 as to
whether the wind is visible or not.
67. It appears that the Tibetan and Chinese sources call for the translation: "What is it that is
broken? By contact with the hand . . .”138 Chapter One
Samyutta, iii.86: ruppatīti kho bhikkhave tasmā rūpam ti vuccati / kena ruppati /
sitena... sirimsapasampassena ruppati. (See the interpretation of Shwe Zan Aung in the
Compendium: "rüpa means that which changes its form under the physical conditions of
cold . . .").
The Mahävyutpatti has: rūpaṇād rūpam. (111.3, 245.1137, 1153, 1154).
There are two roots: (1) rūp, which gives rūpa, form, color, beauty, rūpya, gold, etc.; and (2)
rup, rumpere, in Vedic Sanskrit: rupyati, ropana, etc.; in Pāļi: ruppati (=kuppata ghaṭṭiyati pīliyati
domanassito hoti); in Classical Sanskrit lup, lumpati.
68. The Sarvāstivādins understand: "Useful Chapters;" the Pāļi signifies "The Octades." (S. Lévi,
J. As. 1915, i.412, 1916, ii.34).
Mahāniddesa, p. 5. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften, ii.261 (La Haye 1913) illustrates the
meaning of rup by Jātaka iii, 368, Cariyapiṭaka, 3.6, etc.
69. Pratighāta signifies svadese parasyotpatti pratibandha. See above p. 90.
Elsewhere, the thing which is sapratigha, “impenetrable," is defined: yad deśam āvṛṇoti, that
which "covers" a place, that which is extended.
One shall see (i.43) the type of pratighāta refered to in the Dhammasangaṇi, 618-619.
70. There is a third definition of rūpaṇa, Madhyamakavṛtti, 456.9: tatredam ihāmutreti nirūpaṇād
rūpam = "This is called rūpa because one can indicate it as being here or there," and Vyākhyā ad
i.24 pāṇyādisaṁsparśair bādhanālakṣaṇād rūpaṇāt / idam ihāmutreti deśanidarśanarūpaṇac ca.
Compare Mahävyutpatti, 245.1139, deśanirūpana.
We have thus: rupa, that which is impenetrable, that which occupies a place; thus "physical
matter."
Saṁghabhadra also has another explanation: rūpa is so called because it indicates previous
action as "This man has cultivated an action, anger, which has produced his bad appearance."
71. See i.43c-d and ii.22.
72. This formula has passed into the Mahävyutpatti, 109.2. The Japanese editor refers to Vibhāṣā,
TD 27, p. 390al.
The Vyākhyā mentions that this second explanation is due to the Vṛddhācārya, or “former
master," Vasubandhu.
On the Vasubandhu the teacher of Manoratha, in turn the teacher of Vasubandhu the author
of the Kosa, see Bhāṣyam iii.27 and iv.3a, and the sources discussed in the Avant Propos to
Cosmologie Bouddhique, p. viii (London,1918).
73. Saṁghabhadra, in the Samayapradīpikā, reads: ta evoktā. Vasubandhu employs the expression
ista, "is regarded by the Vaibhāṣikas,” because, for him, the skandhas do not really exist (i.20).
74. Vedanānubhava, ii.7, 8, 24; iii.32; Samyutta, iii.96; Dhammasaṁgani, 3; Theorie des douze
causes, p. 23.
75. Nimitta, characteristic, is understood as vastuno'vasthāvišeșa, the diverse conditions or
manners of being of the thing. Udgrahaṇa signifies pariccheda, determination or discernment.
The Vijñānakaya, TD 26, p. 559b27, quoted in the Nyayabindupūrvapakṣasaṁkṣepa (Mdo,
111, fol. 108b) and in the Madhyamakavṛtti (p. 74), says that the visual consciousness knows blue
(nīlam jānāti), but does not know "This is blue" (no tu nīlam iti). See the note ad i.33a-b. It is
through saṁjñā that one gives a name to the visual impression, and to the external cause of the
visual impression.
Objection: The consciousness (vijñāna) and ideas (saṁjñā) are always associated (ii.24); thus
the visual consciousness will know the characteristics (nimitta) of the object. Answer: The samjñā
which accompanies sense consciousness is weak and indistinct. Only the mental consciousness isFootnotes 139
accompanied by an efficacious saṁjñā, and only it is savikalpaka (i.32-33).
Compare Samyutta iii.86; Atthasalinī, 291; Milinda, 61.
76. On the samskāras, Theorie des douze causes, p. 9-12.
77. Compare Samyutta, iii.60: katame ca bbikkbave samkbārā | cbayime cetana bà và / nipasam
cetanā . . . dhammasaṁcetanā; Vibhaṁga, p. 144; Sumangalavilāsinī, p. 64.
78. Volition is action (iv.1), the cause of upapatti, and by opposition to thirst, the cause of
abhinirvṛtti (vi.3).
79. This is to say: "because it conditions that which should be conditioned," as one says: "Cook the
porridge that should be cooked."
80. a. Samyutta iii.67: saṁkhatam abhisaṁkharontīti bhikkhave tasmā saṁkhārāti vuccanti / kiñ
ca samkhatam abhisaṁkharonti / rūpaṁ rūpattāya saṁkhatam abhisaṁkharonti / vedanam
vedanattaya...
b. Saṁyutta v.449: jātisaṁvattanike’pi saṁkhāre abhisaṁkharonti / jarāsaṁvattanike'pi . . . /
maraṇasaṁvattanike'pi . . . / te jātisaṁvattanike'pi samkhäre abhisaṁkharitvā . . . jātipapātam
pi papatanti / ...
c. abhisaṁskaraṇalakṣaṇāḥ saṁskārāḥ (Madhyamakavṛtti 343.9); cittābhisaṁskāramanas-
kārakṣaṇā cetanā (ibid. 137.7, Mahāvastu, i. 26 and 391).
81. See ii.34.
82. The Vyākhyā explains upalabdhi by the gloss vastumātragrahaṇa, and adds vedanādayas tu
caitasikā višeṣagrahaṇarūpāh (The text of the Biblotheca Buddhica has wrongly: caitasikavišeșa-):
"The consciousness (vijñāna) or mind (citta) apprehends (grahaṇa) only the thing itself
(vastumatra); the 'mental states' (caitasika) or dharmas associated with the consciousness (ii.24),
that is to say, sensation, etc. (vedanā samjñā . . .), apprehend particular characteristics, special
conditions." For example, the consciousness of touch (kāyavijñāna) apprehends unevenness,
softness, etc. (i.10d); it is associated with an agreeable sensation (vedanā) which apprehends a
certain characteristic of unevenness or softness, the characteristic of being the cause of an
agreeable sensation (sukhavedanīyatā). The visual consciousness apprehends color (blue, etc.)
and shape; it is associated with a certain "mental state" called saṁjñā, an idea, which apprehends
a certain characteristic of color and shape under consideration: “This is a man, this is a woman,
etc." (i.14c-d).
This doctrine has been adopted by the School of Nagarjuna. Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 65 cittam
arthamatragrāhi caitta višesävasthāgrāhiṇaḥ sukhādayaḥ; and by the School of Dignāga,
Nyāyabinduṭīkā, p. 12, Tibetan version, p. 25.
P.
The Japanese editor of the Kofa here quotes the Kōki (=the Chi of P’u-kuang, TD 41,
26a14) and the Vibhāṣā which mentions four opinions on this problem.
See ii.34b-d.
83. According to Saṁghabhadra: “Even though numerous material objects are present, visual
consciousness solely grasps visible matter, not sound; it grasps the blue, etc., but does not say that
it is blue, etc., or that it is agreeable, disagreeable, male, female, etc., a stump, etc. . . ' (TD 29, p.
342a15).
84. The consciousnesses (vijñāna) succeed one another; they can be visual . . . mental. The
consciousness which disappears is the immediately antecedent cause (ii.62a), the support (āśraya)
of the consciousness which immediately fol ws. Under
ceives the name of manas,
mana-āyatana, manodhātu, and mana-indriya (ii.1). It is to the consciousness which follows what
the organ of sight is to the visual consciousness.
aspect it140
Chapter One
85. See i.39a-b.
According to the Vyākhyā, the Yogācārins admit a manodhātu, a manas or mental organ,
distinct from the six consciousnesses. The Tamraparṇīyas, the masters of Taprobané, imagine
(kalpayanti) a material organ, the heart (hṛdayavastu), a support of the mental consciousness.
This heart also exists in Arūpyadhātu, the non-material sphere: these masters admit in fact the
existence of matter in this sphere (viii.3c); they explain the prefix a in the sense of "a little," as in
äpingala, "a little red."
The Paṭṭhāna (quoted in Compendium of Philosophy, p. 276) assigns a material (rūpa)
support to the mental consciousness, without giving the name of "heart" to this support, whereas
it terms "eye" the support of the visual consciousness. But the later Abhidhamma (Visuddhi-
magga, Abhidhammasangaha) considers the heart as the organ of thought.
The teaching of the Vibhanga, p. 88, is less clear: "From the visual, auditory consciousness
tactile consciousness which has just perished there arises the mind, the manas, the mental organ
(mānasa = manas), the heart (=the mind), the manas, the manas organ . . .” (Atthasalinī, 343).
86. Avijñapti forms part of rūpaskandha and dharmadhātu.
87. The problem of inclusion (samgraha) is examined in the Dhätukathāpakaraṇa, Kathāvatthu,
vii.1, Dhātukāya, and Prakaraṇa (see below i.20, note 105).
88. Digha, iii.232; Dharmasaṁgraha, 19; Mahāvyutpatti, 35, etc.
89. Great ugliness results from the fact of having only one eye, one ear, or one nostril. But many
animals, camels, cats, owls, etc., are not beautiful for having two eyes! They are not beautiful in
comparison with other species, but, among their species, individuals having only one eye, etc., are
ugly.
Sarhghabhadra explains sobhārtham in the sense of ādhipatyārtham, "with a view to its
predominating factor" (see ii.1). He who possesses predominance is beautiful, and shines in the
world. Individuals who only possess one eye do not possess "predominance," the capacity for clear
vision; for sight is not as clear with one eye as with two eyes . (i.43).
90. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 14c4: yat kiṁcid rūpam atītānāgatapratyut pannam ādhyātmikam vā
bāhyaṁ vā audārikaṁ vā sūkṣmaṁ vā hīnaṁ vā praṇītaṁ vā dūraṁ vā antikaṁ vā tad ekadhyam
abhisamkṣipya ayam ucyate rüpaskandhaḥ.
Compare Vibhanga, p. 1.
The edition of the Vyākhyā has aikadhyam, but the Mahavyutpatti 245, 243 has ekadhyam
abhisaṁkṣipya. Wogihara mentions ekadhye in Divya, 35.24, 40.22.
91. Anityataniruddha: destroyed by impermanence which is one of the characteristics of
conditioned things (ii.45c-d).
There are five types of nirodha: (1) lakṣaṇanirodha (ii.45c-d) which is posed here, (2)
samāpattinirodha (ii.41c), (3) upapattinirodha (=āsaṁjñika, ii.41b), (4) pratisaṁkhyānirodha
(i.6a-b), and (5) apratisaṁkhyānirodha (i.6c-d).
If the texts were to say, “In the past, rūpa is destroyed," one could understand that this refers
to nirodhas two to five. Now nirodhas two and three are the destruction of future mind and
mental states; nirodha four is the destruction of an impure mind and mental states; and nirodha
five is the destruction of future dharmas not destined to arise (anutpattidharman).
92. Āryadeva, Šataka, 258, shows that this definition contradicts the thesis of the existence of the
future.
93. Hsüan-tsang translates: The Bhadanta Dharmatrāta. But the Vyākhyā says: The Bhadanta is a
Sautrāntika Sthavira, or a Sauträntika Sthavira of this name. Bhagavadviseșa thinks that this
refers to the Sthavira Dharmatrāta.Footnotes
141
We object to this: Dharmatrata is a follower of the teaching of the existence of the past and
future, thus a Sarvāstivādin, and we are concerned here with a Sautrantika, this is, a Dārṣṭāntika.
But the Bhandanta Dharmatrāta has a Sarvāstivādin theory presented later (v.25). The
"Bhadanta" is a philosopher that the Vibhāṣā quotes under the simple name of Bhadanta, a
philosopher who adhers to the Sautrāntika system (sautrāntika-darśanāvalambin), whereas the
Vibhāṣā calls the Bhadanta Dharmatrāta by his name. Thus we have here a certain Sautrantika
Sthavira Bhikṣu, who differs from Dharmatrāta.
The Japanese editor refers to Vibhāṣā TD 27, p. 383b16, where it is said that Dharmatrāta
does not admit that the dharmāyatana is rūpa (see iv.4a-b).
94. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 379a12, presents twenty opinions on the meaning of the term āyatana.
The definition of the Kośa is reproduced in the Mahāvyutpatti, p. 552.
95. Vibhāṣā, TD p. 367c21, has eleven etymologies. We have here the first one.
96. Dhātu signifies "mine" in the expression suvarnagotra, Asaṁga, Sūtrālaṁkāra, iii.9 and note of
the translater.
97. The Vaibhāṣikas believe that the skandhas, the āyatanas and the dhātus really exist; the
Sautrāntikas hold that the dhātus are real, the skandhas and the āyatanas only "nominally" so;
Vasubandhu holds the skandhas to be "nominal," whereas the āyatanas and the dhātus are real.
98. The doctrine of the pudgala is discussed in a supplement, Chapter IX, of the Kośa, translated
by Stcherbatsky, Académie de Petrograd, 1920.
99. Samghabhadra: "This objection does not hold. Skandha does not signify 'mass,' but 'that which
is susceptible of being collected together in a mass' . . .” (TD 29, p. 343c25).
100. In the way that, in the world, skandha signifies shoulder, nāmarūpa are the two shoulders
which bear the saḍāyatana (iii.21).
101. That part which is rūpa, that part which is sensation . . .
102. Paramārtha: "I shall return to you three skandhas." Tibetan: dbul bar bya ba'i phuń po gsum
dag tu dbul bar bya'o.
103. Utsūtra: Mahābhāṣya, i. p. 12; Kielhorn, JRAS, 1908, p. 501.
104. The Ābhidhārmikas are not always clearly distinguished from the Vaibhāṣikas. See
Introduction.
105. Compare Prakaraṇapāda, Chapter VI (TD 26, p. 731c19): The cakṣurdhātu is embraced
within one dhātu, one āyatana, and one skandha; it is known (jñeya) by seven jñānas (see Kośa,
vii) with the exception of paracittajñāna, nirodhajñāna, and mārgajñāna: it is discerned by one
vijñāna; it exists in Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu; it is affected by the anusayas to be abandoned
through Meditation (see Kośa, v.).
Dhātukathāpakaraṇa (PTS ed. 1892) p. 6: cakkhudhātu ekena khandhena ekenāyatanena
ekāya dhatuya samgahità.
106. According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 366c26.
107. Teaching of the skandhas to persons of sharp faculties (prajñendriya). Example: yad bhikṣo
na tvaṁ sa te dharmaḥ praḥātavyaḥ /ājñātaṁ bhagavan / katham asya bhikṣo saṁkṣiptenok-
tārtham ājānāsi /rūpaṁ bhadanta nāhaṁ sa me dharmaḥ praḥātavyaḥ/
The three types of hearers-udghaṭitajña, avipañcitajña, and padamparama—correspond to
the three types of faculties (Puggalapaññatti, p. 41; Sūtrālaṁkāra, trans. p. 145).142
Chapter One
108. Dharmaskandha, TD 26, p. 501a7; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 385a29.
109. Six vivādamūlas in Dīgha, iii.246, etc.
110. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 385b15.
111. According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, P. 384bl-6.
112. The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 399c4-7, enumerates eleven reason which justify the terms
rūpāyatana and dharmayatana.
113. This is the opinion of Dharmatrāta (see his Samyukta Abhidharmahṛdaya, TD 28, p.
873a28-b2). i.17.
114. (1) According to the Sautrāntikas, the word of the Buddha (buddhavacana) is vāgvijñapti
(iv.3d); according to another school (nikāyāntarīya) it is nāman. The Vyākhyā quotes, on this
point, the Jñanaprasthana (See Cosmologie bouddhique, p. vii, note).
(2) In another canon, the Sūtra says that there are eighty-four thousand dharmaskandhas.
The Sūtra has Ananda saying, “I have learned from the Buddha more than eighty-four thousand
dharmaskandhas: sātirekāṇi meʼŝītir dharmaskandhasahasrāṇi bhagavato'ntikāt saṁmukham
udgrhītāni (See Burnouf, Introduction, p. 34; Sumangalavilāsinī, p. 24; Theragathā, 1024;
Prajñāpāramitā in the Akutobhaya of Nagarjuna, i.8; Avadānaśataka, ii.155).
115. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 385c18: the Dharmaskandhaśāstra contains six thousand gaāthās.
See Takakusu's analysis, JPTS, 1905, P. 112.
116. Eighty thousand dharmaskandhas have perished; a single dharmaskandha has been
preserved (Vyākhyā).
117. This is the explanation of Buddhaghosa, Sumangalavilāsini, i.24.
118. The Vyākhyāä quotes a Sūtra, a more developed form of Dīgha, iii.241 and Anguttara, iii.21.
Vimuktyāyatana = vimukter āyadvāram.
119. These are opposed to the sixty-two dṛṣṭis (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 376c6 and foll.). The
Bahudhātuka (Madhyama, TD 1, p. 723c13, Dharmaskandha, Chapter XX) is closely related to
Majjhima, iii.61 (41 dhātus). Compare Asanga, Sūtrālaṁkāra, iii.2.
120. This refers to the Sūtra which explains the constituent elements of a person: ṣaḍdhatur ayaṁ
bhikso puruṣaḥ. Vasubandhu quotes it (i.35) under the name of Garbhāvakrāntisūtra
(Vinayasamyuktakavastu, Sec. 11, TD 24, p. 253a21; and in the Ratnakita, Chap. 14, TD 11, p.
326b). In the Majjhima, this Sūtra is called the Dhātuvibhangasutta (iii.239); it constitutes one of
the sources of the Pitāputrasamāgama extracts of which are preserved in the Sikṣaāsamuccaya, p.
244, Bodhicaryavatāra, ix.88, Madhyamakāvatāra, p. 269.
See note 62, and note 143 and Prakaraṇapada quoted in the note ad ii.23c-d.
On the six dhātus, Añguttara, i.176, Vibhanga, p. 82-85, Abhidharmahṛdaya, viii.7.
121. Dharmaskandha, Chapter XX, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 388a29. Same definition in Vibhanga, p.
84: katamā ajjhattikā ākāsadḥātu? yaṁ ajjhattaṁ paccattam ākāso ākāsagataṁ aghaṁ aghagatam
vivaro vivaragatam . . . kaṇṇacchiddaṁ nāsacchiddaṁ . . .
122. P'u-kuang says (TD 41, p. 32c28): “One says that ākāśadhātu is light and darkness in order to
show that it is a type of color (varṇa) and a real thing. The author does not believe that
ākāśadhātu is a real thing, and this is why he adds the word kila.” Vasubandhu and the
Sautrāntikas, ākāśadhātu is solely the absence of a resistent body (sapratighadravyābhāvamātra).
See ii.55c-d.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 388b19: What difference is there between ākāśa and ākāśadhātu? The first
1
1Footnotes 143
is non-material (arūpin), invisible (anidarśana), non-resistent (apratigha), pure (anāsrava),
unconditioned (asaṁskṛta); the second is material...
123. One edition of the Vyākhyā reads āgha: āghaṁ kila citasthaṁ rūpam iti citastham
saṁghātastham /atyartham hanti hanyate cety agham /... atyarthaśabdasya ākārādeśaḥ kṛto
hanteś ca ghādeśah. But the Burnouf MSS reads agham . . . akārādeśaḥ; we have, ad iii.72, agha
citastharūpa; Mahāvyutpatti, 245.162.
124. See above P. 70 and following.
125. The dharmadhātu is apart from cause: it includes avijñapti which is material and non-
susceptible to being struck.
126. See Kāraṇaprajñaptiśāstra, analyzed in Cosmologie bouddhique, p. 339.
127. Compare Samyutta, iv.201: putbujjano cakkbusmim bannati manāpāmanapebi rupebi.
128. This means that the consciousness which arises having blue for its object (visaya) and the eye
for its support (aṣraya), can be hindered from arising through the interposition of a foreign body
between the eye and the blue object: the eye and the blue are thus sapratigha. But neither the
manodhātu, which functions as the organ of the mental consciousness (manovijñāna), nor the
dharmadhātu, which is the object proper of the mental consciousness (for example sensation), are
not sapratigha: nothing can hinder, by making an “obstacle" or a "screen" (āvaraṇa), the mental
consciousness from arising from the mental organ (manodhātu) with respect to the dharmadhātu.
129. See ii.9a; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 263c12, p. 740b8.
130. The Mahiśāsakas believe that the first four consciousnesses are always neutral; the
consciousness of touch and the mental consciousness are of the three types.
131. The dharmas which do not belong to any sphere of existence, which are transcendent to
existence (adhātupatita, adhātvāpta, apariyāpanna) are unconditioned things.
132. The examination of this problem is taken up again ii.12.
Compare Kathāvatthu, viii.7.
133. Compare Dīgha, i.34, 186.
134. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 746a4: “Do the male and female organs exist in Rūpadhātu? Neither of
the sexual organs exist there. First opinion: it is because one desires to abandon these organs that
one cultivates the dhyānas and is reborn in Rūpādhatu. If beings in Rūpadhātu were to possess
these organs, they would not desire to be reborn in this sphere. Second opinion: these organs are
created by gross food (iii.39); the Sūtra (iii.98c) says in fact that human beings at the beginning of
the cosmic age do not possess these organs, that they all have the same form; later, when they eat
of the juice of the earth, the two organs arise, and the difference of male and female appear; in the
absence of gross food, the two organs will be missing. Third opinion: the two organs have a use in
Kāmadhātu, but they do not have a use in Rūpadhātu: thus they are missing in Rūpadhātu . . .
On the gods of Kāmadhātu, see iii.70.
135. The Mahāsāṁghikas and the Sautrāntikas maintain that the body of the Buddha is pure
(anāsrava) (see iv.4a-b, discussion of avijñapti) (Compare Kathāvatthu, iv.3, xiv.4). Vibhāṣā, TD
27, p. 229a17, p. 391c27: “Certain masters, the Mahāsāṁghikas, maintain that the body of the
Buddha is pure. They say, 'Scripture says that the Tathāgata remains above the world, that he is
not mundane, that he is not defiled; thus we know that the body of the Buddha is pure.' In order
to refute this opinion, we show that the body of the Buddha is impure. To say that it is pure is to
contradict the Sūtra."
The body of the Buddha is not pure (anāsrava), because it can be the occasion of the144 Chapter One
defilement of another. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 871cll: The body of the Buddha is the result of
ignorance and thirst; it is thus not pure. The Sūtra says that ten complete ayatanas (organ of
sight. . . ,visibles . . .), and two partial āyatanas (manaãyatana dharmas) are impure . . . If the
body of the Buddha were pure, women would not have affection for him; he would not produce,
among others, any desire, hatred, confusion, or pride . . .
Compare Vyākhyā, p. 14; above P. 58.
136. Same question in Vibhaga, 97, 435. Vitarka and vicāra are defined ii.28, 33.
137. These are called avikalapaka by reason of the text: caksurvijñānasamangī nīlaṁ vijānāti no tu
nilam iti (See above note 75).
138. Kila: this is an opinion of the Vaibhāṣikas without support in the Sūtras.
The opinion of Vasubandhu is explained later, ii.33. For him as for the Sautrantikas, vitarka
and vicara are citta, manovijñāna.
139. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 219b7: svabhāvavikalpa is vitarka-vicāra; anusmaranavikalpa is the
memory associated with mental consciousness; nirūpaṇāvikalpa is non-absorbed prajñā of the
sphere of the mental consciousness. In Kāmadhātu, the five consciousnesses have only the first
type of vikalpa: they.include memory, but not anusmaraṇavikalpa, for they are not capable of
recognition; they include prajñā, but not nirūpaṇāvikalpa, for they are not capable of examination.
Nyāyānusāra (TD 29, p. 350bll): The nature of svabhāvavikalpa is vitarka.
140. Samghabhadra: Prajñā and memory are associated with the five sense consciousnesses, but
their functions are reduced therein (TD 29, p. 350b17).
141. Prajñā which is mental (mānasī), that is to say manasi bhavā, proceeds either from the
hearing of Scripture or from reflection (frutacintāmayî), or is innate (upapattipratilambhikā); is
dispersed (vyagrā), that is, non-concentrated prajñā, having different objects (agra), or "dis-
crowned" (vigatapradhānā) by the fact that it successively grasps after different object.
Why give the name of abhinirūpaṇāvikalpa to this prajñā?
Because it applies to a certain object in respect to its name (nāmāpekṣayā) and examines
(abhinirūpaṇā): "this is rūpa, vedanā, anitya, duḥkha,” etc. However, concentrated (samāhitā)
prajñā, proceeding from absorption (bhāvanāmayı), is applied to an object without taking into
consideration its name. Thus it is not abhinirūpaṇāvikalpa.
All mental memory (smṛti), that is to say, the mental memory, is or is not concentrated. For,
according to the School, the mental memory uniquely has for its object the thing previously
experienced and does not take into consideration its name, according to the definition: "What is
memory? Expression of the mind (cetaso’bhilāpaḥ)." The mode of existence of memory
connected to the five consciousnesses is not an expression (abhilapa) of a thing previously
experienced. It is thus not anusmaraṇavikalpa (Vyākhyā). See ii.24.
142. On the meaning of ālambana, i.29b.
Compare Vibhanga, p. 95.
143. The Abhidhamma (Vibhanga, p. 96, Dhammasangaṇni, 653, 1211, 1534) understands
upādinna in the same sense. The modern commentators of the Abhidhamma translate upādinna
as "issue of grasping;" they do not see the upādā = upādāyarūpa, bḥautika, and so create a great
confusion.
Moreover the Vibhanga does not classify the dhātus as does the Abhidharma. (See also
Suttavibhanga, p. 113; Mahävyutpatti, 101.56; Divyavadana, p. 54; Bodhicaryāvatāra, viii.97, 101).
And there is some fluctuation even in Sanskrit sources. For example, Majjhima iii.240, reproduced
in the Pitāputrasamāgama (see above p. 54, n. 1), gives the hair ... excrements as ajjhattaṁ
paccattam kakkhalam upādinnam. Now hair is not upādinna. A description of corporeal matterFootnotes
145
(ādhyātmikā, see Majjhima, iii.90) has been confused with a description of organic matter
(upātta)
Upätta matter, plus the manas, is called āśraya (see ii.5). This is the subtle bodies of the
non-Buddhists.
144. Bhūta, mahābhūta; upādāya rūpa, bhautika; see i.22, 23-24, ii. 12, 50a, 65. bhautika = bhūta
bhava = derived from the bhūtas.
145. Compare Vibhanga, p. 96.
146. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 661c14. There are two masters in this school, Buddhadeva and
Dharmatrāta. Buddhadeva says: “Rūpa is solely the primary elements; the mental states (caitta)
are solely mind (citta)." He says that upādāyarūpa, secondary matter, is a species of the primary
elements (mahābhūtavišeṣa), and that the mental states are a species of mind . . ." (Compare
Kathāvatthu, vii.3). Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 383c24. The Sūtra says: "Rūpa is the four primary
elements and that which derives from the four primary elements." Which opinion does the Sūtra
intend to refute? It intends to refute the opinion of Buddhadeva. The Buddha sees that, in the
future, there will be a master, Buddhadeva, who will say: "There is no derived, distinct rūpa apar
from the primary elements." In order to refute this opinion, the Buddha says: "Rūpa is the four
primary elements . . .” Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 730b26: "All conditioned things are either mahābhūta
or citta; there is no upādāyarūpa apart from the mahābhūtas; and there is no caitta (mental
states) apart from the citta (the mind).
On the mind and mental states, see below p. 101 and ii.23c.
Buddhadeva is perhaps the master named on the lion inscription of Mathura.
147. Thus (1) the organs are not primary matter, not being "solid," etc.; (2) tangible things
include primary matter, since a solid is perceived by touch; and (3) secondary matter perceived by
the other organs is not perceived by touch.
148. See ii.5. The first four dhātus (earth . . . wind) are “radical substances," because the organs
arise from these dhātus; the vijñānadhātu or manodhātu is a “root,” because it gives rise to
manaḥsparśayatana. Or rather the first four dhātus are roots because they give rise to secondary
matter; the vijñānadhātu is a root because it gives rise to mental states (caitta, caitasika).
149. Thus the first five "supports of contact," the five organs of sense consciousness, are
"secondary matter:" otherwise, they would be included in the definition: "A person is made up of
the six dhātus.”
150. According to the Abhidhamma (Dhammasangani, 647), derived rūpa is not tangible.
Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 352cl) refutes this opinion which he attributes to the Sthavira. On this
subject see the Introduction for a discussion of the authenticity of the Sūtras.
151. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 391c6.
151. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 689c5 and foll.
153. This is the etymology vipacyata iti vipākaḥ; the vipāka is what has become ripe.
154. This is the etymology vipäka = vipakti.
155. It appears that this is the opinion of Dharmaträta i.45 (TD 28, number 1552).
156. Let us consider one moment or state of existence of this subtle matter which is the organ of
sight. One part of this matter is retribution of a former action; another part proceeds from food:
all this matter is the outflowing result of a previous moment or state in the existence of the eye.
But this previous moment or state is not, in and of itself, capable of generating the present
moment: in fact, at death, the organ of sight ceases producing itself through outflowing. Thus by146 Chapter One
definition the organ of sight is not an outflowing. But consider, on the contrary, the flesh that
constitutes the body: it persists after death; it is thus an outflowing, the result, in each of the
moments of its existence, of the previous moment.
The Kathāvatthu, xii,4, xvi.8, does not hold that matter is retribution.
157. Nine reason are enumerated in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 612c. Vasubandhu quotes the third.
158. The Vätsiputriyas and the Vibhajyavādins maintain that sound is retribution.
159. Compare Digha, iii.173, quoted by the Mahāsāṁghikas in the Kathāvatthu, xii.3: saddo
vipāko.
160. See Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 823a20, p. 449a16, and Dharmatrāta, TD 29, p. 396c20. These
passages are discussed by Fa-pao in his Shu, TD 41, p. 502a18 and following.
161. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 714a7 and foll. The difference between internal (ādhyātmika) dharmas
and external (bāhya) dharmas is threefold: 1. difference from the point of view of the series
(samtāna): the dharmas that are to be found in the person himself (svātmabhāva) are internal;
those that are to be found within another, and also those which are not integral to living beings
(asattvākhya, i.10b), are external; 2. difference from the point of view of the āyatanas: the
ayatanas which are the support (aśraya) of the mind and mental states are internal; those which
are objects (ālambana) are external; 3. difference from the point of view of living beings: the
dharmas integral to living beings are internal; the others are external.
162. See Udānavarga, xxiii; Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 354; Dhammapada, 160.
163. Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 699a3-28.
164. Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 368a21): The organ that has seen, now sees or shall see rūpa, and its
tatsabhāga (that is to say the organ which resembles this organ) is the cakṣurdhātu. The organ
which has seen is past cakṣurdhāṭu; the organ which now sees is present cakṣurdhātu, and the
organ that shall see is future cakṣurdhātu. As for tatsabhāga, the masters of this land say that it is
of four types: the past, present, and future tatsabhāga eye is the cakṣurdhātu which has perished,
is now perishing, or shall perish without having seen the rupa; one should add, as a fourth, the
cakṣurdhātu which absolutely will not arise.
Foreign (bahirdeśaka) masters say that it is of five types: past, present, future, as above.
Further, future cakṣurdhātu which absolutely will not arise, is of two types, accordingly as it is, or
is not, associated with the consciousness.
165. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 368b13. Three opinions. Can one see rūpa by means of the eye of
another? Who maintains such an opinion? If one cannot see by means of the eye of another, how
can the eye of a certain being be called sabhāga through relationship with other beings? Because
the activity of the eye is definite: this activity consists of seeing. When the eye, after having been
active, has perished, it is called sabhāga: neither for the person himself, nor for another, does this
name sabhāga change. In this same way .
166. By explaning bhāga in the passive, bhajyata iti bhāgaḥ.
167. The eye that perishes without having seen is similar to the eye that sees, etc.
The Madhyamikas (Vṛtti, p. 32 and the note that should be corrected) make the best of this
theory: "In reality, the sabhäga eye does not see visible things, because it is an organ, exactly like
tatsabhāga:" na paramārthataḥ sabhāgaṁ cakṣuḥ paśyati rūpāņi, cakṣurinidriyatvāt,
tadyathatatsabhāgam.
168. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 265cb. The same problem is examined in the Vibhanga, pp. 12, 16, 97,
and the Dhammasangani, 1002, 1007, 1008.Footnotes
147
169. On the quality of pṛthagjana, ii.40c, vi.26a, 28c-d. In Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 231c13-23, divergent
explanations of Vasumitra, the Bhadanta, and Ghoşaka.
170. See ii.13, iv.lla-b.
171. We shall see that the first stage is anantarjamärga, "the path which destroys the
defilements;" the second stage is vimuktimārga, "the path of deliverence," the path in which the
defilements are destroyed (vi.28).
172. Dhi in place of prajñā, for prosodical reasons (ii.57d).
173. See Nyayabinduṭīkāṭippaṇī, p. 26; Bodhicaryāvatārapañjikā, p. 520; Atthasālinī, p. 400;
Warren (Visuddhimagga), p. 207; Buddhist Psychology, p. 351, note; Spence Hardy, Manual, p.
419. Kathāvatthu, sviii.9, where the thesis "the eye sees" is attributed to the Mahāsāṁghikas.
Compare Samayabheda, Wassilief, p. 262. Wassilief summarizes the discussion of the Kośa, p. 308
(Read: "das Auge nicht das Mass des Sichtbaren sieht," and not "ist").
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 489b14: According to another opinion, all the saṁskṛtas are, by their
nature, view (dṛṣṭi). View means the manifested characteristic of its manner of being
(paṭupracāra). All the saṁskṛtas possess this characteristic. Some others say that the conscious-
ness of the supression of the defilements and of non-production (kṣayānutpādajñāna, vii.1) is
view. Vibhāṣā, TD 27. p. 6lc and foll.: Dharmatrāta says that the visual consciousness
(cakṣurvijñāna) sees visible things. Ghoșaka says that the prajñā associated with visual
consciousness sees visible things. The Dāṛṣṭāntikas say that the "complex” (sāmagri) sees visible
things. The Vätsiputriyas say that one eye alone sees visible things . . . If the visual consciousness
sees visible things, then consciousness would have view for its characteristic; now this is not the
case: thus this opinion is false. If the prajñā associated with visual consciousness sees visible
things, then the prajñā associated with the consciousness of hearing would understand sounds;
now prajñā does not have hearing for its characteristic: thus this opinion is false. If the "complex"
sees visible things, then one would always see visible things, for the "complex" is always present.
If one eye, not the two eyes, sees visible things, then parts of the body would not feel tangibles at
one and the same time: in the same way that the two arms, however distant they may be from
each other, can simultaneously feel tangible things and produce a single tactile consciousness, in
this way what obstacle is there to the two eyes, however distant they may be from each other,
simultaneously seeing and producing a single visual consciousness?
174. This is the thesis of the Bhadanta (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 63b23, c12).
175. cakṣuṣā rūpāṇi dṛṣṭvā . . . quoted iii.32d. Samyukta, TD 1, p. 87c26, p. 88a; Vibhanga, p. 381;
Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 137; Dhammasangani, 597. This is the argument of the Māhāsaṁghikas,
Kathāvatthu, xviii.9.
176. Compare the formula: tasyaivaṁ jänata evaṁ paśyataḥ.
177. Vyākhyā: vijñānaṁ tu sāṁnidhyamātreṇti nāśrayabhāvayogeneti darśayati / yathā sūryo
divasakara iti/yathā sāṁnidhyamātreṇa sūryo divasaṁ karotīty ucyate tathā vijñānaṁ vijānatīty
ucyate / kasmāt /loke tathā siddhatvāt.
178. Or rather: "One should not reject expressions in worldly use for the reason that they do not
correspond to realities." janapadaniruktiṁ nābhiniveśeta saṁjñāṁ, ca lokasya nātidhavet.
(Madhyama TD 1, p. 703a2, Saṁyukta, 13.12). Compare Majjhima, iii.230: janapadaniruttim
nabbiniveseyya sa man nam natid baveyya; Samyutta, iv.230: yam ca sāmam nat am ca atidbavanti,
yam ca loke saccasaṁmataṁ taṁ ca atidhāvanti. Itivuttaka, 49.
179. According to the Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 919c27; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 62bl.
Against the Vatsiputriyas. See above note 173, at the end.148 Chapter One
180. Argument of Vasubandhu, Pañcavastuka, i.10.
181. Compare Atthasālini, 629.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 63b14 and foll: One says that the object is attained (prāpta) in a twofold
sense: either because it is "grasped as object" or "perceived;" or because there is a juxtaposition
(nirantaratva) of the object and the organ. In the first sense, the six organs attain the object. In
the second sense, only three organs-the organs of smell, taste and touch,—attain the object; but
on the
contrary, three organs, the organs of sight and hearing and the mental organ, perceive
without attaining.
The organ of sight preceives visible things by reason of light; when a visible thing is close to
the organ, it hinders the light: the organ does not see. The organ of hearing perceives sound by
reason of space or the void; when a sound is close to the organ, it does not hinder the void: the
organ hears ... The organ of smell perceives by reason of the wind; the organ of taste, by reason
of water; the organ of touch, by reason of the earth; and the mental organ, by reason of the act of
attention (manaskāra).
Fa-pao (see TD 41, p. 508a19 and foll.) observes that the rupa of the moon does not leave the
moon in order to juxtapose itself on the eye.
Compare Aryadeva, Sataka, 288.
182. An objection of the Vaiseșikas.
183. This doctrine is refuted by Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 370b12 and foll.); Shen-t'ai attributes it
to the Sāṁmitiyas; Fa-pao, to certain masters of the Vibhāṣā (TD 41, p. 508b17).
184. Samghabhadra discusses this thesis (TD 29, p. 370b23 and foll.).
-185. Here and below (the definition of Bhadanta, p. 106), our Tibetan version translates nirantara
by 'dab chags pa. But the Tibetan Siddhantas analyzed by Wassilief (p. 307) oppose the nirantara
of the Bhadanta (bar med pa) to the nirantara of the other masters ('dab chags pa).
According to the Bodhicaryāvatāra, p. 516, the organ and its object cannot be either separated
(savyavadhāna, sāntara) or contiguous (nirantara).
186. Saṁghabhadra (TD 29, p. 371c7): What is the meaning of "to attain?" When an object arises
in proximity to an organ, this latter grasps it. Thus one can say that smell, taste, and touch grasp
the objects that they attain; in the same way one says that the organ of sight does not see eyelids,
eye-lashes and the other visible matter that it attains. The eyelid does not touch the organ of
sight: one says nevertheless that the organ attains it. From the fact that the eyelid arises in
proximity to the organ, one says that this latter attains it. As the organ of sight does not see the
visible matter thus attained, one says that the organ of sight grasps without attaining, not by
attaining; moreover it does not grasp a very distant object. In this same way, even though smell
grasps the object that it attains, it does not grasp what is very close.
187. Compare the Vimsaka of Vasubandhu, 12-14; Bodhicaryāvatāra, p. 503; Prasastapāda, p. 43,
etc.
188. According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 683c24: Do the atoms touch one another? They do not
touch one another; if they touch one another, they touch one another in either their totality or
partially. If they touch one another in their totality, they form but one single thing; if they
partially touch one another they would thus have parts. And atoms do not have parts.
How is it that agglomerations, striking against one another, do not fall to pieces? They do not
fall to pieces because vāyudhātu holds them together.
But does not väyudhātu fall to pieces? Sometimes it falls to pieces, for example at the end of
the cosmic period. Sometimes it holds together, for example at the beginning of the cosmic
period.Footnotes 149
If atoms do not touch one another, how can striking produce sound? Sound is produced for
this very reason. For, if the atoms were to touch one another, how could there be the production
of sound? If atoms touch one another, the hand and the body that it strikes would mix with one
another, and there would be not free space, and how could sound arise? Vasumitra says: “Atoms
do not touch one another: if they touch one another, they would thus last for a second moment."
The Bhadanta says: There is no real contact; it is through acquiescense to popular truth that one
say
that there is contact when atoms arise in a union without interval (nirantara).
Does the thing in contact arise having for its case a thing in contact.
189. They should have arisen (first moment) in order to touch one another (second moment).
190. Vasubandhu believes that the Bhadanta understands "juxtaposition without interval" in the
sense that atoms do not allow any intermediate space bewteen them. Saṁghabhadra is of a
different opinion.
191. For Vasubandhu, atoms are immediately juxtaposed; nevertheless they do not mix one with
another, for being impenetrable, they remain distinct in spite of their contiguity. See P. 70.
Here are the essentials of Samghadra's explanations.
Nyāyānusāra, (TD 29, p. 372b12): The Bhadanta nevertheless says: "Atoms do not touch one
another; but one says, by metaphor, that they touch one another, because they are juxtaposed
without interval" (nirantara). The Sautrāntika (that is, Vasubandhu), indicating that that is the
best theory, says: "This doctrine is the best; otherwise, the atoms would present some
intermediate space (sāntara) between them; since these intermediate spaces are empty, what
would hinder the atoms from going (one towards the other)? One admits that they are
impenetrable (sapratigha)." This theory of the Bhadanta can neither be approved nor criticized;
one should solely examine how there can be any absence of an intermediate space without there
being contact: since this is not explicit, this theory is difficult to understand. If one says that atoms
absolutely are without any intermediate space between them, and yet are not mixed one with
another, they must have parts: a false opinion. Otherwise, if nirantara signifies "without interval"
(anantara), how is it that the atoms do not touch one another? Consequently, the word nirantara
signifies "close." The prefix nis signifies "certitude." As there is certainly an interval, the atoms
are nirantara, "possessing intervals:" the same way as nirdahati, "he burns." Or rather the prefix
nis signifies "absence." The atoms are called "without interposition" (nirantara), because there is
not any rupa of contact (sprsta) of the dimension of a atom between them. When the atoms of
the primary elements arise close to one another, without "interposition,” they are said, by
metaphor, to touch one another. We approve the understanding of the Bhadanta thusly . . .
192. Saṁghabhadra (TD 29, p. 372c5) reproduces this paragraph (The Sautrāntika says: 'If you
admit . . .), and following: "This not correct. "To have parts' and 'to be spatially divided' are two
expressions of the same idea. When one says that 'an atom does not have any parts,' one says in
fact that it is foreign to all spatial division. How can you be in doubt with respect to this point and
still I say: 'If you admit spatial division . . . ?' Since the atoms are foreign to this division, how can
they touch one another? We have explained that contact can only be total or partial; thus the
atom, foreign to any spatial division, cannot enter into contact. How can you thus say 'If you deny
spatial division, there will be no difficulty in the atoms touching one another.' Thus the atoms are
called nirantara, 'not separated,' because there is not any rūpa of contact of the dimension of an
atom between them."
See ii.22 and the Introduction.
193. According to Vibhāṣā TD 27, p. 63c12.
194. The first opinion is that of the Sarvāstivādins.
195. mālāvad avasthita = maṇḍalena samapanktyāvasthita.150 Chapter One
196. The text has kila. As a general rule, Vasubandhu uses the word kila when the opinion in
question is a wrong opinion of the Vaibhāṣikas; but here the Vyākhyā says: āgamasūcanārthaḥ
kilaśabdaḥ.
197. According to Vibhāṣā TD p. 369c10 and foll.
198. Unconditioned things are eternal because they do not go from one time period to another
time period (advasaṁcārābhāvāta, v.25). Asaṁskṛta, nitya, dhruva, (iv.9) and dravya (i.38) are
synonyms.
199. According to another reading (kecit paṭhanti): dharmārdham . .
See Dhammasangani, 661.
200. The Vyākhyā quotes the conversation of the Brahmin Jātiśrona with the Blessed One:
indriyāṇīndriyāṇi bho Gautama ucyante /kati bho Gautama indriyāṇi /kiyatā cendriyāṇāṁ
samgraho bhavati . . .
201. The order of the indriyas is justified ii.6. We have the order of our Sūtra in Vibhanga, p. 122,
Kathāvatthu, trans. p. 16, Visuddhimagga, xvi; and also in the Indriyaskandhaka (TD 26, p.
991b24), sixth book of the Jñanaprasthāna (Takakusu, “Abhidharma Literature," JPTS, 1905, p.
93).
The small treatise of Anuruddha (Compendium, p. 175) follows the same order as the
Prakaraṇapāda.
The Mahävyutpatti (108) places the vital organ at the end.
202. The last three indriyas are made up of (1-3) three sense faculties; (4-8) the five moral
faculties; and (9) the mental organ (ii.4); 1-8 are dharmadhātu.CHAPTER TWO
***Footnotes
497
1. According to Buddhaghosa (Atthasālinī, 62), Kāmadhātu is made up of four bad realms of rebirth
(hellish beings, animals, Pretas and Asuras, see iii. 4a), humans and the six classes of gods: in all
eleven divisions (padesa).
The six gods of Kāmadhātu (Burnouf, Introduction, 603, 608; Hastings, article, "Cosmogony
and Cosmology"; names explained in the Vyākhyā) are an old list, sometimes reduced to five names
(Trayastrimsas . . . Paranirmitavaśavartins subject to Māra, Saṁyutta, i.133). [Each category has
chiefs or a king, Anguttara, iv.242.] Above there are, in Dīgha, i.215, the Brahmakāyikas and
Mahābrahmā; in Anguttara, i.210, the Brahmakāyikas and the higher gods; in Mahāniddesa, 44, the
Brahmakāyikas. (See below, note 4).
The Vyākhyā explains the words naraka, etc. First opinion: from the root nṛ (naye, Dhātupāṭha,
i.847), "Beings are led there by transgression"; second opinion: from the root r (gatiprāpaṇayoḥ or
gativiseşanayos [the reading of the Vyakhyā], i.983, vi.111) preceeded by a negation; third opinion:
from ram, ranj, "beings do not rejoice therein"; fourth opinion, that of Samghabhadra, "Beings do
not obtain (r = prap) protection there."
· 2. Vyākhyā: All of the Dhyānas belong to the three realms, corresponding to weak, medium, and
strong absorptions: thus the Fourth Dhyāna contains the stage of Anabhrakas, Puṇyaprasavas,
Vrhatphalas. But a strong absorption of the Fourth Dhyāna can be mixed with an anāsrava
absorption (as explained in vi.43); from whence there are five new places: Avrhas, etc. The Fourth
Dhyāna is thus made up of eight stages.
3. We are reminded of the four bhavüppattis of Majjhima, iii.147: the Parittābhas gods, the
Appamāṇābhas gods, the Saṁkiliṭṭhābhas gods, and the Parisuddhābhas gods.
4. This is the opinion of the Bahirdeśakas (Vyākhyā) or the Pāścātyas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 509a22),
"the Westerners." This refers to the masters in Gandhāra. In this country, there are some
Sautrāntikas, but when the Vibhāṣā speaks of Pāścātyas, it means the extra-Kashmirian
Sarvästivādins, or those of Gandhāra.
The Mahāvyutpatti has four names for the First Dhyāna: Brahmakāyikas, Brahmapārişadyās,
Brahmapurohitās, and Mahābrahmāṇas. From whence, according to Georgy, and Hodgson, there
are four distinct heavens; Remusat and Burnouf (Introduction, 608) have discussed their various
sources. In the Kośa the Pāriṣadyas are omitted, and Brahmakāyikas are the inferior class.
Elsewhere (iii.5a, etc.) Brahmakāyikas is the generic name for all the gods of the First Dhyāna, of all
of gods of the world of Brahmā.
Vyākhyā: He is called Brahmā, because he is produced by broad, large (bṛhat) roots of good.
Who is he? He is called Mahābrahmā. He is great, mahān, because he has attained the intermediate
dhyāna (viii.23); because he is born and dies before and after all others (iii.6a, Para. 2); and because
he is distinguished by his stature, etc. They are called the Brahmakāyikas, because the kāya, that is to
say, the nivāsa, or dwelling, of Mahābrahmā is theirs (tasya kāyo nivāsa eṣāṁ vidyate). Some are
called Brahmapurohitas, because Brahmā is placed (dhīyate) at their head (pura eșām). And some
are called Mahābrahmāṇas, because āyurvarṇādibhir viſeṣair mahān braḥmā eṣām.
The Vyakhyā explains the names of the gods in very clear language (Cosmologie bouddhique, p.
119). Samgrabhadra is in agreement. For details on all the gods, see iii. 64.
5. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 509a22.
a. Pāļi sources. Rūpadhātu (or world of Brahmã, see above, note 1) contains sixteen places: 1.-9.
three places for each one of the first three Dhyānas; 10.-11. the Vehapphalas and Asaññasattas for
the Fourth Dhyāna; 12.-16. five Suddhāvāsas, reserved for the Anāgāmins. Variants: Majjhima,
i.329; iii.147, etc.
b. The "correct opinion of the Sarvästivādins” admits sixteen places, by assigning only two
places to the First Dhyana.
c. The masters of the West (the Vaibhāṣikas of Gandhāra, Pāścātyas, and Bahirdeśakas) admit
seventeen places, by assigning three places to the First Dhyāna (a special place for the
Mahābrahmāṇas).498 Chapter Three
d. Some other Bahirdeśakas (Kośa, ii.41d) admit seventeen places, by assigning two places to
the First Dhyāna, and a special place to the Asamjñisattvas in the Fourth Dhyana.
e. Eighteen places, by assigning three places to the First Dhyāna (a special place for the
Mahābrahmāṇas) and a special place to the Asamjñisattvas.
"
This is the opinion of Śrīlabdha (Śrī-lo-to, Watters, i.355, the author of a Sautrāntika
Vibhāṣāśāstra), according to P'u-kuang and Fa-pao who quote Samghabhadra according to whom:
"the Sthavira admits eighteen places". This is the opinion of the Mahāyāna Sthiramati or Sāramati
(TD, 31, number 1606, Grand Vehicle).
f. The Yogācāras also admit the number of eighteen, but they place the Asamjñisattvas in the
heaven of the Vrhatphalas, and obtain the number of eighteen by recognizing the Maheśvaradevas
(compare Mahāvyutpatti, 162.7, Mahāmaheśvarāyatana).
Yuan-hui and other commentators say that the School (nikāya) of the Sthaviras admit eighteen
places, wrongly interpreting the expression "the Sthavira" of Samghabhadra, (a) because, among
the twenty schools, there is a School of the Sthaviras (but Ts'e-yuan, P'u-kuang and Fa-pao say that
"the Sthavira" of Saṁghabhadra is Śrīlabdha); (b) because they do not know that eighteen is the
number of the Sautrāntika Śrīlabdha, whereas seventeen is the established number in the
Sautrāntika system. The Vibhāṣā attributes the opinion of seventeen places the Western Masters,
the Gandhārans. Among these masters, there are some Sauträntikas, but many are Sarvästivādins.
The Vibhāṣā designates a divergent opinion of the Sarvästivādin school by the expression "Western
Masters", and not the Sautrāntikas; this is why Samghabhadra says only, "There are others who say
(that the places are seventeen in number) . . . " and does not say "another School" ...
Saeki gives, in resume, "Sixteen places: the correct opinion of the Sarvästivādins. Seventeen
places: a. Westerners (separate Mahābrahmas) and b. some other masters (separate Asaṁjñins).
Eighteen places (by distinguishing the place of Mahabrahmã from that of the Asamjñins): and the
Sthavira (a) Śrīlabdha, a Sthavira not included among the twenty schools, who is also termed a
Mulāsautrāntika; and (b) the Sthavira, who is included among the twenty schools, and who is
termed the Mülasthavira. Further, Sthiramati (Sāramati) (and the Yogācārins)."
6. This "dwelling" is dhyânântarikā, Kośa, ii.41d.
7. I believe that I correctly understand Hsüan-tsang and Paramārtha (i-sheng so chü
- which should be corrected to read i-chu-‡); but the Kośa, in many places, speaks of
some "Great Brahmās”, Mahābrahmāṇas: these are the Mahābrahmadevas of the Pāļi texts, the
followers or the court of the one, sole king (see Kośa, vi.38b); the Vyākhyā explains their name:
"They are Mahābrahmāṇas because Brahmā is the greatest among them by his duration of life, his
color, etc."
8. Beal, Catena, 94, "Following the Kosha Shaster, it is said that Brahmā has no distinct abode, only
in the midst of the Brahmapurohita Heaven there is a high-storied tower, and this is (the abode of
Brahmā)."
9. The problem as to whether there is rupa in this dhatu or not, is discussed viii.3c.
10. As we will see iii.41, the mind and mental states, in the first two Dhātus, are an āfrita (a thing
supported) which have for their āfraya (support) a body endowed with organs. The mind "falls", or
dies, when the organs are destroyed. On nikāya = nikāyasabhāga, ii.41, see below iii.7c,
nikāyasabhāga = upapattyayatana.
11. Hsüan-tsang corrects: The mental series of material beings is not supported on these two,
because they lack any force: they are strong among non-material beings because they proceed from
an absorption from whence the notion of matter has been eliminated. But why not admit that the
mental series of non-material beings is directly supported on this absorption? Why is there an
intermediate support? Furthermore, the "genus" and vital organ of non-material beings is
supported by matter ...
12. See ii.14, viii.3c.Footnotes 499
13. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 387b26-27: As we have pṛthivīdhātu, etc.
14. This explanation holds for the expression ārūpyadhātu: but when one speaks of the non-
material absorptions (viii.2), ārūpya should be understood as equivalent to rūpa, or rather as
signifying "favorable to Arūpya[dhātu]" (Vyākhyā).
15. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 199a6. The first stanza is quoted in Anguttara, iii.411, where it is attributed
to a deity (devatā). In Sanskrit as in Pāļi it begins with na te kāmā yāni citrāṇi loke/ saṁkalparāgaḥ
puruṣasya kāmaḥ. The two other stanzas, to my knowledge, are absent in the Pāļi. The Vyākhyā
gives the last two lines.
The argument of the Ajivika does not hold. He thinks that a Bhikṣu ceases to be a Bhikṣu if he is
a kāmopabhogin; and, if kāma = desire, then the Bhikṣu would be kāmopabhogin, and would lose
the quality of Bhikṣu, even when he does not enjoy these objects. But the Bhikṣu, through desire,
corrupts his morality and his precepts, without losing the quality of Bhikṣu: by this he transgresses
by his body or speech the boundary of the rules of the Tathāgata.
Įn Kāthāvatthu, viii.3-4, the Theravādins establish against the Pubbaseliyas that kāma, in the
expression Kamadhātu, does not signify "object of desire", as rūpāyatana or "visible matter”,etc., but
rather “desire.” They quote the stanza of the Anguttara, iii.411 and Samyutta, i.22, as does
Vasubandhu.
Compare Vibhanga, 256 quoted in Atthasālinī, 164-5; the distinction between the vatthukāmas
and the kilesakāmas, Mahāniddesa to Suttanipāta, 766; Compendium, p. 81, n. 2.
16. Some dharmas are produced (samudācaranti) in Kāmadhātu which are of the sphere of
Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu, for example the different absorptions (viii.19c); a person can
experience "desire" (rāga) with respect to these absorptions: but as this desire has a dharma of a
higher sphere for its object, it does not lodge in him: like a foot on a burning paving-stone (v.2, 39).
So too among the beings of Kāmadhātu some anāsravas, or “pure” dharmas are produced, namely
the mental states which constitute the Path: these dharmas are not the object of “desire” (rāga) in
any Dhātu (v. 16, viii.20c): they are thus adhātupatita or adhātvāpia, foreign to the Dhātus.
From whence the principle that it is "thirst" which determines the spheres (Kāmadhātu = one
sphere, Rūpadhātu = four spheres); viii.20c.
All dharma with respect to which the "thirst" of a being in Kāmadhātu develops is also of the
sphere of Kāmadhātu.
17. See vii.49-51.
18. There are four anantas: ākāso ananto, cakkavālāni anantāni, sattakāyo ananto, buddhañāṇam
anantam (Atthasālinī, 160).
19. P'u-kuang (quoted by Saeki, viii. 5b) says, "If one follows the opinion of the Mahiśāsakas, there is
an arising of new beings (yu shih ch'i yu ch'ing = asty ädyutpannaḥ sattvaḥ) which
do not arise from action-defilement (karmakleśa)".
20. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 966b11-27, mentions two opinions, a horizontal disposition, and a
horizontal and vertical disposition of the universe, and the difficulties that they present. Compare
Digha, i.33.
21. This Sūtra is Samyukta, 34.7; it is used in the Lokaprajñāpti, beginning (trans. in Cosmologie
bouddhique, p. 196).
22. The İşādhāra, "the cloud the drops of which have the dimension of a pole," is one of the four
clouds at the beginning of the cosmic age, Śikṣāsamuccaya, 247, Kośa, iii.90c (A "rain” Nāga of
Waddell, JRAS, 1894, 98.)
23. The opinion of the Dharmaguptakas according to P'u-kuang. The opinion of Sthiramati,
Tsa-chi (TD 31, number 1606), etc.500 Chapter Three
24. For example, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 120b26, Madhyama, TD 1, p. 493b8.
25. On the disposition of the universe, see the references in Hastings, article "Cosmology", 137b
(Mahāvastu, i.122; Lotus Sutra, Chap. xi; Avataṁsaka). See below iii.45, 73.
26. Are there five or six gatis?
Kathāvatthu, viii. 1. Regardless of Majjhima, i.73 (pañca kho pan'imā sāriputta gatayo...), the
Andhakas and the Uttarāpathakas maintain that the Asuras constitute a separate gati.But the
Kālakañjakas are placed among the Pretas, and the Vepacitti (Samyutta, i.221, Dialogues, ii.280,
Brethren, 749) among the Devas. (According to the version and the note of Aung-Rhys Davids.)
Furthermore Majjhima, i.73; Dīgha, iii.234, Anguttara, iv.459, Samyutta, vi.474.
Yet there are four apayas or painful realms of rebirth: the damned, animals, Pretas and Asuras
(References: Rhys Davids-Stede). These are the akşanagatis of the Sikşāsamuccaya, 147, the
akkhanas of the Digha, iii.264, and the duggatis of the Petavatthu, which are lacking in the paradise
of Amitabha (Sukhäävatī, 11).
In the Lotus Sutra, we sometimes have six gatis (Burnouf, 309), sometimes five (Burnouf, 377).
Nāgārjuna's Letter to a Friend gives five gatis; the same for the inscription of Bodh-Gayā
(Fujishima, JAs. 1888, ii.423; Chavannes, RHR. 1896, ii).
But six gatis in the Dharmasaṁgraha, 57, and other sources named ibidem.
Notes of Kyokuga Saeki. i. The Asuras 1. are included among the Pretas (Vibhāṣā and
Saṁbhinnahṛdaya, TD 28, number 1552); 2. are not included among the gatis (Buddhabhūmi, etc.);
3. are a sixth gati (Mahāsāṁghikas, etc.); 4. are included among the Pretas and the animals
(Saddharmasmṛtyupasthānasūtra); and 5. are included among the Pretas, the animals and the gods
(Sagāthasūtra). ii. The Sūtra says that there are five gatis.How can one maintain that there are six?
Some five centuries after the Buddha's demise, there were many schools; the schools were not in
agreement; some held to five gatis, others to six. The first make the Sūtra say that there are five
gatis, the others that there are six. iii. In the Mahāyāna, the Avataṁsaka says that there are six gatis.
27. See below note 37.
28. Definition of gati in Kāraṇaprajñāpti, translated in Cosmologie bouddhique, p. 345. We see
there that nārakanikāyasabhāgatā, nārakāyatanasamanvāgama, and anivṛtāvyākṛtanārakarūpādīni
as well as nārakeṣu pratisaṁdhiḥ are narakagati.
29. This Sūtra, discussed in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 309b15, is the Saptabhavasūtra.The schools which
deny intermediate existence contest its authenticity, see Saṁghabhadra, translated in Nirvāṇa,
1925, p. 23, note.
30. Vasubandhu means: Only the Kaśmīrians read this Sūtra; this Sūtra is muktaka, that is, it does
not form part of the Agamas.
According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 865a18.
31. If the gatis are undefiled-neutral dharmas, the Prakaraṇa should say how these dharmas are
abandoned through meditation, "The anusayas abandoned through meditation and the universal
anusayas are active and develop with respect to the gatis" (see i.40c and Chapter V); it should not
say, "all the anufayas", for among them there are those that are not active in undefiled-neutral
dharmas.
32. This is the explanation of the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, 371b16.
Samdhicitta = pratisamdhicitta= upapattibhava of the Koša, iii. 13c, 38. We have pratisamdhi =
vinnāņa, the element of "reincarnation", Patisambhidāmagga, i, p. 52; pratisamdhicitta and
vốn hàng, Vissuddbimagga, 548, 659.
33. According to iii.38, ii. 14.
34. Paramārtha (TD 29, p. 199c7) differs: "You say that karmabhava is mentioned here because it is
the cause of the realms of rebirth: it would be fitting also to mention the skandhas which are also the
cause of the realms of rebirth."Footnotes
35. One could say that intermediary existence is a realm of rebirth, even though it is mentioned
separately in order to indicate that it is the access to other realms of rebirth.
501
36. ārūpya na gatiḥ syuś cyutideśa evotpādāt / ārūpyagā hi yatra cyavante vihāre vā vṛkṣamüle vā
yavac caturthyam dhyānabhüman tatraivotpadyante: "In whichever place beings die, beings 'who
should go to the arūpyas', (ārūpyaga), either in a monastery, at the foot of a tree, or in the sphere of
the Fourth Dhyāna, are reborn in this place from an ākāśānantya existence, etc.” (See above iii.3b).
38. Vibhäşā, TD 27, p. 707a23-25.
Vibhāṣā,
37. The undefiled-neutral dharmas can be either vipākaja or aupacayika (i.37, ii.57). Saṁghabhadra
adopts the opinion of the second masters.
We see ii. 10 that the jivitendriya is exclusively retribution, but that the five material organs,—
the mental organ, and the four sensations-are sometimes retribution, sometimes not retribution.
The Sūtra (Mahāvyutpatti, 119.1-7) has: 1. rūpiṇaḥ santi sattvā nānātvakāya nānātvasaṁjñinas
tadyathā manuşyā ekatyāś ca devāḥ, 2. nānātvakāya ekatvasaṁjñinas tadyathā devā
brahmakāyikāḥ prathamābhinirvṛttāḥ, 3.... ekatvakāyā nānātvasaṁjñinas tadyathā devā
ābhāsvarāḥ, 4....ekatvakāyā ekatvasaṁjñinas tadyathā devā śubhakṛtsnāḥ, 5. ākāśānantyāyatanam
(better: -ayatanopagāḥ), 6. vijñānānantyāyatanam, 7. ākimcanyāyatanam..
Dīgha, ii.68 (iii.253, 282, Anguttara, iv.39, v.53), "There are seven viññāṇaṭṭhitis and two
ayatanas (which are joined to the vijñānasthitis in order to make nine sattvāvāsas, Kośa, iii. 6c): 1.
santi Ananda sattā nānattakāyā nānattasaññino seyyathāpi manussā ekacce ca devā ekacce ca
vinipātikā … . . 2. sattā nānattakāyā ekattasaññino … . . and as above to subhakiņṇā; 5. santi Ananda
sattā sabbaso rūpasaññānaṁ samatikkamā paṭighasaññānam atthagamā nānattasaññānaṁ amana-
sikārā ananto ākāso ti ākāsānañcāyatanūpagā; 6. . . . viññāṇānañcāyatanaūpagā; 7.
ākiṁcaññāyatanūpagā.
39. The gods of the First Dhyāna are, according to the system of the Foreign Masters
(bahirdeśakanaya): 1. the Brahmakāyikas, 2. the Brahmapurohitas, 3. the Mahābrahmans
(mahābraḥmāṇaś ca). For the Masters of Kāśmir, the Mahābrahmans do not form a "place"
(sthana) distinct from the Brahmapurohitas (as we have seen, p. 366).
The vinipātikas of the Pāli text are missing.
40. The Vibhāṣā (707a) omits the "gods of the First Dhyana," because these gods are not necessarily
different in ideas (note of Kyokuga Saeki).
Hsüan-tsang and Paramärtha translate prathamābhinirvṛtta as those who arise at the
beginning of the kalpa; the Lotsava has, literally, dan por byun ba.
41. We follow the version of Paramartha. Vasubandhu (as the Lotsava and Hsüan-tsang) explains
the expression nānātvakāya as “difference of ideas because their ideas are different; endowed with
this difference, they have different ideas.” On nānātvasaṁjña, the references of Rhys Davids-Stede
and of Franke, Dīgha, p. 34, n.8.
42. The Brahmakāyikas are all the gods of the First Dhyana; by naming the first ones, one names
the others.
43. Compare Dīgha, i.18, iii.29. Brahmā thinks, “mayā ime sattā nimmitā…."; the other gods think,
"iminā mayam bhotā brahmuṇā nimmitā.”
The Tibetan can be translated, "The aspect of the idea not being different, they are of the same
idea." Paramārtha is very clear: "Because they have the similar idea that Brahmã is their sole cause."
Samghabhadra refutes an objection: "Their ideas are different, since the Brahmakāyikas think that
they are created, whereas Mahābrahmã thinks that he creates." In fact, he says, both have the idea of
a single cause, the idea of creation (nirmāṇa).
=
44. Height
|= āroha (uttaratā); greatness, breadth pariņāha (sthantyapramāṇa); body
ākṛtivigraha, that is to say vigraha consisting of ākṛti, or "figure", and as a consequence equivalent to
farira.[There is, furthermore, vedanāvigraha, “mass of sensation", etc.]; speech = vāgbhāṣā
(vāguccāraṇa): Hsüan-tsang and Paramartha translate: voice,sound (=väg bhāsaḥ).502 Chapter Three
aho vata aññe pi sattā
45. The Digha differs. We have the formula for Brahma's desire, "
itthattam agaccheyyun ti," and the thought of the gods, "imam hi mayam addasāma idha paṭhamam
upapannam / mayaṁ panʼamhā pacchā upapannā.” "for we have seen him arise here before us, and
as for us, we have arisen after him."
46. P'u-kuang (TD 41, p. 153a20) says that there are three answers to this question; Samghabhadra
(TD 29, p. 462c20) mentions six responses; and the Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 508c3) gives five answers
of which Vasubandhu reproduces the first three.
47. Intermediate existence can be prolonged only when the intermediate being should be
reincarnated into Kāmadhātu, iii.14d.
48. According to the Vyākhyā.
Paramartha understands: "The gods remember the past in the world of Brahmā; they formerly
saw [-in a preceding existence in the world of Brahmā] Brahmā of long life and lasting for a long
time; later, they see him anew; and as a consequence they say...'
Hsüan-tsang: "The gods remember the past of this being in this world itself; they have seen
him previously ...'
""
49. Destruction of the universe by fire, iii.90a-b, 100c-d.
50. See viii.4.
51. The Vyakhyā: paribhidyate'neneti paribhedaḥ.
52. Vasubandhu reproduces the seventh of the eight explanations of the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 708a13.
53. Addition of Hsüan-tsang who follows Samghabhadra (whom the Vyākhyā quotes ad iii.7a),
"The Aryans who are in the first three heavens of the Fourth Dhyana, desire to enter among the
Suddhāvāsas (last five heavens of the Fourth Dhyāna) or into Arūpya; and the SŚuddhāvāsas desire
Nirvāṇa."
54. Vyākhyā: cittacaittānāṁ mandapracāratvād abalavad vijñānaṁ na tiṣṭhati.
55. Fa-pao says that the Sūtra does not teach the nine sattvāvāsas, but the Vibhāṣā (TD 27, P.
706b13) is plain: "Why have we created this Šāstra? In order to explain the meaning of the Sutra.
The Sūtra teaches seven vijñānasthitis, four vijñānasthitis, and nine sattvāvāsas, but it does not
explain their distinctions and it does not say how they are included or are not included in one
another...
22
The Sūtra of the Nine Dwellings of Beings: nava sattvāvāsāḥ / katame nava / rūpiṇaḥ santi
sattvā nānātvakāyā nānātvasaṁjñinas tadyathā manuṣyā ekatyāś ca devā / ayam prathamaḥ
sattvāvāsaḥ The fifth dwelling is that of the Unconscious Ones: rūpiņaḥ santi sattvā
asamiñino'pratisaṁjñinaḥ / tadyathā devā asaṁjñisattvāḥ / ayam pañcamaḥ sattvāvāsas…. The
ninth dwelling: arūpiṇaḥ santi sattvā ye sarvaša ākiṁcanyāyatanaṁ samatikramya naivasa-
mjñānāsaṁjñāyatanam upasaṁpadya viharanti / tadyathā devā naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatano-
pagāḥ / ayam navamaḥ sattvāvāsaḥ.This is very close to the edition of the Digha, iii.263, 288,
Anguttara, iv.401.
The Mahavyutpatti, 119, adds the naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana (9th sattvāvāsa) and the
asamjñisattvas to the vijñānasthitis; the same for the Dīgha, ii.68, which places the asaṁjñisattvas
before naivasamjñā.
56. Hsüan-tsang adds: "With the exception of the place of the Asamjñisattvas, the Fourth Dhyāna
is not a dwelling, as explained above."
The Vyākhyā observes that Vasubandhu enumerates the painful realms of rebirth through
signs (mukhamātra); this refers also to the gods of the Fourth Dhyana which is not a "dwelling," for
no one desires to remain there. Samghabhadra is of this opinion. Some other commentators think
that Vasubandhu, excluding only the painful realms of rebirth, holds the Fourth Dhyana to be a
dwelling: they have to defend this opinion.Footnotes 503
57. See viii.3c.
Dīgha, 9.7, Samyukta, 3.6. Dīgha, iii.228, enumerates the four vijñānasthitis according to the
Samyutta, iii54: rà pù pay am va avuso vin nan am titba màn am tit bati rù parammanom và papati
ṭṭhaṁ nandūpasevanaṁ vuddhiṁ virūlhiṁ vepullaṁ āpajjati / vedanūpāyam . . . The Sanskrit
edition should be the nearest: the notable variant being the preference accorded to the expression
rūpopagă. The meaning is clear: "It is by going to the visible, to sensation, to ideas, to the saṁskāras,
that the mind takes its support; it is with visible matter as its object and for its place that, associated
with pleasure, the mind develops ...”
But the Abhidharma (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 706b16) attributes to the Sūtra the expressions
rūpopagā vijñānasthiti, vedanopagā vijñānasthiti ….. the grammatical explanation of which is not
easy.
a. The Vaibhāṣikas understand: Vijñānasthiti, or "dwelling of the vijñānā”, is that upon which
the mind resides(tişthati). This dwelling, this object of the mind, is upaga, that is to say "near"
(samīpacāriņi) the mind. It is, by its nature, "visible." Being visible and near, it is termed rūpopagā.
b. Bhagavadviseșa says that the Sautrāntikas have two explanations: 1. Vijñānasthiti means the
duration of the mind, the non-interruption of the series of the mind (vijñānasaṁtatyanupaccheda).
Visible matter is "approached” (upagamyate), and it is "made one's own" (tadātmīkriyate) by this
sthiti.The sthiti is thus rūpapagā: “duration of the mind which approaches the visible.” 2. Sthiti
means "thirst" (tṛṣṇā), for thirst causes the mind to last. We thus have vijñānasthiti = "duration of
the mind, consisting of thirst". This thirst "approaches" visible matter, and attaches itself to it. We
thus have: rūpapagā vijñānasthitih = "thirst attaching itself to visible matter and causing the
vijñāna to last." But, in these two explanations, vijñānasthiti is distinct from visible matter; now it is
visible matter which is vijñānasthiti. We must then hold to explanation a. (But this explanation is
absurd from the grammatical point of view. Also) some others explain rūpopagā vijñānasthitih as
rūpasvabhāvā vijñānasthitih: “The object wherein one fixes the mind and consisting of visible
matter." In fact the root gam is understood in the sense of svabhāva, as we have khakhaṭakharagata,
etc. (But, we would say, gata is not upaga).
58. The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 706b20 and foll., examines whether these skandhas are sattvākhya or
asattväākhya. Two opinions.
59. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 103a3; Samyutta, ii.101 (Nettippakaraṇa, 57): viññāṇe ca bhikkhave āhāre
atthi nandī atthi rāgo atthi taṇhā patiṭṭhitam tattha viññāṇam virūlham.
The word abhyārūḍha (a term employed in order to designate a sailor riding on a ship) should
correspond to virūlha of the Pāļi.
60. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 9a7. Compare Samyutta, iii.54.
The four skandhas of the past and the future are the sthiti of past and future vijñāna.
61. "Matrix, or "womb" is a useful equivalent. Better: "Four modes of birth, arising".
The theory of the four yonis in their relationship with the five gatis is presented in the
Kāraṇaprajñāpti, Chap. xv (Cosmologie bouddhique, 345). Vasubandhu borrows his information
from this work (the story of Kapotamālini, of the Bhikṣuṇi "born in the hermitage", etc.). The same
subject studied in Visuddhimagga, 552.
Dīgha, iii.230: catasso yoniyo, anṇḍajayoni, jalābujayoni, saṁsedajayoni, opapātikayoni;
Majjhima, i.73: andaja yoni... (with definitions); Visuddhimagga, 552, 557; Mahävyutpatti, 117:
jarāyujāḥ, aṇḍajāḥ, saṁsvedajāḥ, upapādukāḥ.
62.Yoni = skye gnas; in Hsüan-tsang, sheng = to be born, to arise; in Paramārtha, tsa= to mix.
Sukraśonitasamnipato yoniḥ, in Prafastapāda (Viz. S. S. p. 27) which defines the yonijas and
ayonijas.
63. "Born from a womb": jarāyur yena mātuḥ kukṣau garbho veṣṭitas tiṣṭhati / tasmāt jātā jarāyujāḥ.
Majjhima: ye sattā vatthikosam abhinibbhijja jäyanti ayaṁ vuccati jalābujā yoni. On the numerous
modes of impregnation, Milinda 123, Samantapāsādikā, i.213; Windisch, Geburt, 24.504 Chapter Three
64. "Arisen from perspiration": bhūtānāṁ pṛthīvyādināṁ samsvedad dravatvalakṣaṇāj jātāḥ…..
Majjhima: ye sattā püütimacche vā . . . jāyanti.
65. Upapāduka sattva, sems can skye ba pa, Hsüan-tsang: hua-sheng yu ch’ing £
Paramärtha: tse jan sheng ch'ung sheng.
Upapāduka in Mahävyutpatti, Kofavyākhyā, and Mahāvastu; aupapāduka in Divya, Avadā-
naśataka; aupapādika in Caraka (quoted in Windisch, Geburt, 187), which corresponds to the Jaina
uvavaiya, and the Pāļi aupapātika.
Upapātika, upapattika, opapātika (defined in Sumañgalavilāsinī: cavitvā uppajjanakasattā:
"one who, (immediately upon) death, is reborn").
A very long bibliography from the Lotus Sutra, 394: "came into the world by a miracle", Senart,
JAs. 1876, ii.477, Windisch, Geburt, 184, to S. Levi, JAs. 1912, ii.502 (who quotes Weber, Childers,
Leumann, etc.).
Upapāta simply signifies "birth, arising" (cyutyupapātajñāna, vii.29, etc.) and not necessarily
"casual and unusual birth" (Rhys Davids-Stede).
66. Organs not lacking is avikalendriyāḥ; organs not deficient is abīnendriyāḥ: the organ of the eye
is hina when one is one-eyed or when one squints. The members, anga, are the hands, the feet; the
"sub-members" are the fingers, etc.
67. Majjhima: katamā ca opapātikā yoni / devā nerayikā ekacce ca manussä ekacce ca vinipātikā.
68. Two merchants whose ship had burned found (samadhigata) a crane on the sea shore. From this
union there were born the Sthaviras Śaila and Upaśaila (Vyākhyā). According to another source,
"Saila = mountain, Upaśaila = small mountain; a crane produced two eggs there, from whence there
was born two men, and hence their names."
69. The thirty-two eggs of Viśākhā, Ralston-Schiefner, p. 125. The eggs of Padmavati, Chavannes,
Cinq cents contes, i.81 (“Lait de la mere").
70. Five hundred eggs were born to the queen of the King of Pañcala: they were placed in a box
(mañjūṣā) that was abandoned in the Ganges. The King of the Licchavis found the box and in it,
five hundred young men (Vyākhyā).
71. Māndhātar was born from a swelling (pitaka) which formed on the head of Upoşadha; Cāru and
Upacāru were born from a swelling which formed on the knee of Mändhātar (Cakravartin Kings,
see Kofa, iii.97d). Divya, 210, Ralston-Schiefner, p. xxxvii, Buddhacarita, i.29), and the references of
Cowell (Visnupurāṇa, iv.2, Mahābhārata, iii.10450), Hopkins, Great Epic, 1915, 169.
72. Kapotamālini was born from a swelling on the breast of King Brahmadatta.
73. Amrapālī was born from the stem of a banana-tree.
See the story of Āmrapālī and Jīvaka in Chavannes, Cinq cents contes, iii.325, (translated
between A.D. 148 and 170); Ralston-Schiefner, p. lii. A birth considered as "apparitional," in
"Sisters," p. 120.
74. Compare Majjhima, i.73, Vibhanga, 416.
75. This paragraph according to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 626c17 and also according to the
Kāraṇaprajñāpti, xv (Cosmologie bouddhique, p. 345-6) where Vasubandhu deviates on a point:
"The Pretas are solely apparitional. However certain masters say that they are also born from a
womb. One Pretī in fact said to Maudgalyāyana..." The Vyākhyā observes that the discourse of the
Pretī appears to indicate that her sons are apparitional; if they were born from a womb, the mother
would be satisfied. But this fecundity is explained by the speed with which the sons of the Preta are
constituted, and the violence of the mother's hunger explains how they do not satisfy as food.
We have the Petavatthu, i.6: kālena pañca puttāni sayaṁ pañca punāpare / vijayitvāna khādāmi
te pi na honti me alam // The Vyākhyā furnishes fragments of the Sanskrit stanza: [aham] rātrau
pañca sutan divā pañca tathāparān / janayitvā [pi kḥādāmi] nāsti tṛptis tathāpi me //In Ceylon the nijjhāmataṇhikapetas, which are exclusively apparitional, are distinguished from
the other Pretas which are of the four types. See Rhys Davids-Stede, s. voc. peta.
Footnotes 505
76. The fifth of the Bodhisattvavasitās of the Mahāvyutpatti, 27; defined in the Madhyamakāvatāra,
347.
77. In the Mahāvastu, i.145, "the Buddhas are produced through their own virtues and their birth is
miraculous (upapăduka)”; i.154, “Rahula descended directly from Tuşita into the bowels of his
mother; his birth is marvellous without being, for that, like that of the Cakravartins, and like that of
those of aupapăduka birth." On these texts and other Lokottaravādin declarations of the Mahāvastu,
see Barth, J. des Savants, Aug. 1899. Compare Lalita, Lefmann, 88.
78. These Tirthikas are Maskarin, etc.
We read in the Nirgranthafästra: ṛddhim bhadanta ko darfayati / māyāvī gautamaḥ, and
elsewhere, referring to the Bhagavat, the passage quoted by Vasubandhu: kalpaśatasyāṭyayād
evaṁvidho loke māyāvī prādurbhūya lokaṁ bhakṣayati (Vyākhyā). (“to devour the world" is to
"live at the expense of the world," upajiv). Compare Majjhima, i.375: samaṇo hi bhante gotamo
māyāvī... Saṁyutta, iv.341; Commentary of the Theragathā, 1209.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 38b11. "The Tirthikas slander the Buddha saying that he is a great magician
who troubles the mind of the world." And p. 139a23: The Păṭali-tīrthika says, “Gautama, do you
know magic? If you do not know it, you are not omniscient; if you do know it, you are a magician."
79. Vibhäşā, TD 27, p. 627c15 and foll.
80. According to the Suvarṇaprabhāsa, relics are as illusory as the Buddhas (JRAS. 1906, 970).
81. There is käyanidhana, that is to say kayanāfa: the body disappears (antardhiyate) at death...
This is the teaching of the Kāraṇaprajñāpti.
82. On the preservation of relics and ṛddhi, vii.52.
The Vyākhyā explains: "The thing that the magician consecrates (adhitisthati) saying, 'may this
thing be thus' is termed adhiṣṭhāna.This thing is the object (prayojana) of this ṛddhi, or this ṛddhi is
produced in this thing: thus this rddhi is called adhiṣṭhāniki.
83. On the four types of Garudas and Nāgas (W. de Visser, The Dragon in China and Japan, 1913),
and in which order the first eat the second, Dirgha, TD 1, p. 127b29, Saṁyutta, iii 240, 246.
There are sixteen Nāgas safe from the attacks of the Garuḍas (Sāgara, Nanda, etc.), note of W.
de Visser. See iii.83b, Beal, 48.
84. Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 467b29) mentions a second opinion, that the womb of perspiration is
the most extended.
85. See p. 390.
A bibliographic summary of antarabhava.
Kofa, iii. 10-15, 40c; iv.53a-b, vi.34a, 39.
Kathavatthu, viii.2. The Theravadins deny antarābhava against the Sammitīyas and the
Pubbaseliyas. These latter stress the existence of an Anägāmin called Antarāparinirvāyin (see
below p. 386 and iii.40c); they do not attribute antarābhava to creatures who are going to hell, to the
Asaññasattas, or to Arūpyadhātu.
Saṁmitīyanikāyaśśāstra, TD 32, number 1646, Third Chapter.
Kāraṇaprajñāptiśāstra, xi.5 (Cosmologie bouddhique, 341).
Sects that deny antarābhava are the Mahāsāṁghikas, Ekavyavahārikas, Lokottaravādins,
Kukkuţikas, Mahīśāsakas (Vasumitra), Mahäsāṁghikas, Mahīśāsakas, and Vibhajyavādins (Vibhā-
şă, TD 27, p. 356c14). The Vyākhyā mentions many opinions: no antarābhava; antarābhava
preceding birth in the Three Dhatus; antarabhava preceding birth in Kämadhātu; finally, the sole
correct opinion,-antarābhava preceding birth in Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu.
Vibhāṣā TD 27, p. 352b18-366a1: “Even though there is a difference in time and place between
death and birth, because in the interval, there is no destruction following upon birth, these Schools506 Chapter Three
do not admit antarābhava.” In Visuddhimagga, 604, as in Madhyamakavṛtti, 544, birth immediately
follows upon death: tesaṁ antarikā natthi.
Brahmanical sources, notably Ślokavärttika, Ātmavāda, 62: "Vindhyavasin has refuted
antarābhavadeha”; Goldstucker s. voc. antarābhava and ativāhika, ātivāhika; Sāṁkhyasūtra, v.103.
(A. B. Keith, Karmamīmāṁsā, p. 59, Bulletin School Oriental Studies, 1924, p. 554, thinks that this
Vindhyavasin is not the Sāṁkhya master, about which see Takakusu, "Life of Vasubandhu,” JRAS,
January, 1905.)
On the manner in which "the disembodied jīva, before it secures a new āyatana (body) wanders
about like a great cloud." see Hopkins, Great Epic, 39, JAOS, 22, 372; the demon body which
undergoes death in order to go to hell, Sāṁkhyapravacanabhāṣya, iii.7.
Diverse references, JRAS, 1897, 466; JAs. 1902, ii.295; Nirvana (1925), 28; Keith, Buddhist
Philosophy, 207; Sūtrālaṁkāra, p. 152, Madhyamakavṛtti, 286, 544. On the Bar-do, see Jaschke and
Sarad Candra Das (and a very rich literature).
86. This causes a difficulty. We have seen that the gati is undefiled-neutral. Now arising is always
defiled (iii. 38) and death can be good or defiled. How can one say that intermediate existence,
which is to be found between death and arising, is found between two gatis, gatyor antarāle?
Answer. At the moment of death as at the moment of arising there exists the nikāyasabhaga, the
jivitendriya, the jātis, etc., and the käyendriya (ii.35), which are undefiled-neutral and are as a
consequence, with no difficulty, gati by their very nature.
87. The first term refers to the action which projects the existence (divine, human, etc.), the second
to actions which complete the existence (caste, stature, etc.), according to iv.95.
Or rather: the place where the retribution projected by the action is manifested, namely the
nāmarūpa, and where the ṣaḍāyatana is completed.
88. Four schools, the Mahāsāṁghikas etc., do not admit antarābhava, see the Commentary to the
Samayabheda of Vasumitra in the Materiaux of J. Przyluski; the same for the Mahīśāsakas (Saeki).
89. The Vyākhyā says: atrācārya Guṇamatiḥ saha śiṣyeṇācārya Vasumitreņa svanikāyānurāgabhā-
vitamatir vyākhyānavyāpāram apāsya pratyavasthānapara eva vartate / vayam iha śāstrārtha-
vivaraṇaṁ praty ādriyāmaḥe na taddūṣaṇaṁ niḥsāratvād bahuvaktavyabhayāc ca.
Yasomitra, in the introductory stanzas to the Vyākhyā, notes that he follows "the
commentators, Guṇamati, Vasumitra, etc.", in the places where they are correct; in the commentary
to i.1, p. 7 (Petrograd edition), he condemns the explanation that Guṇamati and his student
Vasumitra give to tasmai namaskṛtya.From the gloss that we have here, it results that Gunamati
and Vasumitra belong to another sect or school (nikāya). Details are lacking.
90. Compare Chavannes, Cinq cents contes, ii.200.
91. See above, note 29.
92. Majjhima, ii.156: jānanti pana bhonto yathā gabbhassa avakkanti hoti / jānāma mayam bho
yathā gabbhassa avakkanti hoti / idha mātāpitaro ca sannipatită honti mātā ca utunī hoti
gandhabbo ca paccupaṭṭhito hoti / evaṁ tiņņaṁ sannipātā gabbhassa avakkanti hoti.The same
formula, Majjhima, i.265. (A propos these formulas, Rhys Davids-Stede say that the Gandharva "is
said to preside over child-conception") (For other modes of conception, asucipānena, etc., see
Samantapāsādikā, i.214, Milinda, 123, which repeats the formula of the Majjhima.)
(We can compare the avakrānti of nāmarūpa which takes place when the vijñāna is pratiṣṭhita,
Samyutta, ii.66; elsewhere we find avakrānti of the vijñāna, ibid ii.91).
A different redaction, Divya, 1.440: trayāṇāṁ sthānānāṁ saṁmukhībhāvāt pūtrā jāyante
duhitaraś ca / katameṣāṁ trayāṇāṁ | mātāpitarau raktau bhavataḥ saṁnipatitau / mātā kalyā
bhavati ṛtumatī/ gandharvaḥ pratyupasthito bhavati / eṣāṁ trayāṇām . . (The reading
gandharvapratyupasthitä that Windisch retains, Geburt, p. 27, is certainly faulty: four Mss. have
pratyupasthito).
Our text has garbhāvakrāntiḥ, descent of the embryo (and not: putrā jāyante…); it places theFootnotes
507
qualities of the woman before the union of the parents; for the rest it follows the Divya.
Discussed in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 363b2; kalya signifies “not sick"; details on Țtumatī.
On the Gandharva, see the sources mentioned in note 85. Also the remarks in Hist. de l'Inde
(Cavaignac, Hist. du Monde, vol. iii), i.287. Oldenberg, Religion du Veda, 209, has indeed shown
that the Buddhist Gandharva is "the animated seed which, passing from an old existence to a new
existence, waits and instantly grasps on to the act of generation in order to become an embryo, or
garbha." (Against Hillebrandt, who makes the Gandharva a genie of fertility; same conception in
Rhys Davids-Stede: the Gandharva "is said to preside over child conception." Also against Pischel
who makes the Gandharva an embryo). Gandharva is the “Veda-ized” or “Brahmanisized" name of
the disembodied spirit as "primitives" conceived
93. According to the Lotsava. Hsüan-tsang: a Gandharva is made ready. If he is not the
intermediate being, what will the Gandharva be? How could a dissolution of the former skandhas
be made ready? If they do not read this text, how do they explain the Afvalāyanasūtra? …” We are
led to believe that the meaning is: "The school that we are combating pretends that the word
gandharva signifies maranabhava or skandhabheda ...
""
Vyākhyā: skandhabhedaś ca pratyupasthita iti maraṇabhavaḥ.
94. The Assalāyanasutta, Majjhima, ii.157, gives a more archaic recension of our text.
95. Samyukta, 37.20, Dīrgha, TD 1, p. 51c12, Dīgha, iii.237; Kośa, vi.37.
Whatever we may think of the Antarāparinirvāyin of the Kathāvatthu, viii.2 and the
Puggalapaññati (quoted below note 97), the definition that the Anguttara, ii.134, gives of this saint,
presupposes a belief in intermediate existence (See below iii.40c - 41a).
96. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 427a11, Anguttara, iv.70, Kośa, vi40. I have compared the Sanskrit
version, reproduced in full in the Vyākhyā, with the Pāļi version, JRAS, 1906, 446.
97. One should compare this explanation of the Vibhajyavādins with that of the Pudgalapaññati,
16. The Antaräparinibbāyin realizes the path upapannam vā samanatarā apattaṁ vā vemajjham
āyupamāṇam: the Upahaccaparinibbäyin realizes the path atikkamitvā vemajjham āyupamāṇam
upahacca...upahacca vää kalakriyam (According to the commentary, #pahacca = upagantvā, thus
"holds firm to the place of death"). Buddhaghosa, ad Kathāvatthu, iv.2 (If one can become an Arhat
by birth) reproaches the Uttarăpathakas for substituting upapajjaparinibbāyin for upahacca-.
98. There is premature death (antarāmaraṇa) in Ārūpyadhātu; thus a being of Ārūpyadhātu can
enter into Nirvāṇa before having completed his thousands of kalpas of existences in Arūpyadhātu.
99. For an explanation of this floka, see Cosmologie bouddhique, 141, 235, Añguttara, iv.422.
100. Hsüan-tsang: After a long time (gloss: after 900 years) the sovereign master of the Law has
entered into Nirvāṇa; the great generals of the Law (Gloss: Saradvatīputra, etc.) have also entered
into Nirvāṇṇa ...
101. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 620c11; Majjhima, i.332, where we have Kakusandha and Vidhura
(Vidura-mkhas mgu); Theragāthā, 1187 (with the variants Vidhūra and Vidūra). Mrs Rhys
Davids, "Dussi is a name for Mara in a previous life"; the Vyākhyā: dūṣī nāma māraḥ.
We may recall that a heretic of the Kathāvatthu, viii.2, thinks that existence in hell is not
preceded by an intermediate existence.
102. Hsüan-tsang: Or rather, who does not admit that antarābhava is "arising"? The word
“infernal, hellish being" also designates antarābhava; when antarābhava is produced immediately
following a death of existence, one can also speak of arising (upapatti), because it is the means of the
arising. The Sūtra says that the criminal is immediately born as a "hellish being"; it does not say that
at this moment there is an arising of existence.
103. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 403c6, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 356c21.
Version of Hsüan-tsang: "Desiring to go on the road to the east, you do not have any provisions;508 Chapter Three
desiring to stop, there is no stopping place in the interval."
Recension of Dhammapada 237: upanītavayo va dāni si / sampayāto si Yamassa santike / vāso
pi ca te n'atthi antarā / pātheyyam pi ca te na vijjati.
104. On the action which projects the intermediate existence, etc., iv.53a. Same doctrine attributed
to the heretics in the Kathāvatthu, viii.2 (p. 106): “There is no particular action which produces
intermediate existence...
"9
105. Suppose, says Hsuan-tsang that there are five embryos which give rise to five antarābhavas,
each one calling for a different realm of rebirth; thus one says that these five antarābhavas, although
formed in a single womb, do not touch one another nor burn one another.
106. The Vyākhyā: “By reason of the transparence (acchatvät) of the body (ātmabhāva) of
intermediate beings, there is no reciprocal adherence (anyonyam): thus no burning... It is for this
reason that the womb is not burned."
107. This constitutes a Trisahasramahāsāhasra (iii.74), that is to say, a buddhakşetra.
108. After the beginning of the "one hundred kalpas," iv.108.
109. The Vyākhyā quotes, in full, a recension of the dreams of Krkin which may be compared with
the recension of the Mahiśāsakas, TD 22, number 1421, in Chavannes, Cinq cents contes, ii.343.
On the dreams of Kṛkin, Burnouf, Introduction, 565; Feer, Cat. des papiers de Burnouf, 65;
Tokiwai, Studien zum Sumāgadhāvadāna (Darmstad, 1898); Minayev, Recherches, 89; Oldenbourg,
Zapiski, 1888, JRAS, 1893,509; notes in Cosmologie bouddhique, 237. Many points of contact with
the dreams of Bimbisāra, for example I-tsing, Takakusu, 13; Chavannes, ii. 137.
Dreams of the mother of an Arhat and of a Cakravartin (elephant, etc.) SBE xxii, 231, 246.
110. The same master is quoted iii.59a-c, where we have grouped some references.
111. Hsüan-tsang: "There is no reason to explain this text because it is not in the Three Piṭakas, and
because the authors of these stanzas go beyond the Truth (?)."
Paramārtha: "This is not in the Sūtra... this is merely an arrangement of words. Wise men
desire to arrange the meaning in Sastras.
Vasumitra says: The Mahāsāṁghikas think that the Bodhisattvas do not take up the nature of
kalala, arbuda, etc.; that they enter into the womb having become great elephants; that they are
born by cutting open the womb. In the same way, Bhavya, for the Ekavyavahārikas (Wassilief, 236,
Rockhill, 188).
112. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 362b14.
113. The Bhikşuni dkar mo, or hsien-pai according to Hsüan-tsang; shu-ko-lo
in Paramartha. Avadānaśatakā, ii.15 (73).
Translated according to Paramārtha who expands the original. Hsüan-tsang: "From world to
world, she has autogenous clothing which never leaves her body and which transforms itself
according to the seasons, until finally, at Nirvāṇa, the clothed body will be burned." (Compare the
story of Śaņavāsa, Hsüan-tsang, Julien, i.39, quoted in Przyluski, Funerailles, 111; and that of
Nāgasena, Demieville, Milinda, 80).
The Păli sources (Therīgāthā, 54, Samyutta, i.512) have nothing similar.
114. These four bhavas are enumerated in Mahāvyutpatti, 245, 1271, with maraṇabhava placed
first.
115. Vyākhyā: suvifuddham ity ekādaśadivyacakṣurapakṣālavarjitam.These eleven apakṣālas are,
according to the Sūtra, vicikit sā, amanasikāra, kāyadauṣṭulya, styänamiddha, auddhatya, atyārabhya-
virya, audilya, chambitatva, nānātvasaṁjñā, abhijalpa, atidhyāyitvaṁ jñeyesu.
116. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 364b8. Do intermediate beings see one another? Yes. Who sees whom?
There are different opinions. According to certain masters, hellish intermediate beings see only
!
1
I
1Footnotes
509
hellish intermediate beings... heavenly intermediate beings see only heavenly intermediate beings.
According to other masters, animal intermediate beings see hellish and animal intermediate beings
... According to other masters, the five classes see the five classes.
117. According to the heretics of the Kathāvatthu: satto dibbacakkhuko viya adibbacakkhuko
iddhimā viya aniddhimā . . .
118. His body is accha, viii.3c.
119. The Vibhāṣā discusses this point, TD 27, p. 360a9. According to the Dārṣṭāntikas, it is false that
an intermediate being cannot change his Dhātu, his realm of rebirth, or the place of his new
existence. All of the actions which comprise the five anantaryas can be "changed." . . . An
intermediate being who goes to be reborn into the Fourth Dhyana can generate a false view; he is
then destroyed and is immediately replaced by a hellish intermediate being ...
120. The Lotsava and Paramārtha omit the grammatical explanation which is partially translated
by Hsüan-tsang. Dhātupāṭha, i.615, arva hiṁsāyām. śakandhu, vi. 1.94.
121. Alpeśākhya, that is to say, anudāra hinavīrya.We have iṣṭa itiśaḥ / alpa iso'lpeśaḥ / alpeśa
akhya yasya so'lpeśäkhyah. Trenckner, Milinda, 422 (=appaparivāra). Hsüan-tsang: "of little merit,"
Paramärtha: "of little merit-virtue."
122. This is the fourth opinion expressed in the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 361b14; the others are below
under b, c, d. Vasubandhu prefers this fourth opinion according to the Chinese commentators.
123. We understand that an intermediate being can last a very long time since it is projected by the
cause which projects the duration, frequently long, of the existence properly so-called. See above,
note 104.
124. According to the principle sāmagrīṁ prāpya kālaṁ ca phalanti khalu dehinām, Divyāvadāna,
54, passim.
125. Third opinion of the Vibhāsā.
126. Second opinion of the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 361b8, that of Samadatta (?).
The heretics of the Kathāvatthu: sattāhaṁ vā atirekasattāāhaṁ vā tiṭṭhati.
For the theories found in Tibet, Jäschke and Candra Das, sub voc. bar do: . . . of a shorter or
longer duration, ordinarily under 49 days . . . yet no more than 49 days.
127. First opinion of the Vibhāṣā [From this passage can we conclude that, according to
Vasubandhu, the Vaibhāṣikas admit the opinions indicated in first place in the Vibhāṣā? See note
153].
128. If an intermediate being must be reborn as a horse, then his actions will cause horses to mate
out of season.
129. Ghoşaka (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 361a6): If the desired father is encountered, and if the desired
mother is not encountered, then the father will mate with another woman.
130. Yet Samghabhadra justifies the thesis that condemns Vasubandhu. The example of
Kalmāşapāda, etc., shows that some actions, whose retribution in a certain realm of rebirth (gati) is
determined, can give forth a diversity of births (upapatti).
Vyākhyā: na nikāyabhedād ekākṣepakatvam hiyate tatkarmaṇaḥ ekajātīyatvād gavyākṛṛ-
tisaṁsthānāntarāparityāgāc ca / gatiniyatānāṁ hi karmaṇām upapattivaicitryaṁ dṛṣṭaṁ kalmā-
şapādādivad iti năsty eșa dosa ity ācāryasaṁghabhadraḥ.
According to the Tibetan version of the Vyākhyā: upapattipratyayavaicitryam.
131. This theory, which cannot but remind one of the ancient Gandharvas who were
nymphomaniac Genies, passed into Tantric literature, see Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇatantra, Chap. xvi, in
Theorie des Douze Causes, 125.510 Chapter Three
132. Males to the right, females to the left, Avadānaśataka, i.14; positions changed in the Chinese
redactions of Chavannes, Cinq cent contes, i.380.
133. We must compare the (Buddhist) medical theories of Vägbhaṭa and Caraka, Windisch,
Buddhas Geburt, 48, and the Prasastapāda (V. S. S., 1895), 33-34.
134. Vyākhyā: ekasminn eva kṣaṇe bijam nirudhyate ankuras cotpadyate tulādaṇḍanāmonnāmavat.
135. Sanskrit redaction: valmīka iti bhikṣo asya kāyasyaitad adhivacanaṁ rūpiņa audārikasya
căturmahābhūt[ik]asya odanakulmāṣopacitasya māṭāpitrafucikalalasambhūtasya... Păļi redaction,
Majjhima, i.144: vammīko ti kho bhikkhu imass’etam cātummahābhūtikassa kāyasya adhivacanam
mātäpettikasambhavassa odanakummāsupacayassa aniccucchädanaparimaddanabhedanaviddham-
samadhammassa.
136. The first part of this formula Saṁyutta, ii. 178, Cullavagga, xii.1.3, Anguttara, ii.54,
Theragāthā, 456, 575, Udāna, vi.8, Nettippakaraṇa, 174.
137. Purvācāryā yogācārā āryāsaṁgaprabhṛtayaḥ (Vyākhyā). According to P'u-kuang, quoted by
Saeki, some Sautrāntikas or Sarvāstivādins.
138. I think that this is the meaning; but I do not wish to superimpose the versions of the Lotsava,
Paramartha and Hsüan-tsang onto the notes of the Vyakhyā.
139. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 341b9; Jātaka, v.266: ete patanti niraye uddhapādā avaṁsirā / isīnaṁ
ativattāro saṁyatānam tapassinam.For ürdhvapāda, avākširas, Rhys Davids-Stede sub. voc.
avaṁsira, Suttanipāta, 248, Saṁyutta, i.48, etc. This is not most commonly "a position characteristic
of beings in Purgatory" (as Mahāvastu, iii.455.3), but the position of a being who falls into hell; the
same for Manu, iii.249, viii.94.
According to the glosses of Saeki, the Rșis are the Buddhas, the ascetics (samyata) are the
Pratyekabuddhas, and the penitents are the Bodhisattvas. The explanations of the Lokaprajñāpti
(Cosmologie, p. 239) differ.
ativaktar= adhikṣeptar apavaditar.
140. According to the Sutra quoted in note 142,we should read garbhasaṁkrānti; but gabbāvakkanti,
gabbe okkanti (Dīgha, iii.103, 231, Calaniddesa, 304) and kārikā 17 give garbhāvakrānti. The
Lotsava has 'jug-pa throughout.
141. Dīgha, iii.103, 231, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.863a11.
Vibhāṣā, p. 863all: There are four types of garbhāvakrānti( ju t’ai λì‚Paramārtha TD 29, p.
204al:t'uo t'ai,entry into the womb): to enter into the womb without full consciousness, and
to remain there, and to leave it in the same condition; to enter in full consciousness, to remain there
and to leave it without full consciousness; to enter and remain there in full consciousness, but to
leave without full consciousness; and to enter, to remain there, and to leave in full consciousness.
Why create this Śästra? In order to explain (vibhaktum) the meaning of the Sūtra. The Sūtra
teaches four garbhāvakrāntis … but it does not explain them. The Sūtra is the support, the root of
this Šāstra. Desiring to say what the Sūtra does not say, we make this Šāstra. What is to enter, to
remain, and to leave without full consciousness? Two ways. 1. He whose merit is small, at the
moment of entry, produces error of ideas and resolution (saṁjñā, adhimokşa); he thinks, "The
heavens rain down...". 2. He whose merit is great believes that he is entering into a palace…..
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 863b8 and foll: There are five opinions on the four garbhāvakrāntis
examined in descending order: the fourth, full consciousness upon entry, remaining, and leaving;
the third, full consciousness upon entry and remaining; the second, full consciousness at entry; and
the first, complete absence of full consciousness. According to the extract which Saeki gives: 1. the
fourth: Bodhisattvas, third: Pratyekabuddhas, second: Päramitā-Śrāvakas, first: all others. 2. second:
Srotaäpannas, Sakṛdāgamins. 3. Beings having pure knowledge and action, impure knowledge and
action, no knowledge but pure action, neither pure knowledge nor pure action. The four
garbhāvakrāntis correspond to this classification. When the first ones enter the womb, they areFootnotes
511
pure
and free from all troubling tangibles; when they remain therein. . . ; when they leave it, the
gate of their birth is open, easy, without pressure or obstacle: from whence it results that these
beings do not lose their "mindfulness" for any moment (smṛtimoșa). (For beings of the following
categories, the conditions of leaving, remaining and entering become successively bad; from whence
"loss of mindfulness") In the order of Bodhisattvas, etc. 4. The three good garbhāvakrāntis are those
which the Bodhisattvas take up in the course of the three asamkhyeyakalpas of their careers.
8
Buddhaghosa ad Dīgha, iii. 103 (Dialogues, iii. p. 98): fourth, omniscient Bodhisattvas; third, the
two great Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and Bodhisattvas; second, the twenty-four great Theras; first,
persons in general.
142. According to Hsüan-tsang.
According to Samghabhadra: aṇḍāj jāto janisyate jayate cety andajaḥ, by virtue of Panini, 3.2.75
143.In the case of full consciousness, how can one say that reincarnation or rebirth (pratisamdhi-
bandha) takes place by reason of a defiled mind (kliṣṭacitta) (iii.38)? Because the mind is defiled
through affection for the mother, etc. (mātṛsnehādi).
144. See Madhyamakāvatāra, 149, Muséon, 1910, 336.
145. Namely, the Samkhya and the Vaišeşika.
146. Kārikās 18 and 19 are quoted in the Bodhicaryāvatārapañjikā, ix. 15, 73.
147. (Samyutta, i206 (Jataka Commentary, iv.496, Kathāvatthu, xiv.2): Mahāniddesa, 120,
Mahāvyutpatti, 190. Windisch, Buddhas Geburt, 87, compare the Nirukta, the Garbha-upanishad,
the Samkhya and medical sources.
Note that Milinda, 40, and Visuddhimagga, 236, treat of premature death, but omits the
pasākhā: "The embryo dies at the time of kalala…..of ghana, at one month, at two months..." In
the Mahāniddesa: “ ….. it dies at the time of pasākhā: it dies when scarcely born.
The Sanskrit version (see Samyukta TD 2, p. 357c29) replaces the fourth line with:
(rūpīndriyāṇi jāyante) vyañjanāny anupūrvafaḥ.The "material organs" are the subtle parts of the
eye, ear, nose, and tongue [=the eye properly so-called, that which sees ... ]; the vyanjanas are the
visible supports (adhiṣṭhāna) of the eye thus defined, etc., for it is by reason of its support that the
organ properly so-called is manifested (abhivyajyate). (The organ of touch exists from the very
beginning).
On kalala, etc., p. 395–396, and n. 154. TD 14, no 523.
According to the commentator of the Kathāvatthu, xiv.2, the organs of the eye, etc., appear after
seventy-seven days.
According to a Mahāyāna commentary, there are eight embryonic states: 1.-5. kalalāvasthā …
praśākhāvasthā, 6. keśalomāvasthā, 7. indriyāvasthā, 8. vyañjanāvasthā (the period when the
supports of the indriyas are clearly manifested). In agreement with the Hinayāna commentaries,
P'u-kuang and Fa-pao say that keśa, roman, nakha, etc., up to the moment when the indriyas-
vyanjanas are complete, all constitute the fifth state. But according to the Saṁmitīyas, hair, etc., are a
sixth state.
148. We have tried, in Cosmologie bouddhique, p. 30, to translate the Tibetan here word for word.
149. The description of Majjhima, i.266 is more moderate: " . . . When he is born, his mother
nourishes him with her blood, for, according to the Vinaya, 'Oh Bhikṣus, maternal milk is of blood..
150. Compare Majjhima, 1.266: . . . vuddbim an và ya paripakam an vây a
151. Note of Saeki: The author refutes the Mahiīśāsakas who admit that there is a beginning, one
eternal cause, of effects without causes; see above note 19.
152. In kārikās 20 to 24 Vasubandhu defines āvasthika or "static" pratityasamutpäda (see 25a), the
series considered in twelve successive states (avasthā, daśā).512
Chapter Three
On the three parts or "sections" (kāṇḍa) and the three "paths" (vartman), a theory common to
the two scholars, see Deux notes sur le Pratītyasamutpäda (Congres d'Alger, 1905); Shwe Zan
Aung, Compendium, 259; Théorie des douze causes, Gand, 1913, p. 34-38; the Sanskrit source is the
Jñanaprasthānaśāstra.
Samghabhadra (Nyāyānusāra) establishes that the causal series is both internal and external,-
the kalala, etc., on the one hand; the seed, etc., on the other: this is what is termed
Pratītyasamut pāda (Comp. Sālistambasūtra, Théorie des douze causes, p. 73). Pratītyasamut pāda is
thus not only the twelve angas. How do we know this? By the Šāstra (Prakaraṇa, below, p. 405 line
2) which says, "What is pratityasamutpäda? All the conditioned dharmas." Indications vary
elsewhere in the same Sūtra. Sometimes twelve bhavāngas are enumerated, for example in the
Paramārthaśūnyatāsūtra, etc.; sometimes eleven, for example in the Chih-shih ching (Jñāna-
vastu-sūtra = Saṁyutta, ii.56), etc.; sometimes ten, as in the Nagaropamädisūtra (Divya, 340);
sometimes nine, as in the Mahānidānaparyāyasūtra; sometimes eight, as in the Sūtra which says,
"The Śramaṇas and Brāhmanas who do not truly know the nature of the dharmas..." Such are the
differences. (Other variations, Senart, Mélanges Harlez, 281, Przyluski, JAs, 1920, ii.326). Why does
the doctrine of the Sūtras differ from that of the Treatises? The Treatises teach according to the
nature of the dharmas; the Sūtras take into consideration the person to be converted... Or rather
the Sūtras are of non-explicit sense (anītätha), the Treatises are of explicit meaning. The Sūtras only
consider living beings (sattvākhya); the Treatises consider living beings (sattva) and non-living
beings... (Below, p. 405).
153. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 120a29: Some say, "This Sūtra refers only to Kāmadhātu and the three
types of arising with the exception of apparitional birth; and, as a result, it is without fault." We
should say that this Sūtra refers to the Three Dhātus and the four types of birth. Although
apparitional beings possess all the organs at the moment they are born, these organs are not sharp
(tīkṣṇa); then, little by little, with time, the organs become sharp. When they are not sharp, at the
first moment, this is the anga of vijñāna; at the second moment and as long as they are not sharp,
this is the anga of nămarūpa; when they are sharp, this is the anga of şaḍāyatana.In this way, the
Sūtra does not present the fault of being incomplete. (This refers also to the apparitional beings
who possess all their organs from the beginning, Kofa, ii.14, Kathāvatthu, xiv.2).
P'u-kuang says, "The Sastra of Vasubandhu does not take the judgement of the Vibhāṣā (p'o-sha
p'ing-chia ) as authority; it follows the sense of the first masters of the Vibhāsā.
We must, it appears to me-without my having the Vibhāṣā in my hands-understand the
p'ing-chia to be the group of scholars who drew up the Vibhāṣā and who formulated a critical
judgement on the opinions of the different masters. Saeki notes that, on such and such a point, the
Vibhāṣā confines itself to enumerating opinions: "There is no p'ing chia," it says. According to
others, four p'ing-chia. See note 127.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 122c12: Twelve angas exist in Kāmadhātu; eleven añgas in Rūpadhātu with
the exception of nāmarūpa; ten añgas in Arūpyadhātu with the exception of nămarūpa and
şaḍāyatana.(But we see the difficulty of the propositions which result from this thesis, for: "The
şadayatana exist by reason of the vijñāna,” “sparśa by reason of the vijñāna”). Thus the Vibhāṣā
(literally: the p'ing-chia say): "We must say that the twelve angas exist in the Three Dhatus...
154. For these definitions, Théorie des douze causes, 41; the San-tsang fa-tsu, trans. by Klaproth,
Foe-koue-ki, 286, which very closely follows the doctrine presented by Vasubandhu, but requiring
glosses; for example, sparsa is described: "From the leaving of the uterus until the age of three or
four years, even though the six roots (=indriyas) corresponding through touch to the six dusts
(viṣaya, ālambana), one cannot yet reflect, nor comprehend the joys and the sufferings of life."
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 119a2: What is avidyā? We cannot say that it is all the past kleffas, for this
would destroy the characteristics proper to avidyā; we must say that it is pūrvakleśadaśā (or
avasthā), the period of the past klefa. What are the saṁskāras? The period of the past action. What
is the vijñāna? It is pratisaṁdhicitta, "the mind at conception" with that which accompanies it.
What is nāmarūpa? After pratisaṁdhicitta and before the four material organs are produced.
(Käyendriya, the organ of touch, is acquired all at once). In this interval, before the ṣaḍayātanas areFootnotes
513
complete, there are five periods (avasthā): kalala, arbuda, pesin, ghana, and praśākhā, which
together make up the period of nămarūpa. What is the şaḍāyatana? When the four material organs
are produced, the six ayatanas are complete. In the period of praśākhā, the organs of the eye, etc., are
not capable of giving any support to sparśa.
155. Commentary of Kathāvatthu, xiv.2; Kofa, ii.14.
156. Vyākhyā: cakṣurādyayatanotpattikāle kāyamanaāyatanayor vyavasthāpanāt. Hsüan-tsang:
"But this refers to the moment when the six ayatanas are complete."
157. Vibḥāṣā, TD 27, p. 117c3: Pratityasamutpada is of four types: kşanika, sāṁbandhika, āvasthika,
and prākarşika.
The Vyākhyā explains, in a different order: a. kṣaṇikaḥ kṣaṇe bhavaḥ kṣaño'syāstīti kṣaṇikaḥ.b.
prakarsena divyati carati vā prākarşikaḥ prabandhayukta ity arthah.And further on: sa
evavasthikaḥ prakarṣayogāt prākarṣikaḥ/anekakṣaṇikatvād anekajanmikatvāc ca.c. sambandhikaḥ
/hetuphalasambandhayukta ity arthaḥ.d. āvasthikaḥ / dvādaśa pañcaskandhikā avasthā ity arthaḥ.
158. Hsüan-tsang corrects: "the three skandhas."
159. One can say that the organs are placed beside the nāman which is their support (āśraya); one
can say that their existence or activity (vṛtti) depends on nâmarūpa.
160. The abhinipata of the eye is its activity (pravṛtti) with respect to visible things.
161. The paryavasthānas are the absence of shame, ahri, etc., v.47.
162. Here Hsüan-tsang and Paramärtha omit this quotation from the Prakaraṇa. (According to the
Vyākhyā, "the Prakaraṇas"). See below, p. 405, 410.
163. Samghabhadra: The masters of the Abhidharma say that it is with respect to the "states"
(avasthās) that the Buddha taught pratītyasamutpāda.The Sautrāntika (=Vasubandhu) does not
believe this, and this is why he puts in his stanza the word kila (which we have translated as
"according to the School").
164. Saeki mentions Madhyama, TD 1, p. 578b16. Pratītyasamutpāda of the Sūtra is ābhiprāyika; in
the Abhidharma, lākṣaṇika. See above, note 152.
165. Samyutta, ii.26; Majjhima, i8, 111; Visuddhimagga, 599; Samyukta, TD 2, p. 84b26;
Šalistamba, p. 88 (Théorie des douze causes), quoted in Madhyamakavṛtti, 593. Variants, among
which we shall take up those of the third paragraph.
Vyākhyā: kim svid idam ity ätmadravyam anveşate / kathaṁ svid idam iti kena prakāreņa kayā
yuktyeti / ke santa iti ke vayam idānīṁ vidyamānaḥ / ke bhavisyāma ity evaṁ nāvadhārayati.
The Sālistamba in the Madhyamakavṛtti: kiṁ nv idam / kathaṁ nv idam / ke santaḥ / ke
bhaviṣyāmaḥ / ayaṁ sattvaḥ kuta āgataḥ / sa itaś cyutaḥ kutra gamiṣyati.
Majjhima, i.8 and Visuddhimagga, 599 (Warren, 243): ahaṁ nu kho’smi / no nu kho'smi / kim
nu kho'smi / kathaṁ nu kho'smi / ayaṁ nu kho sutto kuto āgato / so kuhiṁgāmī bhavissati (The
Visuddhimagga reads: ahaṁ nu kho'smim ….. )
This text appears to bear some relationship to the Sūtra of the tṛṣṇavicaritas, Kośa, vii.13a.
166. Opinion rejected by Samghabhadra.
167. These are the three vartman or vațța. Visuddhimagga, 581: tivaṭṭam (idaṁ bhavacakkam)
anavaṭṭhitam bhamati.
In all the other sources, the third vartman is solely defined as retribution (vipāka) (or fruit,
phala); see Théorie des douze causes, 34.
168. Hsüan-tsang: "The naya of the bhavāngas is solely that." Saṁghabhadra comments on the
word "solely", which, he says, indicates that the number of the bhavangas is limited to twelve.
169. Madhyama, 34.3, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 92c22.514
Chapter Three
The commentators say: the word kevala indicates the absence of ātman (self) and of ātmīya
(things pertaining to the self); the word "grand" indicates the absence of beginning and end; ..
"'mass of suffering", because it is accumulated by the impure saṁskāras; samudaya because it is
produced by a conjunction of conditions . . .
170. According to the Vyākhyā: "The Sthavira Vasubandhu, teacher of the master Manoratha”;
according to P'u-kuang: "Vasubandhu the elder, a dissident Sarvāstivādin" (yu pu i shih
₺ ).
On Manoratha, the teacher of Vasubandhu the elder, see Watters, i.211.
171. According to the Vyākhyā, the Sahetusapratyayasanidānasūtra.
avidyā bhikṣavaḥ sahetukā sapratyayā sanidānā / kaf ca bhikṣavo 'vidyāyā hetuḥ kaḥ pratyayaḥ
kiṁ nidānam / avidyāyā bhikṣṣavo 'yoniśomanasikāro hetuḥ…..
Same quotation in the Madhyamakavṛtti, 452, excerpt from the Pratityasamutpädasutra.
Samyukta, 13.20 (note of Saeki).
Théorie des douze causes, p. 8; Anguttara, v.113 (on the nourishment of avidyā).
Nettippakarana, 79 (avijjā avijjāya hetu, ayonisomanasikāro paccayo).
172. See below, note 176.
173. "Here", that is to say in the Sūtra that we are concerned with now, the Pratityasamutpādasūtra
(Vyakhyā), the Dvādaśāṁgasūtra (Saeki).
For example, Samyutta, ii.25.
174. The Sautrāntika Śrīlābha.
175. See above, note 171.
176. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 74b-c. cakṣuḥ pratītya rūpāṇi cotpadyata āvilo manasikāro mohajaḥ.
mohaja = avidyāja.
Madhyamakavṛtti, 452, according to the Pratityasamutpādasútra: āvilo mohaja manasikāro
bhikṣavo'vidyāyā hetuḥ.
177. Samyukta, 2.14. Saṁyutta, iii.96: avijjāsamphassajena . . . vedayitena phuṭṭhasya assutavato
puthujjanassa uppannā taṇhā.
178. Samyutta, ii.25: paṭiccasamuppādaṁ vo bhikkhave desissāmi paṭiccasamuppanne ca dhamme.
179. Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 715c4 trasyadhvikāḥ sarve saṁskṛtā dharmāḥ pratītyasamutpāādaḥ / ta
eva ca pratityasamutpannah.
Above P. 405.
180. By qualifying cetană with the word ābhisaṁskārikā, the author indicates the unique or
self-characteristic of all the cetanās (i.15a); for the cetană, creating retribution (vipākābhisa-
mskaraṇāt) is its ābhisaṁskārikā.The future dharmas are "willed" (cetita), that is to say are "the
object of a vow or an intention" (praṇihita), by this cetanā, "I will be a god, I will be a man." It is in
this way that the future dharmas are saṁskṛta; they are not so called through "anticipatory
designation" (bhāvinyā saṁjñayā).
181. It is the object of a kuśaladharmacchanda, v.16, viii.20c.
182. Kośa, i 13.
183. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 118b25: The Bhadanta Vasumitra says: The dharma which is cause (hetu) is
pratītyasamutpāda dharma; the dharma which is caused (sahetuka) is pratītyasamutpanna dharma;
the dharma which is arising is pratītyasamutpāda dharma . . . ; the dharma which is production
(utpāda) . . . ; the dharma which is active (karaka?) . . . The Bhadanta says: The pravartaka (see
Kośa, iv.10) is pratītyasamutpāda dharma; the anuvartaka is pratītyasamutpanna dharma.
184. According to the Tibetan, the Sthavira Bsam rdzogs (which Schiefner, Tāranātha, 4, n.6, givesFootnotes 515
as Sambhūti); Hsüan-tsang: wang-man
"hope-fulfillment"; transcribed by Paramartha.
This paragraph appears to be excerpted word for word from the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 118b15,
which Saeki quotes fol. 16a.
185. According to the Vyākhyā.
186. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 85a16. pūrvänte'jñānam aparānte'jñānaṁ madhyānte'jñānam
buddhe'jñānam dharme'jñānaṁ saṁghe'jñānam … … . . (See p. 421).
187. See Chapter ix, French trans. p.247.
188. The Lotsava translates: "It happens that, in the Teaching not everything is only of clear
meaning. The Bhagavat also gives definitions which bear on the essentials of the thing to be
defined." Hsüan-tsang: "All the Sūtras are not spoken in a clear meaning; it happens that they are
also spoken according to their essentials." Paramartha: "All the Sūtras are not of clear meaning by
the fact that they define …..
>>
189. Siksāsamuccaya, 245; Majjbima, i.185 (katama ajjbattika patbavidbatu / yam ajjbattam...
kakkhalam ... seyyathāpi kesā . . . ), iii.240.
190. The Lotsava indicates the first words of this other Sutra: santy asmin käye, see Śikṣāsamuccaya,
228, Madhyamakavṛtti, 57, Majjhima, iii.90, Dīgha, iii.101.
191. The vijñāna that this refers to is the pratisaṁdhivijñāna, the vijñāna of "reincarnation": we
should understand upaga = tāṁ tāṁ upapattiṁ gacchati.
192. According to the Vyākhyā, the Āryamahīśāsakas; according to the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 116c57,
the Vibhajyavādins; according to the Samayabheda, the Mahäsärghikas; according to the Yü-chia
lun chi, the Mahāsāṁghikas and the Mahiśāsakas. Kathāvatthu, vi.2 (xi.7, xxi.7);
Nirvana, 1925, p. 185.
Samyukta, TD2, p. 84b16. Utpādād vā tathāgatānām anut pādād vā tathāgatānāṁ sthitaiveyam
(dbar mànām) dbarmatd; Samyutta, ii25; Visuddbimagga, 518.
,
On this formula (which the Vyākhyā quotes according to the Sālistambasūtra, Cordier, 111,
361), see the note in Théorie des douze causes, 111-113.
193. Utpādaś ca nāmābhūtvābhāvalakṣaṇaḥ (definition of the Sautrāntikas, ii. p. 242), Paramārtha
translates this text. The Lotsava has: ut pādaś ca nāmotpattiḥ (and the Vyākhyā glosses: the ut patti
of a dharma is necessarily "of the moment", [tadanimtana]). Vyākhyā, in Cosmologie, p. 166, line 5,
reads: ko'syotpädasya avidyādibhir abhisambandho yathaudanena päkasyābhisambandhaḥ karty-
kriyālakṣaṇaḥ.
194. Etymology of the word pratītyasamutpäda, Burnouf, Lotus, 530, Introduction, 623;
Visuddhimagga, 518, 521 (Warren, 168); Aung and Rhys Davids, Compendium, 259; Madhya-
makavṛtti, 5; Théorie des douze causes, 48.
195. According to Pāṇini, 3.4.21: samānakartṛkayoh pūrvakāle.
196. The Sautrāntikas do not admit the pre-existence of this dharma.
197. Šābdika = Sabdavid = vaiyakarana.
198. Two opinions: the refutation which follows is Sautrāntika or Sarvāstivādin (P’u-kuang, TD 41,
p. 170a29).
199. Anāgata = alabdhātmaka.
200. Two simultaneous actions: pratītyakriyā and samutpādakriyā.
201. According to the version of Paramārtha, more explicit than Hsüan-tsang: “One should quote
this Sūtra as an explanation of pratītyasamutpada."
202. Vyākhyā: asann abhāvo'labdhātmaka utpadyate yathā pratyety api tathā / asan // atha516 Chapter Three
labdhātmaka utpadyate . . . utpanno’pi punar utpadyata ity anavasthānād aniṣṭā prāpnoti. Yet the
Sāṁkhyas affirm sata evotpādo nāsataḥ. And we Buddhists admit the existence of the future against
the Vaibhāşikas; and against the Sautrāntikas; we admit the existence of "generating seeds"
(janakadharmabīja): we say then san purāpi vā: “or rather, it is pre-existent."
But one can see in the fourth pāda: asan purāpi vā = “In order to avoid infinite regression, you
say that it arises non-existent: this is to return to the thesis refuted in the first line: asann ut padyate
yadvat."
203. Vyākhyā: na hy asau pūrvaṁ mukhaṁ vyādadāti vidārayati paścăc chete / kim tarhi mukhaṁ
vyādadan chete sa mukhaṁ vyādāya śeta ity ucyate/...
204. This is the explanation of Bhadanta Śrīlābha (Vyākhyā).
pratir vīpsārtha iti nānāvacinām adhikaraṇānāṁ sarveṣāṁ kriyāguṇābhyām icchā vīpsā / tām
ayam pratir dyotayati // itau gatau sādhava iṭyāḥ / tatra sādhur iti yatpratyayaḥ / itau vinaṣṭau
sādhavo'navasthāyina ity arthaḥ // samupasargaḥ samavāyārtham dyotayati // utpūrvah padiḥ
prādurbhāvārtho dhātvarthapariņāmāt // tāṁ tāṁ sāmagrīm prati ityānāṁ vinaśvarāṇāṁ
samavāyenotpādaḥ pratītyasamutpādaḥ.One dharma never arises alone, Kośa, ii.22, etc.
See the explanation of pratyaya, vii. note 100.
205. Samyutta, ii.72, iv. 33; Milinda, 56, etc.
206. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 85a14, Majjhima, iii.63, Mahāvastu, ii¡.285, Madhyamakavṛtti, 9, Théorie
des douze causes, p. 49.
i. First explanation, approved by Vasubandhu. The arguments two to four are (according to
P'u-kuang who follows Saṁghabhadra), those of the Sthaviraśişya Bhadanta Rāma (fiș-
ya=ti-tzu #‡).
ii. Second explanation, that of the Sthavira Vasuvarman (Vyākhyā); according to Fa-pao, a
divergent explanation of the Sautrāntikas (ching-pu i shih ) (as is also the fifth
explanation); according to P'u-kuang, the “dissident Santrāntika master” (ching-pu i-shih
), the Bhadanta Shih-ts'ao (Vasuvarman); according to Samghabhadra, the
"Sthavira-t'u-t'ang", (which gives Sthavirapākṣika, a follower of the Sthavira).
iii. Heterodox explanation.
iv. Explanation of the ancient masters (Sautrāntika).
v. Explanation of Śrīlābha (Vyākhyā) (whom Saṁghabhadra terms, generally, "the Sthavira”);
Fa-pao: a divergent explanation of the Sauträntikas; P'u-kuang, "Sthavira-t'ung-hsüeh";
Samghabhadra, "Sthavira-t'ung-chien."
207. The Vyākhyā comments on this paragraph with the words: etat sarvam ācāryamatam.
208. According to the Vyākhyā, an explanation of the Sthavira Vasuvarman, which should be the
Shih-ts'ao of P'u-kuang. A Vasuvarman is the author of TD 32, no 1647, Treatise on the Four
Truths.
209. Namely, the ancient masters: ācāryā iti pūrvācāryāḥ.
210. aprahāṇajñāpanārtham, utpattijñāpanārtham.
211. According to the Vyākhyā, the opinion of Śrīlābha.
212. According to the Vyākhyā: sa eṣa Bhadanta Śrīlābhah.Note of Saeki: the Sthavira.
213. The Sūtra says: jātipratyayā jaramaraṇaśokaparidevaduḥkhadaurmanasyopāyāsāḥ saṁbha-
vanti (with variants).
The terms foka …...upāyāsas are included (saṁgṛhīta) in jarāmaraṇa and are not separate items
(nāngāntaram). They come from diverse transformations (pariņāma) of objects (visaya), living
beings and non-living beings, and from the person (ātmabhāva).
They are defined: foka = daurmanasyasamprayuktavitarka; parideva = fokasamutthitapralāpa;
duḥkha, as ii.7a; daurmanasya, as ii.8b; upāyāsa = vicchinnavega daurmanasya, or, according to
others, fokaparidevapūrvaka śrama (Vyākhyā).Footnotes 517
See the definitions of the Sālistambasūtra (Théorie des douze causes, 80); Abhidhammaasan-
gaha, 36; sokādivacanam pan'ettha nissandaphalanidassanam; Visuddhimagga, 503 (grief is the
cause of all vyasana); for other references, see Théorie des douze causes, 31-32.
Soka, etc., are represented on the wheel of existence in Ajaṇṭā, J. Przyluski, JAs. 1920, ii.313, an
article that should be read.
214. The Vyākhyā explains aprajānan with the words äveṇikīm avidyāṁ darśśayati: “the author
indicates here avidyä pure and simple.” See p. 402, 419.
215. See iii.101b.
216. For us, the item vijñāna is the whole of the series of vijñānas from the existence at death
(maraṇabhava) until the existence at birth (upapattibhava): in other words, the mental series of the
intermediate being since his initial mind (pratisammhicitta) to its end (the existence at birth, the
beginning of the realm of rebirth). This series includes mental consciousness (manovijñāna), plus
the five consciousnesses, visual consciousness, etc. We are thus in agreement with the definition of
the item vijñāna (vijñānānganirdefe): vijñānam katamat / ṣaḍ vijñānakāyāḥ.
This definition of the vijñāna is from the Madhyama, TD 1, p. 578b16, Majjhima, i.53.
According to Paramārtha, confirmed by the Vyākhyā below (see note 217), we should read:
"according to the Vijñānavibhanga of the Pratityasamutpädastra.”
If the item vijñāna is the initial mind of the realm of rebirth, existence at arising
(pratisamdhicitta, upapattibhava), the Sūtra would say: vijñānaṁ katamat / manovijñānam. For "it
is to the manovijñāna alone that the cutting off of the roots belongs . . . ” (iii.42a).
217. Vyākhyā: pratītyasamutpādasūtre nāmarūpavibhanga evaṁ nirdeśāt / nāma katamat . . .
On the definition of nāmarūpa and its variants, Théorie des douze causes.
218. Here Vasubandhu gives the Sautrāntika explanation of upādāna: the Vaibhāṣika thesis, v.38.
On the four upādānas, Kathāvatthu, xv.2, Vibhanga, 145, Nettippakaraṇa, 41, Samyutta, ii.3, Dīgha,
ii.58, Majjbima, 1.66.
219. On kukkuravrata, etc., Majjhima, i.387, Dīgha, iii.6.
The Pāṇḍarabhikṣus call to mind the Pandarangaparibbājakas who divided, along with the
Brahmins and the brāhmaṇajātiyapāsandas, the favors of Bindusara, Samantapāsādikā, 44; Mrs
Rhys Davids reconciles this with the Paṇḍara[sa]gotta of the Theragāthā, 949.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 590a26: There are two Tirthakas, Acela Śreņika (Acela Seniya
Kukkuravatika of the Majjhima, i.387, compare Nettippakaraṇa, 99) and Pūraṇa Kodika (Puṇṇa
Koliyaputta Govatika). These two Tirthikas, at the same time, went to ask questions of the people
seated together, saying, "We two practice all the difficult practices of this world, we study them, and
we accomplish them to perfection. Who can in truth prophesize the retribution that these practices
will produce?...
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 284a13: Šilavratopādāna is twofold, internal and external. The inner
persons (or Buddhists) are those who abuse themselves thinking that bathing makes for purity, that
the practice of the twelve Dhutas suffices for purity.
220. Ātmabhāva, ātmavāda are the five upādānaskandhas, as results from the text: ye ke cic
chramaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā ātmeti samanupaśyantaḥ samanupaśyanti sarve ta imān eva
pañcopādānaskandhān.(Saṁyutta, iii.46).
221. The "divergent" masters (i-shih) of the Sautrāntika school (Saeki).
222. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 498b10. Bālo bhikṣavo'śrutavān pṛthagjanaḥ prajñaptim anupatitaḥ
cakṣuṣā rūpāṇi dṛṣṭva . . . (Madhyamakavṛtti, 137 and note).
The bāla, who lacks “innate” (upapattilābhikā) prajñā which comes from the influence of a
previous religious practice (purvābhyāsavāsanānirjātā); aśrutavān, who is lacking the prajñā which
arises from Scripture (āgamajā); the prthagjana, who is lacking the prajñā arisen from adhigama,
that is to say from satyābhisamaya (vi.27).
Prajñaptim anupatitas = yathā saṁjñā yathā ca vyavaḥāras tathānugataḥ.The expression518 Chapter Three
appears to be lacking in Pāļi.
223. "In the Sarva", I understand to be the Sarvavarga, but we do not find anything parallel in the
Sabbavagga of the Samyutta, iv.15. The Lotsava translates as thams cad las; Hsüan-tsang: chu-
ching in all the various Scriptures”; Paramārtha: i-ch'ieh ch'u'— "in all places".
224. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 58a4; Samyutta, iii.100: "Is upādāna the same thing as the
upādānaskandhas? It is neither the same thing as the upādānaskandhas, nor different from the
upādānaskandhas: chandarāga with respect to them is upādāna with respect to them (api ca yo
tattha chandarāgo tam tattha upādānam)"; iii.167: rūpa is an upādāniya dhamma (that is the object
of upādāna, giving rise to upādāna); chandarāga with respect to it is upādāna with respect to rūpa
(the same for the other skandhas); iv.89, same text by replacing the skandhas with the six indriyas.
Vyākhyā: aprāpteṣu viṣayeṣu prārthanā chandah; prāpteṣu rāgaḥ.
225. Vyākhyā: idam atra bhavasya svalakṣaṇaṁ svabhāva ity arthaḥ.
Compare the Sūtra quoted vi.3 (trans. note 27): yad kim cid veditam idam atra duḥkhasya.
Visuddhimagga, 575, less precise; Vibhanga, 137, Cullaniddesa, 471.
226. Hsüan-tsang: vijñānasaṁtanayogena. avakrānti = liu ti "to flow". avakkanti of viññāṇa,
Samyutta, ii.91.
227. Compare Majjhima, i.49, Dīgha, ii.305, Vibhanga, 99, Dhammasangani, 644.
The word khālitya, cavity, corresponds to khaṇḍicca which is explained as "the state of being
broken (of teeth)" (Rhys Davids-Stede) according to the Anguttara, i.138 (khaṇḍadanta),
Visuddhimagga, 449.
228. In the word avidyā, the prefix nañ(ā-) has the sense of virodha; it creates words which
designate the vipaksa (the pratidvandva); it does not indicate simple exclusion (paryudasamātra);
and it does not indicate simple absence (abhāva).
229. Other examples: ayukti, avyavahāra, amanuṣya.(On amanuşya, iv.58c-d, 97b, and iv. note 348.)
230. See v.34.
231. On darśana, vii.1.
232. We have seen above (p. 417) that fools "do not understand (aprajānan) the conditioned
character of the dharmas": we can draw a definition of avidyā from this passage. This avidyā is
anterior to dṛsti (ātmadṛṣṭi = satkāyadṛṣṭi). Definition of avidyā, p. 411, 421.
On the other hand avidyā = moha, ii.26a, iv.9c, v.20a.
Speaking truthfully, if avidyā is not simply "ignorance," the simple absence of correct vidyā or
prajñā, one is at a loss to see how it is not a defiled prajñā; if avidyā is anything other than ignorance
of the conditioned character of the dharmas, ignorance of the true nature of former existence, etc.,
how is it not confused with this defiled prajñā which is the bad dṛṣṭis, "view of self", "view of the
former existence of self," etc.? All the more then one may admit a reasoned "view of the self," such
as non-Buddhist scholars can formulate, a natural, innate (sahaja) “view of the self." Note that the
three drstis are defined as moha (mūḍhi), the root of evil (v.20a).
233. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 190b15.
On the deliverance of the defiled mind, vi.77a.
The Abhidhamma (for example the Paṭisambhidāmagga, i.21) recognizes the visuddhi of sīla,
citta, and diṭṭhi.
234. Vyākhyā: kalpanāmātram etad āgamanirapekṣam iti kathayati.Fa-pao and P'u-kuang do not
agree whether Vasubandhu here takes the part of the Vaibhāṣikas against the Sautrāntikas. In other
words, whether Vasubandhu says, as his personal opinion, "Who can stop a master in his
imaginations?", or if he gives these words to the Vaibhāṣikas. The Vyākhyā accepts the first
hypothesis. But Saṁghabhadra says, “The Sautrāntikas say that good prajñā can be mixed ...", and
we know that he always mentions and quotes Vasubandhu as "the Sautrāntika.” The ChineseFootnotes
519
commentators think that Vasubandhu rejects the theory of the mixing of good prajñā with defiled
prajñā; nevertheless, he does not admit that avidyā is a separate dharma.
235. Hsüan-tsang: "There is a separate thing, avidyā, which differs from prajñā, as rāga differs from
the mind. This master is correct."
236. Bhadanta Śrīlābha says, "Avidyā is the general designation of all of the klefas; there is no avidyā
separate from craving and the other kleśas (avidyeti sarvakleśānām iyaṁ sāmānyasaṁjñā / na
rāgādikleśavyatiriktāvidyā nāmāsti). According to the Sūtra, "Oh Mahakauşthila, he does not
rightly discern (na prajānāts), and as a consequence we say avidya" (Sammyutta, iii.172:
Mahakoṭṭhito (or Mahākoṭṭhiko)...avoca / avijjā avijjāti āvuso Sāriputta vuccati…). In fact all the
klefas are by their nature non-knowledge (ajñānasvarūpa), for they grasp things as they are not
(viparitagrahaṇatas).
This is the thesis of Harivarman in TD 32, no 1646. According to Saeki, here Vasubandhu refers
to Harivarman.
237. Above iii. p., Samyukta, TD2, p. 85a16, p. 126c5: pūrvānte 'jñānam aparānte... madhyānte...
(buddhadharmasaṁgharatneşv... duḥkhasamudayanirodhamärgeşv... kuśalākuśalāvyākṛteşv...
ādhyātmika...bāhye'jñānam / yat kiṁcid tatra tatrājñānaṁ tama āvaraṇam…) See Kośa, ii.26a-c,
where we have avidyā, ajñāna and "non-clarity."
Vibhanga, 85: yamaññāņam adassanam anabhisamayo….. (asaṁpakkhāna is missing from the
long list of synonyms).
One will find in Rhys Davids-Stede (avijjā) and in Théorie des douze causes, 6-9, a good number
of references.
238. The Vyākhyā has mayanā, mayanānām, and in the Dhātupāṭha, mī gatau: thus sattvamayanā.
Paramartha has simply lei (= maya).
Hsüan-tsang: yu ch'ing shih (to depend upon, to support) wo lei hsing ##004 =
sattva-ātmāśrita-maya-tā: lei gives maya and hsing = -tā, 1.
P'u-kuang explains: lei-hsing (mayatā) = ahammāna.
Samghabhadra explains maya in the sense of "to go (to the realms of rebirth)"; that which is the
nature of maya is mayatā.(We would have sattva mayatā = "the quality of going of beings . . . ”).
239. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 245c21.
240. Ahaṁkāramamakāramānānuśaya, Saṁyutta, iii.80, etc.; asmimāna, asmīti māna, iii.155.
241. Nischaya corresponds to nicchāta of the Pāļi sources. On this word, Rhys Davids and Stede.
Often accompanying nibbuta, sītībhūta, etc.: however see Anguttara, v.65.
242. Here it would be more fitting to explain the saṁskāras and vijñāna; see iii.36a.
243. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 73a18, Théorie des douze causes, p. 16-18. See ii.47.
244. It is by reason of a name that the non-material skandhas are active (pravartante) with respect
to objects not immediately perceived (apratyakṣeṣv artheṣu): "Such is the object (or the meaning),
artha, of this noun." By reason of the organs, the non-material skandhas arise (utpadyante) with
respect to the objects perceived. By reason of the object, the non-material skandhas are active with
respect to names: "Such is the name of this object."
Compare Atthasalini, 392, Expositor, 500-501. Buddhaghosa, on the origin of names; Vibhāṣā,
TD 27,1
P.
73a18.
245. On this subject the Vyākhyā quotes a Sūtra which presents together, with the Mahānāmasutta
of the Samyutta, v.369, some interesting variants: mṛtasya khalu kālagatasya jñātaya imam
pūtikakāyam agninā vā dihanti udake vā plāvayanti bhūmau vā nikhananti vātātapābhyāṁ vā
pariśoşaṁ parikṣayaṁ paryādānaṁ gacchati / yat punar idam ucyate cittam iti vā mana iti vā
vijñānam iti vā śraddāparibhävitaṁ ſfilatyāgafrutaprajñāparibhāvitaṁ tad ürdhvagāmi bhavati
vifeşagamy ayatyāṁ svargopagam.520 Chapter Three
In Samyutta, mention only of the body cut to pieces and eaten by animals and birds, etc.; as
Digha, ii.295. See Nariman, RHR, 1912, 185.
246. On sparsa, see Kośa, ii.24, iii. note 160. Théorie des douze causes, 22, Mrs Rhys Davids, intro. to
the trans. of the Dhammasangani, 63, Compendium, 12, 14 (awareness of the objective
presentation).
Majjhima, i.190; Atthasālinī, 109, 141-2; Visuddhimagga, 463, 595; Madhyamakavṛtti, 554
(important); Vijnanakaya (analyzed in Études Asiatiques, 1925, L.370).
Here the kārikā defines the position of the Sarvāstivādins: whereas, according to the
Sautrāntikas, sparsa is the "coming together of the three", according to the Sarvästivādins (and
according to Buddhaghosa, Atthasālini, 109), sparía is not the "coming together of the three", but
the effect of this coming together, a mental (caitasika) dharma, Kośa, ii.24.
The "three" are the eye, the object and the vijñāna. The vijñāna is produced by the eye and the
object (plus an intellectual element, the samanvāhāra), Majjhima, i.190, Madhyamakavṛtti, i.554.
The Sarvästivādin thesis that the vijñāna (=citta), “the mind,” knows “the thing only"
(arthamatra), whereas the "mental states" (caitta, caitasika) (namely sparſa, vedanā, etc.) know the
"particulars of the thing” (arthaviseșa). Th. Stcherbatski (Central Conception, 15, 17, 55) defines
vijñāna as "the mind viewed as a receptive faculty, pure consciousness (which renders well the idea
of manodhātu), pure sensation without any content," and sparfa as "sensation," "real sensation". To
not depart from the definitions furnished by our texts (Kofa, ii.34, note 178), vijñāna grasps the
upalabhyatārūpa: this is the most rudimentary of the "gnosis" (as psychologists say), the idea that
one perceives something; but, on the other hand, cakṣurvijñānaṁ nīlaṁ vijānāti, “the visual
consciousness knows the blue" (One should explain that without doubt one should understand by
cakṣurvijñāna the vijñāna with the caittas, sparfa, etc., which necessarily accompany it).
Maung Tin recounts the definition of sparfa of the Atthasālinī: tikasaṁnipātasaṁkhātassa
pana attano kāraṇassa vasena paveditattā saṁnipātapaccupaṭṭhāno (phasso) = Contact has
coinciding as its manifestation, because it is revealed through its own cause, known as the coinciding
of the three (i.e., the basis [that is to say, the organ], the object and consciousness). The meaning of
this appears to be: Contact appears, arises (paccupaṭṭhāts) by reason of the conjunction (literally:
has for its immediate cause this conjunction: yasya saṁnipātaḥ pratyupasthānaṁ sa saṁni-
patapratyupasthāna its), because it is sensed ("experienced") by reason of (and in conformity with)
its cause,
which is what is called the conjunction of the three." From another point of view phassa is
vedanapaccupaṭṭhāna (=yo vedanāyāḥ pratyupasthänaṁ sa vedanāpratyupasthāna iti) because it
causes the vedanā or agreeable impression to arise (paccapaṭṭhāpeti = uppādeti).
247. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 18a16: in the Pali sources, we need not read tinnaṁ saṁgatiphasso, as does
the Samyutta Index, but like Saṁyutta, iv.68, and Majjhima, i111: yā . . . imesaṁ tiņṇaṁ
dhammānaṁ saṁgati saṁnipāto samavāyo ayaṁ vuccati cakkhusamphasso. Nettippakaraṇa, 28:
cakkhurūpaviññāṇasaṁnipätalakkhano phasso. Théorie des douze causes, p. 20.
248. Atthasālini, 109: na saṁgatimattam eva phasso.
249. Şatsatka dharmaparyāya, Majjhima, iii. 180 (Chachakkasutta) Dīgha, iii.243.
250. See iv.4a-b.
251. They read ya eṣāṁ dharmāṇāṁ saṁgateḥ saṁnipātāt samavāyāt sa sparfaḥ.And not: . . .
saṁgatiḥ samnipātaḥ samavāyaḥ .……
252. Classic example: yathā buddhānāṁ sukha utpādāḥ (Dhammapada, 194), Visuddhimagga, in
Warren, 194, Madhyamakavṛtti, 70.
253. This discussion is atibahuvistaraprakāravisāriņā.
254. Sparsa = samsparśa (Vyākhyā).
255. Pratighasamsparśa, so called because its āfraya (the organ) is sapratigha (first opinion of the
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 760c13, which follows TD 28, no 1552 and Vasubandhu), because its afraya andFootnotes 521
its object (alambana) are sapratigha (second opinion of the Vibhāṣā, which follows TD 28, number
1550 and Samghabhadra).
256. Adhivacanasamphassa, Dīgha, ii.62 (Warren, 206, Dialogues, ii.59, and an attempt at
translation in Théorie des douze causes, p. 19, n. 2), Vibhanga, 6. Adhivacana in Dhammasangaṇi,
1306.
257. Vyākhyā: adhyucyate' nenety adhivacanam / văn nămni pravartate nāmārthaṁ dyotayatīty
adhivacanam nāma.
258. cakşurvijñānena nīlaṁ vijānāti no tu nīlam iti / manovijñānena nīlam nīlam iti ca vijānāti
(variant: cakşurvijñānasamangī…..manovijñānasamangī...). On this text, which is without doubt
excepted from the Abhidharma (Nyāyabindupūrvapakṣasaṁkṣepa, Mdo 111, fol. 108b), see Kofa,
i.14c, Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 74, note.
259. This is the opinion of Fa-sheng in the Abhidharmahṛdaya (6.18), TD 28, number 1550.
Fa-sheng has been reconstructed as Dharmakirti, Dharmajina (Nanjio), or Dharmottara
(Takakusu); Péri, "“Date de Vasubandhu," 25, mentions the transcription dha-ma-sli-ti (=?).
260. Hsüan-tsang translates: with the vacana for its adhipati [pratyaya].
261. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 760b25. Two sparśas: sāsrava and anäsrava; three sparśas: kuśala, akuśala,
and avyākṛta; four sparſas: traidhātuka and adhātuparyāpanna; etc. From the point of view of
nīvaraṇa and of its pratipakṣa (the hindrance and its opposition): sparsas of avidyā and vidyā; from
the point of view of the same nature of the sparsa: sparśa of neither-vidyā-nor-avidyā; from the
point of view of what is pleasing and what is displeasing: sparfas of sympathy and antipathy; from
the point of view of association (samprayoga): agreeable sparsa, etc.; from the point of view of its
support: sparsas of the eye, of the ear, etc.
262. Abhikṣṇasamudācārin = nityasamudācārin (Vyākhyā).
263. How sparśa is vedanīya, iv.49.
Sukhavedya is explained: sukhasya vedaḥ sukhavedaḥ / sukhavede sādhuḥ sukhavedyaḥ /
sukhaṁ vā vedyam asminn iti sukhavedyaḥ.
264. Vedanā has been explained i.14, ii.24; here the author does not explain the characteristics
(lakṣaṇa) of vedanā, but its type (prakāra).
On adukkbāsukbā, Majjbima, i.397.
265. The Sautrāntika does not reply, because the problem of shade has already been discussed ii.50c.
266. Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 698c10.
267. Samyukta, 8.4. Saeki quotes TD 24, number 1451 (the Vinayakṣudrakavastu, see S. Lévi, Seize
Arbats, p. 37) where the Bhagavat explains to Ananda the four principles of Anguttara, i.167.
268. The Vaibhāṣika theory of the mahābhūmikas is presented ii.23c and following; one should
replace adhimukti with adhimokṣa, p. 189, 190.
269. The asaṁskṛtas are unconnected with cause, since they refer to the caittas.
270. Paramārtha translates: “in the first three bhūmis"; Hsüan-tsang: “in the first bhūmis”; the
Vyākhyā glosses: in the savitarka-savicāra bhūmi.
271. This is the thesis presented ii. trans. p. 192–3, 204.
Here the Vyākhyā quotes several definitions of the Pañcaskandhaka (of Vasubandhu) (Mdo,
58) which we have reproduced ii. trans. p. 189–190. (There is a Pañcaskandhaka by Candrakīrti,
Mdo, 24).
272. The Prakaraṇapāda in effect arranges the "mental states" into four categories: mahābhūmikas,
kusalamahābhūmikas, kleśamahābhūmikas, parīttakleśabhūmikas (see ii. trans. p. 195–6 and note
109).522 Chapter Three
273. The Sūtra opposes akuśala to kuśala.
274. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 72c9, p. 87c26.
We have Samyutta ii.72, iv.33 and passim: cakkhuṁ ca paticca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhu-
vin nà nam / tin nam samgati phasso / pbassapacca ya vedana / vedonapacca ya tan bà | ayam kho
dukkhassa samudayo.
Our Sūtra, most probably, has: cakṣuḥ pratītya rūpāṇi cotpadyate cakṣurvijñānam /
truyệnăm samnipatab sparsab / sabaja a vedana samjna cetana
Vijñānakāya in Études Asiatiques (BEFEO, 1925), i.370.
275. The meaning of sahajäta is not specified; we can understand it as parasparasahajāta, “arisen
one from the other."
276. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 197c18: maitrīsahagataṁ smṛtisambodhyangam bhāvayati.
277. Madhyama, TD, p. 791bl. yā vedanā yā ca saṁjñā [yā ca cetanā yac ca vijñānaṁ] saṁsṛṣṭā [ime
dharmā na visaṁsṛṣṭāḥ]. Saeki quotes this Sūtra which has for its protagonist Great-ko-thi-la (the
same person to whom the Bhagavat teaches that āyus and uşmaka are “mixed," below note 281):
the Pāļi edition, Majjhima, i.293 (Mahāvedallasutta, where the protagonists are Mahākoṭṭita and
Sāriputta), omits the words yā ca cetană.
It is the doctrine of the Dhammasaṁgaṇṇṇi, 1193, that the skandhas of vedanāā, saññā and
saṁkhāra (=cetanā) are cittasaṁsaṭṭha [that is, united to the mind from their origins to their end,
Atthasālini, 49).
On samsṛsta, vii.lld.
278. This means, according to the Vyākhyā, in the same Sūtra where we read: “vedanā, saṁjñā,
cetană...
279. Majjhima, i.293 omits yam ceteti …..
Compare Samyutta, iv.68: phuttho vedeti phuttho ceteti phutṭṭho samjānāti.
280. According to the Vyākhyā, this is a reply of Vasubandhu: ācārya āha.
281. The Sūtra is quoted viii.3c, note 26. The formula is lacking in Majjhima, i.295. On āyus and
uşman (ușmaka), ii. trans. p. 233.
282. The Pali sources know of six somanassi
ssūpavicāras, domanassūpavicāras, and upekkhūpavicāras
(Dīgha, iii.244, Majjhima, iii.218, Vibhanga, 381, etc.): cakkhunā rūpaṁ disvā somanassaṭṭhāniyaṁ
rūpaṁ upavicarati…..manasādhammaṁ viññāya somanassaṭṭhāniyaṁ dhammam upavicarati; but
they ignore the word mana-upavicāra, as does the Mahāvyutpatti.
The Sanskrit text: cakṣuṣā rūpāṇi dṛṣṭvā saumanasyasthānīyāni rūpāṇy upavicarati … . . manasā
dharmān vijñāya saumanasyasthānīyān dharmān upavicarati.
This grammatical explanation disappears in all the translations, but the Vyākhyā partially
reproduces it. (We have manasa upavicāraḥ = mana-upavicāra = manopavicāra).
283. This thing (dravya) which is the mental vedanā, of one single type by its being associated with
the mental consciousness, is threefold by the triple variety of its nature, satisfaction, etc.; and each
one of these three is sixfold by the variety of its object, visibles, etc. Thus we have 1 x 3 x 6 = 18.
284. The Bhasyam says simply: trayo dharmopavicārā ubhayathā, but we have translated the
Vyākhyā here. The source is the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 716c3. When the dharmamanopavicāra has for
its object seven types of dharmas-the six internal ayatanas (eye…manaãyatana) and the external
dharmayatana-either together, or not together, its object is not mixed; when it has for its object
these seven dharmas (either together, or not together) plus one, two,... five of the external objects
(visible things, etc.), its object is mixed. Same doctrine on the subject of the smrtyupasthānas:
kāyasmṛtyupasthāna is of an unmixed object, bearing only on the body; dharmasmṛtyupasthāna can
be of unmixed object, or mixed (saṁbhinna, miśra), or universal (samasta) object, vi.15c.
285. The word kila indicates that Vasubandhu does not accept this etymology.286. The prefix upa has the sense of repetition (punaḥ punaḥ).
287.Problem discussed in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 716b6. The upavicāra are proper to mental sensation:
there is thus saumanasya-upavicāra, not sukha-upavicāra.
288. Problem discussed in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, 1
Footnotes 523
P. 715a3.
289. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 690c4. cakṣuşā rūpāṇi dṛṣṭvā saumanasyasthānīyāni rūpāṇy upavicarati.
290. According to the Lotsava: "The word ga signifies 'taking for an object', as in the expression:
How does he go? He goes thus." This gloss is omitted by Paramärtha and Hsüan-tsang.
291. Hsüan-tsang adds: "The same in the prefatory absorptions of the Second, Third, and Fourth
Ārūpya."
292. According to the Vyakhya, Vasubandhu; according to P'u-kuang, the Sauträntikas (TD 41, p.
179c12).
293. Satataṁhava=sataṭa, vihāra=yogavišeşa.
Dīgha, iii.250 (variants: satata, sattha, sassata), 281, Anguttara, ii. 198, iii.279. Saṁgītiparyāya,
15.6; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 189a18 (so called because the Arhats always cultivate it).
294. Upekṣako viharati, Atthasālinī, 172.
295. When the Arhat thinks of the dharmas which constitute the Buddha, buddhasaṁtānika
dharmas, he experiences a good satisfaction. Such a satisfaction is not forbidden, nor is it to be
fought.
296. Anantavarman does not accept this theory: This is not correct, for, in the Sūtra, the Bhagavat
does not say that the satisfactions, etc., are upavicāra solely when they are defiled (sāmkleśika). He
says in fact, "Oh Bhikṣus, take support on the six upavicāras of satisfaction, abandon the spavicāras
of dissatisfaction; take support on the six upavicāras of equanimity, abandon the upavicāras of
satisfaction. There are, Oh Bhikṣus, two equanimities, the equanimity resting on unity
(ekatvasaṁniśrita), and equanimity resting on variety (nānātvasaṁniśrita): take support on the
first, but abandon the second" (ya ime şaţ saumanasyopavicārās tān āśritya tān adhiṣṭhāya ya ime şat
daurmanasyopavicārās tān prajahīta . . .). Majjhima, i. 364, in another context: yā 'yam upekhā
nānattā nāttasitā tām abhinivajjetvā yāʼyam upekhā ekattā ekattasitā ….. tām evupekhāṁ bhāveti.
But, says Yaśomitra, this Sūtra does not prove that the satisfactions, etc., can be upavicāra
without being sāṁkleśika.One supports oneself on light (laghu) defilement in order to abandon
heavy (guru) defilement; as he said, “Māna or pride, is to be abandoned by supporting oneself on
māna." The text referred to in Nettippakaraṇa, 87: "The māna, supported on which one abandons
māna, is good (kuśala)." According to this same work, thirst (=desire) can also be good, see below
note 297. (We know the Tantric thesis of rāga expelled by rāga, Cittaviśuddhiprakaraṇa, JASB.,
1898, p. 175.
To be sure, māna is never purification (vyāvadānika). Nanda (who expelled desire for women
by desire for goddesses) is an example. The Bhagavat also teaches that one abandons the upavicāras
of equanimity by the upavicāras of equanimity.
297. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 715b1: five explanations of the expression fästṛpada; Vasubandhu adopts
the first. (In taking into consideration the three time periods, 108 upavicāras.The chattimsa
sattpada of Majjhima, iii.217.
"
According to the Vyākhyā: ta evāṣṭtadašopavicārāḥ... "These eighteen upavicāras, through the
distinction of those which have for their principle craving and naiskramya, make up the thirty-six
points of the Master." Understood in this way, the argument goes to prove that some of the
upavicāras are good, others bad.
Paramartha and Hsüan-tsang understand: "On the other hand, the satisfactions, etc. (täny eva
saumanasyādīni)...
Naiskramya is explained as "leaving" (niskrama) the samklefas or getting out of the suffering524 Chapter Three
of samsára.
On gredhāśrita, naiṣkramyāśrita, Kofa, ii. trans. p. 155, iv.77b-c; Mahāvyutpatti, 245.1145,
Samyutta, iv.232, Vibhanga, 381, Milinda, gehanissita and nekkhammanissita (thirty-six vedanās);
Nettippakarana, 87, how good desire gets one out of dissatisfaction, nekkhammasita.Rhys Davids-
Stede, nekkhamma, geha, gedha (confused with the words kāma and gṛha).
Somanassa, domanassa, upekkhā are sevitabba, asevitabba, Dīgha, ii.278.
298. Same comparison, grain and husk, Vyāsa ad Yogasutra, ii.13.
299. This thesis is demonstrated in Chapter IX (page 297 of the French translation).
300. The term kleśa is to be understood as both the klefas and the upaklešas, v.46.
301. Cittacaittasamudācārādyapaṭutvat.As we shall see, iii.42d, upekṣāyāṁ cyutodbhavau.
302. See Chapter IX, French trans. p. 296-7.
303. It appears indeed that this is not exactly correct: the first moment of antarābhava is necessarily
defiled.
304. See above p. 383 and note 85.
305. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 123a24, Ekottara, TD 2, p. 772b14. Dīgha, iii.211 (Saṁgītisuttanta): sabbe
sattā āhāraṭṭhitikā sabbe sattā saṁkhāraṭṭhitikā / ayaṁ kho āvuso tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā
arahatā sammāsaṁbuddhena eko dhammo sammadakkhāto. The word saṁkhāraṭṭhitika is omitted
in Anguttara, v.50, 55. Palisambhidāmagga, i.122.
Madhyamakavṛtti, 40, quotes another Sūtra: eko dharmaḥ sattvasthitaye yad uta catvāra āhārāḥ.
Mahāvastu, iii.65.
The first section (Ekadharma) of the Saṁgītiparyāya begins: "All beings last through food."
306. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 102a13, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 674b28, Lokaprajñāpti (analyzed in
Cosmologie bouddhique); Mahävyutpatti, 118; Beal, Catena, (interesting).
Dīgha, iii.228 (kabaliňkāro āhāro olāriko vā sukhumo vā . . .) Majjhima, i.48, 261, Saṁyutta,
ii.98; Dhammasangani, 71, 646, Atthasālinī, 153, Visuddhimagga, 341, Nettippakaraṇa, 114.
See the Udayisutra, Kośa, ii.44d, viii.3c.
307. Mütrapurīşa absent from among the Four Kings.
308. On the constituent elements of the molecule, ii.22; the smallest part of the visible termed chāyā
includes odor, taste, tangible.
Paramārtha is not very clear: "How are the (odors) chāyā-ātapa-jvālā-prabhā, etc. food?”;
Hsüan-tsang: "How are chāyā-ātapa-flame-cold food?"
Hsüan-tsang translates the phrase yāny api tu nābhyavahriyante "which however are not
swallowed," by a simple yu X (=punaḥ).
309. According to the Vyākhyā, Vasubandhu now presents his own opinion (svābhiprāya).
310. Vibhanga, TD 27, p. 675a13. Vibhanga, 13, atthi rūpaṁ kabaliňkāro āhāro / atthi rūpaṁ na
kabalinkāro āhāro: this refers to rūpaskandha; Vasubandhu speaks of rūpāyatana.
311. Vijñā, as one says prajñā; the meaning is vijñāna.
Food by the mouthfuls, being, by its nature, the three āyatanas of odor, taste, and tangible, is
evidently säsrava, impure; but sparśa, manaḥsaṁcetanā and the vijñāna are sometimes impure,
sometimes pure. It is only when they are impure that they are food.
312. The Lotsava does not explain the term vijñāna. Paramārtha explains it through manovijñāana,
Hsüan-tsang through vijñānaskandha.
313. Vyākhyā: catvāra āhārā bhūtānāṁ sattvānāṁ sthitaye saṁbhavaiṣiṇāṁ cānugrahāya / katame
catvāraḥ / kavaḍīkārāhāra audārikaḥ sūkṣmaś cāhāraḥ prathamaḥ / sparfo dvitīyaḥ / mana-Footnotes
525
ḥsaṁcetanā tṛtīyaḥ / vijñānam āhāraś caturthaḥ.(Comp. viii.3c).
Ekottara, TD 2, p. 719a15: bhūtānāṁ sthitaye yapanāyai sambhavaiṣiṇāṁ cānugrahaya;
Vibbāsā, TD 27,p.676b15; Samyutta, ii.11, Majjbime, i.261: cattāro’me bbikkhave abārā bbutan m
ṭhitiyā saṁbhavesīnaṁ vā anuggahāya . . . kabaliṁkāro āhāro olāriko vā sukhumo vā… ..
On the expression käyassa ṭhitiyā yāpanāya, Visuddhimagga, 32 and other sources in Rhys
Davids-Stede (yāpanā).
Sthitaye-avasthapanāya, anugrahāya-punarbhavāya saṁbhavāya (Vyākhyā).
314. See p. 442 line 27.
315. Manomaya, see Kósa, ii.44d, viii.3c.
316. Above p. 393.
317. Hsüan-tsang:Abhinirvṛtti(ch'i, utpăda),because, turned towards future birth, it is produced
in a short period of time.
318. a painful body... The Lotsava translates lus = kāya, ātmabhāva; the Chinese translators
have svabhāva.The Vyākhyā gives the words savyābādham (saduḥkhatvāt) abhinirvartya.
319. This is a Sutra of four points (cătuşkoţika): asti pudgalo yasyābhinirvṛttisaṁyojanam
prahīṇam nopapattisaṁyojanam / asti yasyopapattiprayojanaṁ prahīņaṁ nābhinirvṛttisaṁyo-
janam / asti yasyābhinirvṛttiprayojanaṁ prahiņam upapattisamyojanam ca / asti yasya nābhi-
nirvṛttiprayojanaṁ prahiņam nopapattisamojanam.
The distinction between abhinirvṛtti and upapatti is elucidated in Kośa, vi.3.
Rhys Davids and Stede have grouped many references under the words abhinibbatta,
abhinibbatti, abhinibbatteti.One of the most interesting is Samyutta, iii.152 (which slightly calls to
mind the "embroiderer" of the Upanishad).
Let us add that, in Añguttara, ii.134, we have (in addition to orambhāgiya saṁyojana which
brings about rebirth in Kāmadhātu): uppattipatilābhika samyojana (correct upapatti) and
bhavapatilābhika samyojana: this second category is the abhinirvṛttisamyojana of the Abhidharma
bhava-antarabhava the Antaraparinibbayin has broken the bond which produces upapatti, but not
the bond which produces bhava.
320. The words "when he is an Anāgāmin” are necessary, for one can detach oneself from the two
lower Dhātus through a worldly path, thus in a manner which is not definitive.
321. Anugraha.Here, by sambhavaisin, one should understand, conforming to the second
explanation (above line 28), not the intermediate beings, but all beings not liberated from thirst
(satysna).
322. Four opinions in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 674c25; Vasubandhu follows the orthodox opinion
(p'ing-chia says: .… . . )
323. We see in fact that three of the four foods-manaḥsaṁcetanā, which is action; the vijñāna
considered as vijñānabīja, “the seed which is the vijñāna," action which develops or perfumes
(karmaparibhāvita); and sparsa, which is associated with action-have for their result anugraha or
re-existence (anugrahāya bhavati). But how can food by the mouthfuls have this result?
324. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 103a5: rogasya gaṇḍasya śalyasya catvāra āhārā mūlaṁ jarāmaraṇa-
pratyayaḥ (?). According to the Vyakhyā, the word jarāmaraṇapratyayaḥ belongs to another
redaction of this same Sūtra (Ekottara, TD 2, p. 656c10). Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 677a17. Samyutta,
iii.189: rūpam rogo ti gaṇḍo ti sallaṁ ti … . .
325. The question also concerns sparſa and vijñāna, which are associated with manaḥsamcetanā.
326. This brings to mind the "popular maxim" (Jacob, ii.11) of the āśāmodakas, "cakes of hope," or
manomodakas, “cakes made by the manas” of the Nyāyakandalī, 130 and Nyāyavārttika, 43
(quotations trans. from the Sarvadarfana, Muséon, 1902, ad 16, 22).526 Chapter Three
In the Shidō-in-zu PËH, (Musée Guimet, Bibl. Études, viii.1899), 126, the mudrä of
drinking and of eating, the four foods, and the sensation of acidity which produces the thought of a
result.
327. The Abhidharma treatise by this name. TD 26, number 1536, chap. 8, fol. 8 (Saeki); Vibhāṣā,
TD 27, P. 676b16.
328. A remark of the Sauträntikas according to certain commentators.
329.The Vibhāṣā explains four opinions:
1. vijñāna, sparſa, and kavaḍīkāra nourish present existence; cetană nourishes future existence.
2. sparsa and kavaḍīkāra nourish present existence; vijñāna and cetanā nourish future existence.
3. kavaḍīkāra nourishes present existence; sparśa, vijñāna, and cetanā nourish future existence.
4. P'ing-chia: all four foods have the two functions.
330. Vyākhyā: sukhavedanīyenānugrahāt / yaḥ kaścid vedanāskandhaḥ saṁjñāskandhaḥ sarvaḥ sa
sparsam pratiyetivacanat.
331. Paramärtha: The bhava thus projected arises from the vijñāna-seed informed-perfumed by
action.
Hsüan-tsang: Punarbhava or new existence means future "birth" (sheng £). This future birth
is projected by the manaḥsamcetana.Being projected by the food which is the manaḥsamcetană,
punarbhava is produced by the force of the vijñāna-seed perfumed by action.
According to P'u-kuang, this explanation is that of the Sauträntika school; the Sarvästivādins do
not use the expression “vijñānabīja."
332. Samgitiparyaya, TD 26, p. 368a28. yaḥ kaś cit kavaḍīkāraḥ sarvaḥ sa āhāraḥ / syāt kavaḍīkáro
nāhāraḥ / syād āhāro na kavaḍīkāraḥ / syād ubhayam / syän nobhayam iti câtuşkoţikam.
333. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 674a3).
On aupacayika "matter" arising from samādhi, i. trans. p. 103. .
334. According to Hsüan-tsang. Vyākhyā: yaś ceha paribhuktaḥ kavaḍīkāro bhoktur bādhām
ādadhāti sa kim ahāraḥ / so'py ahāraḥ / apāte bhojanavelāyām anugrahät.
335. See for example the Pañcaśikṣāsūtra, Feer, Fragments du Kandjour, 241.
336. Vyākhyā: That which has for its effect augmentation is food par excellence (mukhya).
337. In the Dakkhiṇāvibhangasutta (Majjhima, iii.255): tiracchānagate dānaṁ datvā sataguṇā
dakkhiņā paṭikańkhitabbā / puthujjane dussile... sahassaguṇā... / putthujjana sīlavante . . .
satasahassaguṇā . / bāhirake kāmesu vītarāge
/ sotāpatti-
phalasacchikiriyaya paṭipanne dānaṁ datvā asaṁkheyyā appameyyā dakkhiṇā paṭikańkhitabbā.
On the value of the gift according to the field, Kośa, iv.117.
koțisahassaguṇā .
338. The Bhagavat said: yāḥ kāš cij jambuṣaṇḍāt sravantyaḥ sarvās tāḥ samudranimnāḥ
samudrapravaṇāḥ samudraprāgbhārāḥ.
(Compare Anguttara, v.22, Samyutta, v.39).
339. Jambuṣaṇḍagata-jambudvīpaniväsin.
We recall that Jambudvīpapuruşa = Buddha (Kofa, vii.30a-c).
-
Kukṣimantaḥ, "possessing a womb" = who possesses the capacity to eat; since the beginning of
embryonic life.
340. Vyākhyā: kim atrāścaryam ….
341. Spiritual states which immediately precede the abandoning of the quality of Pṛthagjana = entry
into the Path = the acquisition of the quality of candidate for the first fruit, vi.17.Footnotes 527
342. We have, in viii.27c, Vyākhyā, another redaction: bodhisattvo hi karmāntapratyavekṣaṇāya
[karmänta-labored field] niskranto jambumüle prathamaṁ dhyānam utpäditavān. Divya, 391:
asmin pradeśe jambūcchāyāyāṁ nişadya . . . Majjhima, i.246: … . . pitu sakkassa kammante sītāya
jambucchāyāya nisinno vivicc'eva kāmehi ….. prathamaṁ jhānam upasampajja … … . ; Lalita,Lefman,
128 (Chapter xi): avalokya ca kṛṣikarmāntam ……. : Mahāvastu ii.45, 26.
343. The cutting off of the roots of good results from “false view” (mithyādṛṣṭi), which, being of
reflection (samtīrikā), is mental (mānasi); the recovery of these roots results from "correct, right
view" and from doubt (samyagdṛṣṭi, vicikitsā), which are mental (iv.79-80).
It is only in the manovijñāna that detachment takes place: for detachment can be obtained only
by an absorbed (samāhita) mind; the losing of this detachment is caused by incorrect judgment
(ayonisomanasikāra), which is vikalpa, and thus purely mental.
Death is produced in a vijñāna propitious to the cutting off of the series: thus among a person
wherein the activity of the five organs of sense consciousness is "reopened" (cyutiḥ saṁkṣip-
tapañcendriyapracārasya pravāhacchedānukāle vijñāne bhavati). Arising (upapatti) happens only
to the manovijñāna since it takes place with "a troubled mind” (viparyastamati, iii.15).
344. That is to say pratisaṁdhisāmāṇyād anukto'py uktakalpa iti nocyate.
345. Kathāvatthu, xv.9; Kośa, viii. 16.
346. The Bhagavat leaves the Fourth Dhyana in order to die, Dīgha, ii.156; below note 350.
347. We can understand: "the mind, being made present, falls (=dies)"; or rather "the mind of this
[pudgala] being made present [=having entered into activity-samudācarya], this pudgala falls"; or
again saṁmukhībhūya = saṁmukhībhāvya [with the falling of ni, as we say: "There is a wind which
causes leaves to be shoved up, there is a wind which causes leaves to dry up" = asti parṇaruho vāto’sti
parnaſuso'paraḥ; variant from the commentary of Uṇādi, 2.22], with the meaning: having
made the mind present, the pudgala dies."
19
How a mind, interrupted by absorption, is reborn, ii. trans. p. 230.
348. Hsüan-tsang reads, hetvabhāvāt = "because the cause of arising is lacking," and not.
cittacchedahetvabhāvāt (which causes difficulties).
We have seen, iii.38, that arising takes place through all of the klesas or defilements, proper to
the sphere where they take place (sarvakleſair hi tadbhūmikair upapattiḥ pratisaṁdhibandho
bhavati).
349. The mind at death can be good, bad, or neutral. There are four types of neutral mind: vipākaja,
airyāpathika, Sailpasthānika, and nairmāṇika (ii.71d, trans. p. 315). There is good reason to specify
to which category the mind of a dying Arhat belongs, [the mind by which he enters into Nirvāṇa,
nirvāti].
In Visuddhimagga, 292, some Arhats die sitting down, some while lying down, and some while
walking. [Thus with airyāpathika minds?]
350. There are two "cuttings off of the mind" (cittaccheda): apratisamdhika cutting off, or definitive
cutting off, in which the mind at death is not followed by the mind of an intermediate existence; and
sapratisamdhika cutting off, so that the mind at death continues into the mind of the intermediate
being [a cutting off of the series of minds which lasts one life, the cutting off of the bhavanga in the
Păli sources]. In this last case, the mind can be also good or bad.
On the nature of the mind of a dying Arhat and, in general, of all dying persons, Kathāvatthu,
xxii,3. [Death takes place in pakaticitta, a mind of Kāmadhātu for a being of Kāmadhātu]. On the
death of the two types of Arhat, see Compendium, Introduction, p. 75.
351. On the two types of death, death all at once, and gradual death, see ii. 15, trans. p. 176, Vibhāṣā,
TD 27, p. 952c11.
When death is gradual, the organs of sight, hearing, smell and taste, the sexual organ, and the
"organs" of agreeable and disagreeable sensation disappear first; the organ of touch (käyendriya),528 Chapter Three
the vital organ (jivitendriya), the mānas and the sensation of indifference (upekṣendriya) remain:
these four indriyas perish together.
352. Beal, Catena, 41, according to a gāthā which should be Mahāyāna, gives different indications.
For the Saint, the head; for a future god, the eyes; for a future human, the heart; for a future
Preta, the groin... We can divine the future destiny of a dead person by examining which part
remains warm the longest.
Vangisa, before her conversion, listened to a skull with a stethoscope with success, and knew if
the dead person would be reborn as a man, god, or in hell. But listening to the skull of an Arhat, he
remained nonplused (Theragatha, Commentary, Brethern,395).
We see, Avadānaśataka, i.5, that the rays re-enter into a certain part of the body of the Buddha
according to the realm of rebirth that he has predicted. [Into the feet, when it refers to beings in hell
...].
353. The vijñāna, being non-material (arūpitvāt), does not reside in a place (adeśastha); but it has
for its support a body endowed with organs.
354. On the vital parts, the four hundred and four illnesses, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 953a7, and following,
Saddharmasmṛtyupasthāna, TD 17, p. 41b20. Bodhicaryāvatāra, ii.41 (marmacchedādivedanā).
355. Pāli gloss quoted in the Expositor (PTS), 132: maranti anenāti yasmin tālite na jīvati tam
thân am mammầm năma
356. I-tsing (Takakusu, 131) quotes a Sūtra which enumerates four doșas: "The chû-lu, i.e. making
the body slothful and heavy, owing to an increase of the element earth," plus śleşman (kapha) pitta
and vāta. Takakusu translates chü-lu as gulma: "the phonetic probability is rather in favour of guru
or its derivation (gaurava)." [But the fourth classical dosa is the blood, Jolly, Grundriss, 41]. On the
three dosas, Rhys Davids-Stede mention Milinda, 43, 172 and Sumangalavilāsinī, i.133; Takakusu,
Commentary on the Cullavagga, v.14.1, Mahāvagga, vi.14.1.
357. On the signs of death among the gods, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 365a21, and Ekottara, TD 2, p.
693c11.
Beal, Catena, 97, quotes a source which combines the two lists with some omissions, for a total
of five. Chavannes, i.425 (TD 4, number 206), has a list of seven signs: 1. the brightness of the nape
of the neck becomes extinguished; 2. flowers wilt; 3. color becomes altered; 4. dust accumulates on
clothing; 5. a sour smell from the armpits; 6. the body becomes thin; 7. "he has left his throne."
Elsewhere we find only the second list: Divya, 193: cyavanadharmino devaputrasya pañca
pārvanimittāni prādurbhavanti [which corresponds word for word to the text which the Lotsava
translates as the preambule to our first list] akliṣṭāni vāsāṁsi klifyanti / amlānāni mālyāni mlayanti
/daurgandhyam kāyena (?) nişkrämati /ubhābhyāṁ kakṣābhyāṁ svedah prādurbhavati /
cyavanadharmā devaputraḥ sva āsane dhṛtiṁ na labhate [which is our second list]. Same list in the
Friendly Letter of Nāgārjuna, JPTS, 1886, 100 (where we have as the third sign the colour of the
body becoming ugly: compare Itivuttaka, Para. 83).
We know that five signs distinguish the gods from mortals: no bad smell, no dust, no winking of
the eyes, no shadow, and no touching of the ground (see the references of Bloomfield, Pārçvanātha,
Baltimore, 1919, p. 51).
In Divya, 222, Māndhătar differs from Sakra only by the winking of his eyes.
358. Hsüan-tsang adds: "which are in intermediate existence."
359. Kofa, iv.80d.
Ekottara, TD 2, p. 614b23, Dirgha, 13.20, Mahävyutpatti, 95.11.
Dīgha, iii.217, tayo răsī, micchattaniyato răsi, sammattaniyato răsi, aniyato rasi; Puggala-
pannatti, 13, recognizes only puggala niyata (pañca puggalā ānantarikā ye ca micchādiṭṭhikā niyatā,
see Kofa, v.7, iv.96) and the aniyata; but Dhammasangaṇi, 1028, recognizes the three categories
[The explanation as we see by the note of the translator and Atthasālinī, 45, differs from the
explanation of the Abhidharma]. On the aniyatas, see Nettippakarana, 96, 99 and commentary.Footnotes 529
360. Samyaktva defined vi.26a (note 162).
361. A traditional etymology.
362. The oldest sources are the Sūtras of the Dirgha and Madhyamāgama, notably Dirgha, 30;
among the most recent Sūtras, TD 1, number 25 (the Hi-shai of Beal); among the Sastras, TD 32,
number 1644, the Lokaprajñāpti and the Kāraṇaprajñāpti (analyzed in Cosmologie bouddhique),
the Vibhāṣā.It appears that Vasubandhu here reviews all this literature. The Saddharma-
smṛtyupasthāna (Lévi, Pour l'histoire du Rāmāyana, JAs. 1918, i.), Divya, xvii. (the conquests of
Mandhatar, xxxii. = TD 14, number 551 and foll.), belong also to the Hinayāna. For the Pāļi sources,
Lotus, 842, Sp. Hardy, Legends and theories, 1886. Chinese sources (of the two Vehicles), Beal,
Catena, 1871, and Four Lectures. The schema of the universe in Georgy, Alphabetum Tibetanum,
1772, Gogerly, Ceylon Buddhism, 1908, vol ii, Sp. Hardy, Legends, 104. Hastings, Encyclopedia of
Religion and Ethics, art. Cosmogony and Cosmology (Buddhist), iv. 129-138, B. C. Law, Heaven and
Hell in Buddhist Perspective, 1925; I have not seen the Buddhist Cosmology of MacGovern
(London, 1923?).
363. Ufanti = icchanti. This can refer to either "The Vaibhāşikas" (P'u-kuang), or to "All the
schools" (Fa-pao).
According to one opinion (notably Mahayana) the sphere of gold is placed immediately on the
circle of wind; above is the circle of water.
Samniveśa is interpreted by Hsüan-tsang in the sense of disposition: "Such is the disposition of
the receptacle world: below..."; and this interpretation is preferable since the circle of wind forms
part of the receptacle world. Paramärtha understands, I believe, "foundation"; the Lotsava has gnas,
"place".
364. Burnouf has translated, Introduction, 448, the Sūtra which the Vyākhyā quotes ad i.5: pṛthivī
bho gautama kutra pratiṣṭhitā pṛthivī brāhmaṇa abmaṇḍale pratiṣṭhitā / abmaṇḍalam bho
gautama kutra pratişthitam/vayau pratişthitam/vayur bho gautama kutra pratisthitaḥ / ākāfe
pratisthitaḥākāśaṁ bho gautama kutra pratişṭhitam / atisarasi mahābrāhmaṇa atisarasi
mahābrāhmaṇa / ākāśam brāhmaṇa apratiṣṭhitam anālambanam iti vistaraḥ.
Compare Digha, ii.107 (on the earthquakes); Windisch, Māra et Bouddha, 61. ayam ananda
mahapathavi udake patiṭṭhitā / udakaṁ vāte patiṭṭhitam / vāto ākāsaṭṭho hoti. Thesis which
Nägasena (with the reading vāto ākāse patiṭṭhito) explains in Milinda, 68.
On the origin of the circle of wind, iii.90c; 100a-b (Hsüan-tsang fol. 16a to the end). We will see
iii.93c, note 504, that, when the universe is destroyed, it stays in the rūpa there where it was. This
ripa should be the ākāśadhātu, i.28.
365. Hsüan-tsang and Paramartha transcribe; the Lotsava has tshan po che chen po, the meaning of
hich, according to Śarad Chandra, 1024, is › not clear; see Mahāvyutpatti, 253; Kośa, vii.31, note
178; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 155a11.
366. We have, according to the Lotsava, īṣādḥārāmātrā varṣyadhārā [See Cosmologie, p. 317, note,
different Tibetan editions, Lokaprajñāpti, etc.] īṣā signifies "pole"; Paramārtha translates “great
post", but Hsüan-tsang: "the axel of a carriage." We know elsewhere that īșā is a measure
(Sulbasūtra, in Monier-Williams).
On the primordial rain, below iii.90c, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 243a15, 23, quoted above p. 370 (the
rain of the cloud Iṣādhāra); Sikşāsamuccaya, 247: clouds forming thirty-two couches (patala)
covering the world. The deva Iṣādhāra rains during five small kalpas, like the devas Gajaprameha,
Acchinnadhara and Sthūlabinduka. [According to the Pitāputrasamāgama = Ratnakūṭa, xvi, Lévi,
JAs. 1925, i.37]. [Bendall mentions the Nāgarāja with the name of Iṣādhāra, Mahāvyutpatti,
168.24].
367. According to Hsüan-tsang. We have seen, iii.47, that the circle of water has a diameter of
1,203,450 yojanas.It thus forms a drum almost as high as it is large: how is it held up? According to
the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 691b23, the source of this presentation, some other masters think that the
circle of water is incalculable in width, like the circle of wind.530
Chapter Three
Pakvakṣīraśarībhāvayogena.Grammatical
368.
explanation in the Vyakhya.See the comparison of
the Dīgha, iii.85: seyyathāpi nāma payaso tattasya nibbāyamānasya upari santānakaṁ hoti …..
369. Śikṣāsamuccaya, 148, quotes the Agama of the Sarvästivādins: On the circle of gold there rests
Jambudvipa, some 84,000 yojanas of earth. [The circle of gold is named kāñcanavajramaṇḍala,
Bodhicarya, vi.1]. The Kosa prefers 80,000, see iii.50b.
370. The circumference is triple that of the diameter: sarvasya parimaṇḍalasya iyam sthitir yad asya
tripakşamānaṁ (triguṇam eva) samantaparikṣiptasya pramāṇam (Vyākhyā).
371. The "ancient" metrical sources of the Atthasālini (p. 207 and foll.) have the same number for
the diameter of the "circles", and contain details on the mountains and the continents which are
near to those Vasubandhu furnishes. However comparisons with other documents multiply the
numerous variants.
Burnouf, Lotus, 844, Hopkins, Mythological Aspects of Trees and Mountains in the Great Epic,
JAOS, xxx.366 (Babylonian origin, Carpenter in Mélanges C. H. Toy, 72).
Nemijātaka, v.145 and foll. (Jätaka, vi.125); Atthasālini, 297; Spence Hardy, Legends, 81.
Remusat, J. des Savants, 1831, p.600, Beal, Catena, 45; Divyāvadān, 217, same order of the
mountains as in the Kofa.
Mahāvyutpatti, 194, Dharmasaṁgraha, 125, Mahāvastu, ii.300, Śikṣāsamuccaya, 246,
Atthasālinī, 298 and Jātaka, vi.125 differ.
372. These are the seven paribhaṇḍaparvata of the Jātaka. Ra-ba signifies wall.
373. Lévi, Rāmāyaṇa, 45.
374. Nānāvidhabījagarbha, that is to say, according to the Vyākhyā, nānāprakārasāmarthyayukta.
375. ii.36c-d, iii.100a, iv.4, v.26, vii.13a.
376. That is to say, na hy avasthitasya rüparasādyāṭmakasya kṣīranivṛttau dadbijanma: We can only
admit that-color, taste, etc., remaining the same-there would be, at the destruction of milk, the
appearance of small milk.
377. You admit that the successive moments (milk... small milk) are "other" (anyatha), you admit
that there is a modification (anyathābhāva): thus there is no transformation (pariņāma); there is no
passage, from one state to another state, of one and the same thing; for that which is otherwise
(anyathātva) is other (anyatva) such as Yajñadatta and Devadatta.
378. In the Saddharmasmṛtyupasthāna (Lévi, Rāmāyaṇa, 46) as in Atthasālini (208), Meru emerges
to a height of 84,000.
379. Vasubandhu does not speak of the Mahācakravāḍa, Mahāvyutpatti, 194.12, Lotus, 842,
Dharmasaṁgraha, 124 and notes p. 65, Dict. of St Petersburg.The Cakravāḍa of Beal, 45, is of a
height of 300 yojanas; in Atthasālinī (299), the Cakravāda is immerged 82,000, and emerges some
82,000.
380. Hsüan-tsang corrects this redaction which is sufficiently embarrassing: "Between the
mountains [that is to say, between Meru, Yugandhara... Cakravāḍa] there are eight oceans. The
first seven are the inner [ocean]. The first is 80,000 long; and is triple to its external limit. The six
others, diminishing by a half. The eighth is the outer [ocean], of 321,000 yojanas.
381. We read Sita in the kārikās. We do not find the translation "cold" anywhere. The Lotsava has rol
mthso, rol pa'i mtso bdun: "the seven lakes of which the waters move in gentle waves as if they were
dancing to the music of the wind" (Sarad Chandra Das).
The heroes of Jataka 541 see the seven mountains that encircle Meru, satta paribhaṇḍapabbate,
which is found Sīdāntare, that is to say Sīdāmaḥāsamuddassa antare, in the middle of the great sea
Sīdă. This sea is so called because its water is so subtle (sukhuma) that it cannot even bear a peacock
feather: it sinks (sīdati) (Jätaka, vi.125). Compare iii.57.Footnotes 531
382. The Vyākhyā quotes this floka.
Divya, 127.19. The eight qualities of the waters of the lakes of Sukhāvatī, in Beal, Catena, 379; of
Karandahrada (Beal, Hsilan-tsang, ii.165; see ibid. i.10).
383. The masters are not in agreement. We have seen that the diameter of the circle of water and of
the circle of the sphere of gold is 1,203,450 yojanas.On the other hand the Cakravāḍa is so called
because it encircles the universe with its four continents. Now if one adds up the numbers given
above (half of Meru 40,000; first Sītā 80,000; Yugandhara 40,000; second Sītā 20,000 ... ), we see
that Cakravāda is not placed at the edge of the sphere of gold. Thus, certain masters think that the
outer ocean, between Nimindhara and Cakravāḍa, should be 323,287.50 yojanas.Beal, p. 46, gives
322,312 yojanas.But the difference can be resolved in two ways: either by admitting that Cakravāḍa
is not located at the edge that it encircles, not the circle of water but the upper part of the sphere of
gold; or by admitting that the descriptions of the mountains, "same height and width" (iii. 51b),
should not be taken literally: the edges of the mountains are not strictly perpendicular
(atyantacchinnataţa).
384. The form of a carriage, see Dīgha, ii.235.
385. Vajrāsana, iv.112b, trans. note 506. Saeki quotes the Si-yu-ki (=Hsi-yü-chi), Watters, ii.114;
Sarad Candra Das, 751, Foucher, Iconographie, ii.15-21, Beal, Catena, 21.
386. We are assured that, in this continent, the eye hears sounds, the ear sees colors, etc.
387. On Uttarakurus, "Hyperboreans", iii.78, 85, 90, 99c, iv.43, 82, 97, Beal, Catena, 37, Hastings,
ii.687.
388. The Vyakhyā has an interesting remark: bhūmivaśāt sattvānāṁ vaicitryam bhima-
vadvindhyavāsināṁ kirātaśabarāṇāṁ gauraśyāmate: Beings differ by reason of their habitation; the
inhabitants of the Himavat, namely the Kirātas, are yellow; the inhabitants of the Vindhyas,
namely the Sabaras, are black. On the face of the men on the 3,000 islands, Saeki mentions the
Süramgamasutra, 2Bll; see also Saddharmasmṛti in Lévi, Rāmāyaṇa, 47.
389. Mahävyutpatti, 154.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 868a6. There are five small islands around the intermediate continents,
inhabited by men, or by amanuşyas, or deserted... In the beginning men spoke ärya; later, after they
had eaten and drunk, men differed and, through the increase of treachery (Sathya), there were many
languages; there are also men who do not know how to speak...
Beal, Catena, 35, gives numerous details on the four great and the eight small continents,
according to the Dirgha, Saṁghabhadra (Nyāyānusāra), etc. According to Saṁghabhadra, Deha,
Videha, Kuru and Kaurava will be deserted.
390. Vibhāṣā, second opinion ("New Vibhāṣā fāstrā”, Beal, Catena, 35).
391. For the Gandhamādana mountains, etc., see Hopkins, Epic Mythology, 9.
392. The Lotsava, Paramārtha and Hsüan-tsang translate kītsdri=|"black mountain."
Paramartha adds a gloss: "They are called 'ant-mountains' because they are low” (T. 29, p.215b10);
the Vyakhyā glosses kitädrinavakat by kītākṛtināṁ parvatānāṁ navakāt.
393. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 22a2. The Jñānaprasthāna says that there are five great rivers in
Jambudvīpa: Gangā, Yamunā, Sarayū (Sarabhū), Aciravati, Mahi [this is the list of the Pali Canon].
When the Bhadanta Kätyāyaniputra established this Śästra, he was in the East; this is why he
quotes, as an example, the rivers that Easterners know and see. But, in fact, there are in Jambudvipa
four
great rivers which each gives forth four secondary rivers. [The rest of this text, on the four
great and the sixteen small rivers, is translated and commented on by S. Lévi, Pour l'histoire du
Rāmāyaṇa, p. 150-152].
On the rivers of the Pali Canon and of Milinda, Rhys Davids, Milinda, i. p. xliv, and above all
Demiéville, Milinda, 230 (BEFEO, 1924).532 Chapter Three
On the Vakşu or Vahkṣu, and Cakşus and Sucakşus of the Buddhist and Brāhmanical sources, see
Lévi, loc. cit., Mahāvyutpatti, 167.80, Eitel, 194, Hopkins, Sacred Rivers of India, 214, Watters, i.293;
JAs. 1914, ii.409; V. Smith, 262. We owe the identification of Vakşu = Oxus to Rémusat.
On the Sitā, Lévi, ibid. p. 139 (=Tarim); Minayev, Grammaire palie, p. ix, quotes Ctesias in Pliny,
xxxi.2 on the Side:... stagnum in India in quo nihil innatet omnia mergantur. (The river of Yarkand
or the Sirikol).
"To the north of the Sītă, Scripture is written in the language of the land of Campaka, in the
languages of the land of the monkeys, in the language of the land called Gold.” (Mel. As. ii.177).
394. Paramārtha here adds two lines. According to Paramārtha: “On the south bank of this lake, a
mountain 25 yojanas in height; on the north bank, a mountain 15 yojanas in height; both are of
various minerals. To the north of Gandhamādana mountain, at its summit, there is a cave called
Nanda, decorated with the seven jewels, 50 yojanas in length and width, the abode of the king of the
elephants. Beyond, there are six kingdoms, seven forests, and seven rivers. Beyond the seventh
river, there are two forests in the shape of a half-moon. To the north of these forests, there is the
Jambu tree to a height of 100 yojanas …..
"
395. Let us mention the Bibliography of Kern, Manual, 58; L. Feer, “Enfer Indien,” JAs. 1892 and
1893; B. C. Law, Heaven and Hell in Buddhist Perspective, Calcutta, 1925 (Pāļli sources); Gogerly,
Ceylon Buddhism, 1908, vol. 2; Kāraṇḍavyūha, edited by S. B. Samasrami, Calcutta, 1873; the
Friendly Letter, Wenzel, JPTS, 1886; Saddharmasmṛtyupasthana, fragments in the SŚikṣāsa-
muccaya and S. Lévi, Rāmāyaṇa We owe a very interesting essay to J. Przyluski, and the first, on the
story of Buddhist hell, in Légende d’Açoka, 1924.
396. See note 369: there are 84,000 yojanas between the sphere of gold and the surface of
Jambudvipa.
Avici and avici, Bodhicaryāvatāra, vi.120, viii. 107, Rāṣṭrapālaparipṛcchā, 30.
Geography of Avici, Saddharmasmṛti, in Sikṣāsamuccaya, 70.
397. The expression avīci maññe in the description of an overcrowded country, Anguttara, i.159,
Dīgha, iii.75. Terrible Avici with its four doors, Itivuttaka, 86 and Cullavagga, vii.4,8. As the lower
limit of Kāmadhātu, Dhammasaṁngaṇi, 1281. Avīci is not named in Suttanipāta p. 121, Saṁyutta,
i.154 (Notes of Rhys Davids, Dialogues, iii. p. 73).
Avicisamtatisahitam, in an uninterrupted series (explanation of sada), Mahāniddesa, 18, 347.
Avici a synonym of jarā in Visuddhimagga 449 (Rhys Davids-Stede).
398. This second explanation has passed to Maheśvara in the Amarakośa: na vidyate vīciḥ sukhaṁ
yatra. We have two Tibetan equivalents mthsams-med="without interval" [Eitel understands that
the damned die there and are reborn there incessantly] and mnar-med = "without tortures", as a
euphemism, says Wenzel, JPTS, 1886, 23; but mñar-med = "without pleasure."
399. ity eke aştau nirayā ākhyātā duratikramāḥ /
ākīrṇā raudrakarmabhiḥ pratyekaṁ şoḍaśotsadāḥ //_
catuḥskandhāś caturdvārā vibhaktā bhāgaſo mitaḥb!/
ayaḥprākāraparyantā ayasā pratikubjitāḥª //
teşām ayomayī bhūmir jvalitā tejasā yutā /
[anekayojanaśatair jvālābhis tiṣṭhati] sphuṭāḥ ª //
e
Dirgha, TD 1, p. 127a4, Ekottara, TD 2, p. 747c12, Samyukta, TD2, p. 341a25. I have quoted in
extenso in Cosmologie bouddhique the parallel passages: 1. Anguttara, i.141, Majjhima, iii. 182,
Petavatthu, 21.65, Kathāvatthu, xx.3; 2. Jātaka, v.266; 3. Mahāvastu, i.9 and iii.454; 4. Lokaprajñāpti
(Mdo, 89b and 104b, Sūtra and glosses).
a. Reading given in the Vyākhyā: catuḥskandhāiti catuḥprākāra ity arthaḥ/ catuḥsamniveśaity
apare.
Elsewhere catuḥkarṇāḥ (Mahāvastu), catukkaṇṇā (Jātaka).
Elsewhere caturbhāgāḥ according to the version cha bzhi (Lokaprajñāpti), with the
commentary: four parts, east, south, etc. This is the version of Senart: "They are in four parts; they
have four doors..."; this is the interpretation of the Chinese translators: "four faces and fourFootnotes 533
doors".
Version of the Bhāṣya rtsig pa = wall, masonry.
b. Reading of all the sources. Senart: "They are isolated and limited, each having a definite
place." I translate the commentary of the Lokaprajñāpti.
c. Ayaḥprākāraparikṣiptā ity arthaḥ (Vyākhyā).
d. Ayasopariṣṭāc chāditaḥ / ayasā pithitadvārā ity apare (Vyākhyā).Senart: “having a canopy of
fire."
e. Sphuṭā iti vyāptāḥ (Vyākhyā).
Dpag thsad brgya phrag du mar yan / me Ice rnams ni mched par gnas (Lokaprajñāpti); dpag
thsad brgya phrag du mar ni / me lce dag gis khyab par gnas (Version of the Bhāṣya).
According to the commentary on the Lokaprajñāpti, this refers to Avici, which gives the
reading:... tişthati sphuṭṭah.
In the Pāli editions, this refers to the ground: samantā yojanasataṁ phuṭā (var. pharitvā)
tiṭṭhati sabbadā.
J. Przyluski discovered in Divya, p. 375, a fragment of the Balapanditasutra, where there is
described "the ground formed of burning fire, having a hot smell, forming only a single flame”
(Burnouf, Introduction, 366) which is the floor of our hells.
400. On the development of hellish cosmology, see Przyluski, Légende d'Açoka, 130; see also Feer,
Fragments du Kandjour, 518, Hastings' Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, iv.113 (Bibliography).
In the Devadūtasutta (Anguttara, i.138, Majjhima, iii. 178) the great hell (mahāniraya) has four
gates which lead into four secondary hells, Gūthaniraya, Kukkulaniraya, Simbalivana, Asipat-
travana; all this is surrounded by the river Khärodakā which is, at least once, identified with the
Vaitaraṇī (Jātaka, vi.250, quoted in Przyluski, Açoka, 132).
In the thirtieth Sūtra of the Dirgha, there are sixteen utsadas, which are placed between the two
Cakravādas; the same in the Kunālasūtra (Przyluski, Açoka, 135, 136).
According to Vasubandhu, there are sixteen utsadas, counting the River (Vaitaraṇī) as an
utsada, and by making one utsada out of the forests, etc.
In Jātaka, i.174: attha pana mahāniraye sodasa ussadaniraye; ibid. ii.3, there is a village
pākāraparikkhitta catudvāra nagara which is an ussadaniraya, a place where many of the damned
suffer.
401. The kuküla is the kukkula of the Mahāvastu, i.44 = iii.455; Paramārtha: "Burning ashes."
Compare Śikṣāsamuccaya: pādaḥ pravilīyāte / utkṣiptaḥ punaḥ sambhavati.TD 32, number 1644
describes a journey to Kukūla.
402. Kuṇapa (Mahāvastu, ibid.) corresponds to the guthaniraya of the Devadūtasutta which is
related to the guthakūpa of Saṁyutta, ii.259, Petavatthu, 64. The animals with sharp mouths
(nyaṭkuļā nama prāṇī, Mahāvyutpatti, 215.20 or nyankuṭā, “torso”) are the sūcīmukha pāṇa;
compare Samyutta, ii.258; Saddharmasmṛti in Śikṣāsamuccaya, 69-76.
403. The kşuramārga is absent in the Mahāvastu; it is described in Kāraṇḍavyűha, 38.
404. In Devadūta, the asipattravana follows simbalivana. Compare Mahävyutpatti, 215.
405. The simbalivana of the Devadūta; its thorns have eight fingers in the Dvāvimfatyavadāna (ed.
R. Turner).
406. On the Vaitaraṇī ( = khārodakā nadī), Lévi, Rāmāyaṇa, 152, Hopkins, Sacred Rivers, 222. The
rab-med "Without a ford" of the friendly letter, JPTS., 1886, 21.
407. Paramartha, yüan
garden; Hsüan-tsang, ts'eng = additions, excrescences.
Senart, Mahāvastu, i.372; Sp. Hardy, Manual, 27 (osupat);
Sikṣāsamuccaya, 56.6, 248.5.
Vyākhyā: adhikayātanāsthānatvād utsadāḥ / narakeṣu. . / narakāvarodhād ürdhvam eşu
kukūlādiṣe sīdanty atas ta utsadā ity aparaḥ.
Ut signifies adhika or ürdhva.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 866b4 explains why the annexes to hell are called utsada; three reasons
according to P'u-kuang (p. 187a3), two according to Fa-pao (p. 616a15): because its suffering is very534 Chapter Three
strong, quite varied, supplementary. Sojourn in the utsadas lasts 10,000 years; it is indefinite or
infinite in the hells properly so-called (Majjhima, i.335).
In Petavatthu, p. 46, there is a sattussada niraya (mentioned by Rhys Davids-Stede) which is
explained, in Dīgha, i.87, as "full of beings."
408. Beal, Catena, 65, says that the damned pass from Avici to the cold hells, and from there to the
dark hells, etc.
409. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 866b12. This is the controversy of Kathavatthi, xx.3. The Andhakas deny
the existence of beings called nirayapāla basing themselves on a text (not identified): "This is not
Vessabhū, nor the king of the Petas . . . it is their own actions which torment the damned."
Vasubandhu, in the Vijñaptimātravimśaka, stanza 4 (translated in Muséon, 1912, 53-90; the
Tibetan, edited and translated by S. Lévi, 1926), demonstrates the non-existence of the guardians of
the hells, of the dogs, of the crows, of the walls of steel, etc. Saeki quotes a commentary of the
Vimsaka: "Or rather it is believed that the guardians of the hells are real beings: an opinion of the
Mahāsāṁghikas and of the Sāmmitīyas; or rather it is believed that they are not real beings, but
certain kinds of bhūta and bhautika created through action: opinion of the Sarvästivādins etc.; or
rather it is believed that, even though they are not beings, yet, being produced by the vāsanā (the
trace of actions and thoughts), they are not simple modifications of the mind: opinion of the
Sauträntikas."
Compare the women created by action, Sikṣāsamuccaya, 69-76.
410. Vivartanīvāyuvat.In this same way, at creation, the winds move (cestante) in order to create the
receptacle world. The self-styled "guardians of the hells" are only bhita and bhautika, asattväkhya,
"non-living beings," i. 10b.
411. Dhārmasubhūti has been quoted above, iii.13a. We have here a floka which ends: [jäyante]
yamarākṣasāḥ.Perhaps an excerpt from the Daśākušalakarmapathanirdeśa (Lévi, JAs., 1925, i.37).
Hsüan-tsang translates: fa-shan-hsien Paramartha transcribes bhu by puor hou.
On this master, and the masters with analogous names (Subhūtighoṣa), F. W. Thomas, Album
Kern, 407, and S. Lévi, Notes Indiennes, JAs., 1925, i.36 (Dhārmika Subhūti, one of the names of
Aśvaghoşa according to Tāranātha).
412. ... kṛtāvadhitvat / bhūtavišeșanirvṛtter vā.Paramārtha adds: “They do not differ from the
other beings who arise in hell; how can they be guardians?"
Nāgasena, p. 67, explains why the damned in general are not destroyed by the fire.
413. J. Przyluski, Açoka, 135, observes that there are ten cold hells in the 30th Sūtra of the Dirgha
(placed between the Cakravāḍas), in Samyutta, i.152 (Feer, JAs, 1892, ii213), Anguttara, v.172,
Suttanipāta (Kokāliyasutta): abbuda nirabbuda, ababa, ațața, ahaha (or ahaha, ațața), kumuda,
sogandhika, uppala (or uppalaka), puṇḍarīka, paduma. With the eight great hot hells, eighteen
hells, as in the Kunālasūtra (Przyluski, 136). [Feer, JAs., 1892, ii.220: “The names of the cold hells
designate simply the number of years of punishment”: see below p. 473]. Chavannes, Cinq cents
contes, ii.341: There are hundreds and thousands of Arbudas; the Nirayas are thirty-six in number.
Mahävyutpatti, 215.1-8; Divya, 67, trans. Burnouf, Introduction, 201 [Burnouf mentions the
identity of Mahapadma with the Pen-to-li = Puṇḍarīka of the note to the Foe-koue-ki (=Fu-kuei-
chi), p. 298-99).
Or rather we distinguish the eight cold hells and the ten hot hells which are placed between the
Cakravādas or Universes; these, with the numerous small hells, are the lokāntarika hells, Eitel, p.
106-107; Saeki, about this, mentions the Li-shih lun , TD 32, the Saddharmasmṛtyu-
pasthāna, TD 17, p. 103b19 and the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 866b3.
On the lokāntarika aghā andhakārā . . . Burnouf, Lotus, 631, 832, Dīgha, ii.12, Divya, 204, Sp.
Hardy, Legends, 110, Deussen-Geden, Upanishads, 322.
414. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 866a15. Here a difficult person objects: "It is said that Jambudvipa is
narrower at the top, and larger at the bottom; and that the other continents present the oppositeFootnotes 535
appearance:
is this reasonable?"
415. Vibhāṣā, ibidem. Below Jambudvipa, the great hells; at the surface of Jambudvipa, the "border"
(pien) hells (Compare Beal, Catena, 65) and the prādeśika (ku) hells: in valleys, mountains,
etc. In the other dvipas the great hells are lacking because there the great crimes are not committed.
.. According to some, all the hells are lacking in Uttarakuru. The damned are of human form; they
first speak in Aryan languages; then, crushed by their sufferings, they no longer pronounce one
single intelligible word.
Prādefika hells. Hsuan-tsang translates; ku, isolated; Paramartha, pieh ch'ua separate
place (p.216b5); the Tibetan ñi-thse which also signifies "ephemeral" (as prādesika thought,
momentary thought, Madhyamakāvatāra, trans. p. 42; prādeśikayāna, Sikṣāsamuccaya, 183.10,
Mahāvyutpatti, 59.5). Three hells "of a day's duration", Saddharmasmṛti, Lévi, Rāmāyaṇa, 53. See
Rhys Davids-Stede, padesa.
Another name for this is pratyekanaraka, paccekaniraya (Comm. on the Suttanipāta and
Petavatthu); such as the hells which Saṁgharakṣita visits, Divya, 335, 336, Introduction, 320
("some hells which are renewed each day" says Burnouf according to the Tibetan ñi-thse, and
according to the description itself). Burnouf quotes Des Hautesrayes: "hells dispersed over the
surface of the earth, on the rivers and in isolated places" (which corresponds to the Vibhāṣā trans.
by Beal, 57, on the "solitary hells”).
We recall that one of the names of the mahāniraya of Majjhima, i.337, is paccattavedaniya.
The pratyekanaraka of the Sikṣāsamuccaya, 136, is an imitation of a monastery; the damned-
pretas of Samyutta, ii.254 are the "individual" damned; the same for the heros of the
Maitrakanyakāvadāna.
The Bodhisattva who should go to Avici goes into a pratyekanaraka (Mahāvastu, i.103): “a
urinal hell" says Barth, J. des Savants, quoted in part, p. 23; but, ii.350, there is fire in this type of
hell).
416. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 690c15, mentions the opinion that the animals which live among humans
are not beings, sattvas: they resemble animals, give milk, etc. We see that the "disappearance of the
animals" at the end of the world is accomplished in two steps, the animals which live with humans
disappearing after the others and at the same time as humans (iii.90a).
417. The city of Yama is 86,000 yojanas, Hopkins, JAOS, xxxiii. 149.
The peta mahiddhika, Petavatthu, i.10; Kathāvatthu, xx.3; Avadānaśataka, 46. Kośa, iii, note 26.
Fourth decade of the Avadānaśataka; Saddharmasmṛtyupasthāna, Chap IV (TD 17, number
721); sources of Beal, Catena, 67. Description of the Pretas who frequent men, manuşyacarišņu,
Lotus, iii. Stede, Gespentergeschichten des Petavatthu, Leipzig, 1914.
Details on the Pretas, Kofa, iii.9d, 83c.
418. Paramārtha and Hsüan-tsang differ. The sun is set into motion by five winds, Beal, Catena, p.
68.
419. In Visuddhimagga, 417-418 (Warren, 324; Spence Hardy, Legends, 233), the moon is 49 and
the sun 50 yojanas in width.
420. Absent in the Tibetan version.
421. It appears difficult to otherwise understand the Lotsava: ñi meḥi gzhal med khan 'og gi phyi rol
ni me fel kyi dkyil 'khor . . . mnon par 'grub bo. Paramārtha: sun disk lower face outer
limit T... The houses, vimāna, are distinct from the disk; on the dimensions of
the houses, mansions, Beal, Catena, 68.
422. Taijasa cakra is explained süryakāntātmaka, “made of the süryakänta gem.”
423. Hsüan-tsang adds: “By how much is the augmentation? By a lava." The lava is the thirtieth of a
muhurta which is a thirtieth part of the day, or four minutes, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 701c9. The
Māsaparīkṣā Chapter of the Sārdülakarna is omitted in the Cowell-Neil edition (see Divya536
Chapter Three
Appendix).
The Lokaprajñāpti indicates the maximum of a day and a night; in agreement with the
Śārdūlakarṇa, Divya, 642: hemantānāṁ dvitīye māse rohiṇyām aṣṭamyāṁ dvādaśamuhūrto divaso .
..; common figures, as we see in Thibaut, p. 26, Barnett, Antiquities of India, 196: the duration of
the day is a maximum of 15 hours, a minimum of 9 hours.
This contradicts the dates of the equinox in 61c-62.
424. Vyākhyā: aparapārśve chāyāpatantī vikalamaṇḍalam darśayati / tadyathā stambhe pradi-
pachāyāpatanti yathā yathā stambha āsanno bhavati tathā tathā stambhaḥ svacchāyayā chádyate /
dūre hi vartamāne pradīpe paripūrṇastambho dṛśyate / kim cid äsanne kim cit kṣiyate / yāvad
atyāsanne stambho naṣṭarūpo vartate / tadvad etat.
Paramartha: Consequently, the shade of the sun covers the other parts of the moon.
Hsüan-tsang: The other sides (west and east) produce a shade which covers the disk of the
moon (east and west).
425. Vyākhyā: punas tiryagavanāmonnāmayogena adhobhāgaś candramaṇḍalasya kşiyate /
ürdhvaṁ vardhate ceti yogācārāḥ.
Paramārtha: Such is the manner of the progress of the sun and of the moon that sometimes one
sees them complete, sometimes by half. Hsüan-tsang: The progress of the sun and the moon are
not similar; one sees them as complete or partial.
The phases of the moon are explained in TD 1, number 24, Beal, 69: 1. on account of its
revolution, by which the hind parts are exhibited; 2. the blue-clad devas, perpetually intervening
between the earth and the moon, cause the disc of the latter to be obscured; 3. because the bright rays
of the sun (sixty bright rays) obscure the disc of the moon ... the moon is so near the sun that its
brightness is obscured...
Beal also quotes TD 32, number 1644: "The subject of the 19th Chapter is the motion of the sun
and moon" (Nanjio 1297).
426. Cāturmahārājakāyika is explained: cāturmahārājānāṁ kāyaḥ / tatra bhavāš căturmaḥārā-
jakāyikāḥ = which forms part of the company of the Four Great Kings.
427. According to the Lokaprajñāpti (Cosmologie, Appendix, p. 301), there, between the city of the
Asuras and that of the Suras (or Thirty-three), there are "five gardens of the Thirty-three, the
Udakaniśrita Nāgas, the Karoţapāṇis, etc.” Divya, 218, Jātaka, i.204.
Pariṣaṇḍā, Tib. ban-rim, Paramartha: stage (ts'eng), Hsüan-tsang: stage-series (ts'eng-
chi). Divya, 212.8 (the Sumeruparikhanda, incorrect reading); 217.17, 344.12 (Sumeru-
parişanda, which differs from the dwellings of the Karotapāņis, etc., and is not one of our
parisaṇḍās). Mahāävyutpatti, 194.21, sumerupāriṣaṇḍa, 245.358, parisaṇḍa.
428. We do not see how the pariṣaṇḍās “depart” (nirgata, 'phags, ch'u ), from out of the
side of Meru.
If we admit that the parisaṇḍās are recessed terraces, placed all around the circumference of
Meru, one can then understand the theory that attributes to the summit of the mountain sides of
20,000 yojanas in height, not of 80,000 yojanas.[Above the first terrace the side is 80,000 less 32,000:
diminishing then 16, 8, 4, there then remains a prism of 20,000 yojanas on a side.]
Great variety in the designs which represent Meru, Alphabetum tibetanum, 473; Beal, Catena,
75; Eitel, Handbook, 164, etc.
429. See Burnouf, 600, Divya, 218, Mahāvastu, i.30 and 394; Morris, JPTS, 1893, 21 (karoți).
430. Sadāmatta is the name of one of the "particular paradises" of Maitrakanyaka.
431. Dhṛtarāṣṭra in the East, Virūḍhaka in the South, Virūpākṣa in the West, and Vaiśrāvaṇa in the
North.
432. The gods which are the company of the Thirty-three Gods, Śakra, etc. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
691c20, which Vasubandhu follows faithfully. Divya, 219; Mahāvastu, i.31; Lokaprajñāpti, fol.
•Footnotes 537
28a-48b, Cosmologie bouddhique, p. 301-306; Saddharmasmṛtyupasthāna in Lévi, Rāmāyaṇṇa,
44-47 (the Chinese names of the parks do not agree with our versions of the Kofa).
433. In the Vibhāṣā, the first opinion is that the sides are 20,000 yojanas in height; the second, that
they are 24,000. Vyākhyā: How does one reconcile the theory of sides of 20,000 with the thesis that
the mountains are as high as they are wide? These masters think that this thesis refers to the central
section of the mountain (madhyabhāgam evābhisamīkṣya evam uktam). See above note 428.
434. On Sudarśana, Divya, 220; Commentary on the Dhammapada, 30 (p. 319 of Burlingame's
Buddhist Legends.)
435. Hsuan-tsang: Its walls of gold are one yojana and a half in height.
436. On the four parks, see Mahāvyutpatti, 196.14; Divya, 194-195 (regrets of a dying god),
Mahāvastu, i.32. The four parks of the Jainas, SBE, 45, P. 288.
437. Caturdifam is explained: catasro diśo'syeti caturdiśam kriyāvišeṣaṇam.According to Bhāguri,
we have the two forms dif and diśa (Vyākhyā).
438. The subhumīni of the stanza is explained: śobhanā bhūmaya eṣām iti subhūmūni
krīḍāsthānāni.
439. Pārijātaka (Divya, 219, etc.) is the Päricchattaka of the Jātaka, i.202, Atthasālinī, 298,
Visuddhimagga, 206 (opinion of the Porāņas).
440. Paramartha and Hsüan-tsang, five yojanas.
441. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 205b1, Ekottara, TD 2, p. 613c4, Udānavarga, vi.14, Dhammapada, 54,
Anguttara, i.226, Jātaka, iii.291: na puspagandhaḥ prativātam eti.
442. Hsüan-tsang: “The Sūtra of the Mahīśāsakas says … … .
443. On the Sudharmā, see Divya, 220, Anguttara, i.226; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 692a20: The gods come
together on the eighth, the fourteenth and the fifteenth day of each fortnight; they examine the
gods and men, govern the Asuras, etc... The same, TD 1, number 24. Chavannes, Cinq cents contes,
i.26. J. Przyluski, JAs. ii.157, on Dīgha, ii.207, Mahāvastu, iii.198.
444. The vimānas are either immense plate-shaped, or individual, mansions, p., iii.101c.
445. The bhaumas and antariksaväsins (?) of Mahävyutpatti, 156, etc.
Vasubandhu is not speaking here of the Asuras (see iii.4) which the Lokaprajñāpti discusses
(trans. in Cosmologie bouddhique); he also ignores Māra (on which Beal, Catena, 93; Chavannes,
Cinq cents contes, i.125 = the King of the Paranirmitavaśavartins; Huber, Sūtrālamkāra, 110) and
Maheśvara (Beal, 94).
446. Pali: khidḍāpadosika.
447. Lokaprajñāpti, Chap. VI (Cosmologie bouddhique, p. 300): "As, in Jambu, there is
abrahmacarya, maithunadharma, dvandvasamāpatti, so too in the other continents and among the
gods up to the Thirty-three Gods; among the Yāmas, appeasement of desire (paridāha, gdun ba) for
embracing.
""
Lokaprajñāpti, ibid.: "As, in Jambu, the women have their month, are pregnant, give birth, so
too in the other continents. Among the Cāturmahārājakāyikas, the infant appears on the bosom or
the shoulder of the god or the goddess ...
448. Vyākhyā: "As long as there lasts mating, embracing, contact of the hands, smiling, looking, so
long will there last mating for the gods inhabiting this earth" (Four Kings and the Thirty-three),
the Yāmas, etc.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 585b12. . . Some say that as the higher gods approach detachment from
desire (vairāgya), the fire of desire becomes weaker; but, in any union (maithuna), one must mate
(dvandvasamāpatti) in order to appease the fire of desire.538 Chapter Three
449. See above P. 391.
450. That is to say, adds Hsüan-tsang, they speak as they do in Central India, "middle in-tu+Q£.”
Beal, Catena, 91.
451. Samgitiparyaya, TD 26, p. 386a27; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 870a28; Dīgha, iii.218; Itivuttaka, 94.
452. Rhys Davids-Stede translate: "having power under the control of another".
In Dīgha, i.216, there is a god Saṁtusita, King of the Tusitas, a Sunimitta, King of the
Nimmānaratis, and a Vasavatti, King of the Paranimmitavasavattis; above, Mahābrahmā, King of
the Brahmakāyikas.
Sumangalavilāsinī, i.121, Māndhātar possesses the human kāmaguṇas, the Parinirmitas
possess divine kāmaguņas.
453. See ii.45, p. 237.
On the sukha of the dhyānas, viii.9.
Digha, iii.218, differs, at any rate, in the redaction.
454. Sukha is absent there, for the sensation of dhyānāntara is the sensation of indifference,
equanimity, viii.23; thus this is not "an arising of pleasure." This dhyāna is the retribution of a good
action, it resembles sukha (sukhakalpa), thus it is “an arising of pleasure." But then the Fourth
Dhyana will also be "an arising of pleasure"? No, because sukha is absent there. Consequently this
point is to be examined (vicāryam, saṁpradhāryam).
455. Other methods of calculation in Beal, Catena 82. [Excerpt from the Vibhāṣā, with numbers
very different from those that we have here: ten thousand yojanas between the residences; same
doctrine in the In-pen Sūtra; in the Abhidharma; “one year for the falling of a rock of one hundred
cubits thrown from the world of Brahmā; 65,535 years for the falling of a mountain thrown from
Akaniṣṭha"; in the Jñānaprasthāna: “18,383 years for the falling of a rock of ten cubits thrown from
the first stage of Rūpadhātu."]
The same, Milinda, 82, a rock takes four months to fall from Brahmaloka falling at a rate of
84,000 yojanas a day.
Sūtrālamkāra, Huber, 127, the heaven of Trayastrimśas is 3,000,336 lis.
456. Vyākhyā: tadutkṛṣṭatarabhūmyantarābhāvān naite kaniṣṭhā ity akaniṣṭhāḥ.
457. The Mahāvyutpatti, 161.5-6., mentions two forms, the Akaniṣṭhas gods and Aghaniṣṭhas gods.
It appears that Aghaniṣṭha is the reading of the MSS of the Bodhisattvabhūmi, see Wogihara. On
agha, Kośa, i.28a, trans. p. 89; and the references of Rhys Davids and Stede.
Rhys Davids and Stede, s. voc. kaniṭṭha, mention “akaniṭṭha in akaniṭṭhabhavana, Jātaka, iii.487,
Commentary on the Dhammapada, passim, akaniṭṭhagāmin, Saṁyutta, v.237, etc." We could quote
Vibhanga, 425 (akaniṭṭha deva); Dhammasangaṇi, 1283 (limit of Rūpadhātu), Dīgha, ii.52, iii.237,
etc.
458. But the Cāturmahārājakāyikas are of the same bhūmi as the Trāyastrimṣas; they can thus,
without difficulty, go to them.
459. The Four Kings and the Thirty-three Gods are of the same bhūmi (for both inhabit Meru); the
four other classes of higher gods of Kāmadhātu, Yāmas, etc., occupy distinct bhūmis; Rūpadhātu
embraces Four Dhyānas which are also bhūmis.
A god arisen in the First Dhyāna does not see a god arisen in the Second Dhyāna.
460. This is simply an example; we can also read: "As sound is not understood . . . "
461. The Mahāsāṁghikas whom Saṁghabhadra refutes.
462. See iii. 101c.
463. Anguttara, i.227, Cullaniddesa, 235.2b (sahassī cūlanikā lokadhātu); Dërgha, TD 1, p. 114b20,
c7, quoted by Beal, Catena, 102, who quotes many Sūtras. The term "chiliocosm" was invented byRémusat.
Footnotes
539
Mahävyutpatti, 153 and 15.15. In the Mahävyutpatti, it appears that sahasracüdika forms only
one word; by this fact, a lokadhātu, a universe, is called sähasra because it is composed of one
thousand four-continent universes, (cāturdvīpaka lokadhātu), and cūḍika because it is the cūḍā
(cūḍābhūtatvāt) of a great universe. [Without doubt we have here kşulla, kṣudra = culla, cūla].
464. This point will be elucidated iii.93a-b (Vyākhyā). Rather: "Creation and destruction [of the
universes of one group] take place at the same time."
Vivarta is explained as vividhavartana or rather vividhā vartante'sminn iti. Samvarta
saṁvartana, or rather saṁvartante'sminn iti: this is the period when beings "come together"
(saṁvartante = saṁgacchants) in the higher dhyānas; see below, note 493.
465. There is an Ayuşparyantasitra, Csoma-Feer, p. 278, Mdo, 26, 217.
466. Vibhanga, 422: manussānaṁ kittakam āyuppamāṇam / vassasatam appam vā bhiyyo vā.
According to the canonical formula: yo ciram jīvati so vassasatam …..
=
467. This is based on a Sutra very close to Anguttara, iv.256-7 (eulogy of the Upasatha), Vibhanga,
422. Lokaprajñāpti in Cosmologie, 301.
468. The year of 360 days and the year of the "middlere Periode" (=the middle period) of Thibaut,
Astronomie, 1899, p. 28. Below iii.90.
469. Very close to the source of Vasubandhu, Divya, 279: kathaṁ rātrir jñāyate divaso vā /
devapuṣpāņām saṁkocavikāsān maṇīnāṁ jvalanājvalanāc chakunīnāṁ ca kūjanākūjanāt.
470. Doctrine of the Kośa in Beal, Catena, 83.
Anguttara, i.267: life of 20,000, 40,000, 60,000 kappas for the gods of the first three Ārūpyas;
the Fourth Arūpya is ignored.
Vibhanga, 424; Brahmapārisajjas, life of 1/3 of a kappa (or ¹¼4); Brahmapurohitas, ½/2;
Mahābrahmas, 1; Parīttābhas, 2; Appamāṇābhas, 4 . . .We have 64 kappas for the Subhakiṇhas,
higher gods of the Third Dhyāna. For the Fourth Dhyāna, six divisions, namely the Asaññasattas
with the Vehappalas, 500 kappas, and the five types of Suddhāvāsikas, 1,000, 2,000, 4,000, 8,000 and
16,000 kappas (Akaniṭṭhas). The Ārūpyas, as in the Kofa.
Buddhaghosa interprets the formula: "The duration of the life of the Brahmakāyikas is a
kappa," in the sense of "part of a kappa”, Kathāvatthu, commentary to xi.5.
471. The Pāļi sources (Itivuttaka, p. 11, Anguttara, etc.) are quoted iv.99c, note 449.
472. The Vyākhyā quotes the Sūtra.
This list is quoted in the Lokaprajñāpti (with Tejasvin in place of Manasvin) iii.1, Cosmologie
bouddhique, p. 298. M. W. De Visser has assured us that it does not figure in the Dirgha (16 Nagas
who escape from Garuḍa), in Saddharmapundarīka (eight: Nanda, Upananda, Sāgara... Manasvin
.).
The Sūtra quoted by Beal, Catena, 419; Mahävyutpatti, 167.14, 51, 66, 58, 44. Mucilinda,
Mahāvagga, i.3. There is no Pāļi reference to the Nāgas who, like Śeṣa, hold up the earth. Above, p.
382.
473. Suttanipāta, p. 126, Saṁyutta, i.152, Anguttara, v.173: seyyathāpi bhikkhu vīsatikhāriko
kosalako tilavāho / tato puriso vassasatassa vassasatassa accayena... Suttanipata, 677, says that the
"learned" have calculated the vāhas of sesame for Paduma hell, and that they have a figure of
512,000,000,000 (Fausböll).
474. According to the Lotsava; in Paramārtha and Hsüan-tsang, as in the Pāli sources,
vimśatikhārika.
Tibetan, rdzan = vāha; khal = khāri; on the dimensions of vāha, Burnett, Antiquities, 208,
Ganitasarasaṁgraha (Madras, 1912), 5. On the other hand, tilavāha = tilasakaṭa, thus "cart-load"
(Rhys Davids and Stede).540 Chapter Three
475. Full all the way to the top = cüḍikābaddha (āvabaddha, Mahävyutpatti, 244.92).
476. Antarāmṛtyu-antareña kālakriya-akālamaraña. See ii45, trans. p. 235, and Vasumitra on the
sects.
477. Persons in Uttarakuru are free from premature death because they do not say, "This is mine"
(Lokaprajñāpti).
478. Divya, 174.1: asthānam anavakāśo yac caramabhavikaḥ sattvo'saṁprāpte višeṣādhigame
so'ntarā kālaṁ kuryāt.
479. Jinoddişța, jinadšta, see ii. trans. p. 236 and notes.
480. Beings who have entered into the absorptions of nirodha, of unconsciousness, of maitri, etc., do
not die before they have left these absorptions.
481. The paramāņu as distinct from the aṇu, "atom", see ii.22. On name, năman, ii.47. On time, kāla,
adhvan, iv.27a.
482. Bhojarāja ad Yogasūtra, iii.52: kṣaṇa is the smallest division of time, which cannot be further
reduced in quantity. Şaddarśana, p. 28.
483. These two definitions belong to the Sauträntikas. We have seen ii.46a, trans. p. 245, a
Vaibhāṣika definition: kāryaparisamāptilakṣaṇa eṣa naḥ kṣaṇaḥ.We should note the remark of the
Atthasālini, p. 60 at the bottom, that sixteen thoughts arise and perish during the time that a rūpa
The second definition recalls that which the Jains [Tattvārthādhigama, iv.15 (see S. C.
Vidyābhūşan, JAs. 1910, i.161) trans. of Jacobi, Journal of the Germany Oriental Society, vol 40,
1906] give of samaya (which is their kṣaṇa): paramasūkṣmakriyasya sarvajaghanyagatiparinatasya
paramānoḥ svāvagāhanakṣetravyatikramakālah samaya iti.According to Jacobi, "die Zeit, die ein
Atom in langsamster Bewegung bebraucht, um sich um seine eigene Korperlange weiter-
zubewegen." One needs an "incalculable” (asaṁkhyeya) number of samayas in order to make one
āvalikā; a "calculable” (samkhyeya) number of these in order to make one prāṇa (7 prāṇas = 1 stoka,
7 stokas = 1 lava; 38½ lavas = nālikā [=ghaṭī], 2 nālikās = 1 muhūrta).
Compare Gaṇitasārasaṁgraha, i.32 (a mathematical treatise of Mahāvīrācārya, published and
translated by M. Rangācārya, Madras, 1912).
aṇur aṇvantaraṁ kāle vyatikrāmati yāvati /
sa kālaḥ samayo'samkhyaiḥ samayair āvalir bhavet //
The time in which an atom (moving) goes beyond another atom (immediately next to it) is a
samaya; innumerable samayas make an āvali.
484. Quoted in Madhyamakavṛtti, 547: balavatpuruṣācchaṭāmātreṇa pañcasaṣṭiḥ kṣaṇā ati-
kramantīti pāṭhāt. Mahāvyutpatti, 253.10, acchaṭāsaṁghātamātra; Divya, 142; Pāļi, acchară.
The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 701b2, has five opinions on the kṣaṇa.(The first four assign it a duration
more and more reduced: Vasubandhu quotes here the second (Note of Saeki). The fifth is the best
(but Saeki does not reproduce it): the first four solely indicate the duration of the kṣaṇa in a general
manner; the Bhagavat did not tell the true duration of a kṣaṇa ... because no one is capable of
understanding it.) The Samyuktahṛdaya (?), TD 28, p. 886c11, is interesting.
485. This is the series in Mahävyutpatti, 251 (with vätāyanacchidrarajas and yūka = liksodbhava).
Dhanus = daṇḍa; hasta= the puruşahasta of the Abhidharma according to which the stature of
the inhabitants of the Dvipas is calculated.
The series of Sārdūlakarṇa (Divya, 645, where the text is altered) differs in certain details.
In Lalita, 149 (rgya cher rol pa, 142), truti is placed between aṇu and vātāyanarajas; yūka is
replaced by sarsapa.Other Buddhist sources, Lokaprajñāpti, fol. 12a (Cosmologie, p. 262); Watters,
i.141 (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 701b2); Saddharmasmṛti, Lévi, Rāmāyaṇa, 153; Kalpadruma (Calcutta,
1908), 9. Ganitasārasaṁgraha, 3; Varahamihira (in Alberuni, i.162); Fleet, JRAS, 1912, 229, 1913,
153; Hopkins, JAOS. 33.150; Barnett, Antiquities, 208.
Likkä in the Pāļi commentaries = 36 rattareņus, 1/7 ūkā.
1Footnotes 541
486. Same omission in the Hsi-yü-chi, ii.
487. Eitel (p. 98) observes that a cemetary ascetic should not approach a village closer than the limit
of a krosa.
488. According to Lokaprajñāpti, fol. 55b, Cosmologie, 309; figures reproduced in the Hsi-yü-chi, ii.
(Watters, i.143, Julien, i.61, Beal, i.71; vakṣaṇa, error for tatkṣaṇa, in numerical Dictionary quoted by
Chavannes, Religieus Eminents, 152). Source of the Mahāvyut patti, 253, differs.
In Divya, 643-644, the order kṣaṇa and tatkṣaṇa is reversed.
On kşana above p. 474.
Tatkṣaṇa defined in Divya: tadyathā striyā nātidīrghanātibrasvakartinyāḥ sütrodyāma eva-
mdīrghas tatkṣaṇaḥ; Saeki quotes the Prajñāpti: “When a women of medium age is about to spin,
the stroke, the movement of a thread neither long nor short, its duration is the tatkṣaṇa." That is to
say:
the normal time that it takes the thread to touch the finger is the tatkṣaṇa.[According to a note
of P. Louis van Hée].
489. In Scripture (pravacana), there are three seasons (rtu) and not six as in the world. Siśfira is cold
and is thus hemanta; vasanta is hot and is thus grīşma, Sarad is rainy and is thus varṣās (Vyākhyā).
[Three seasons in the Kathyāvār, Alberuni, i. 357]. For all the Buddhas, hemanta is the first season
(Vyākhyā). (Burnouf, Introduction, 569). On the Buddhist seasons, I-tsing, Takakusu, 101, 219, 220,
Hsi-yü-chi, chap. ii, Watters, i.144. Thibaut, Astronomie ..
...,
P. 11.
490. The "learned" are the Buddhists who, in the fourteenth and fifteenth fortnight of each of the
three seasons omit a day which is called ūnarātra or kṣayāha (Thibaut, Astronomie, 1899, 26,
Barnett, Antiquities, 195) and, in this way, hold poșadha after fourteen days and not after fifteen:
caturdafiko 'tra bhikṣubhiḥ posadhaḥ kriyate.
"Worldly" (laukika) computation has months of 30 days. The lunar month has 29 days, 12
hours, and 44 minutes. The ceremony of posadha is regulated according to the moon. One must thus
omit a day (ūnarātra) from the worldly computation every two months. Thus each ecclesiastical
season of eight half-months will be 15 days + 15 + 15 + 14 + 15 + 15 + 15 + 14.
In order to pass from the ecclesiastical (cândra) year to the worldly year, one adds six days; in
order to catch up to the solar year (of 366 days) one adds an intercalary month (adhimāsa) after two
years and seven months (Alberuni, ii.21).
We should study the Mātangasūtra, TD 21, number 1300, analyzed in Divya 657, part of the
Sārdūlakarṇa (māsaparīkṣā) omitted by Cowell-Neil.
491. A good study by Fleet, JRAS. 1911,479, on the kalpas and the yugas.Fleet recalls the formulas
of Asoka: āva kapam, āva saṁvaṭakapā.According to Buddhaghosa, Makkhali admits 62
antarakappas instead of 64, Sumangala, i.162 (Dīgha, i.54). The kalpas of the Jains, for example,
SBE. 22.
The four periods, disappearance, etc., described in 90-93, are "the four asankheyya of the
[maha]kappa", Anguttara, ii.142.
492. We customarily translate antarakalpa, antaḥkalpa, as "intermediate Kalpa", and others, by "der
Kalpa der Zwischenzeit" or "Zwischen-Kalpa.” (Schmidt, Geschichte der Ost-Mongolen, 304). But
Rémusat has correctly seen that "these expressions do not make sense" (Mélanges posthumes, 103,
note). The antarakalpas or antaḥkalpas are, rather, kalpas which are within, inside of greater
periods. The translation of Rémusat "petit kalpa” (“small kalpa”) is, if not literal, at least useful.
493. We translate saṁvarta, saṁvartanī as "disappearance." Such is indeed the meaning of the word
when one speaks of bhājanasaṁvartani, “disappearance of the receptacles,” yadā bhājanāni
samvartante vinaśyantity arthaḥ = "when the receptacles disappear, that is to say, perish." But in the
expressions gatisaṁvartanī, etc., saṁvart signifies “to go together, to be found together with."
There is samvartani of the realms of rebirth (gati) when hellish beings, animals, etc., are found to be
together (saṁvartante, ekasthibhavanti) in one part of the heavenly realm of rebirth; samvartani of
beings (sattva), when beings are found together in a single Dhyana heaven (Rūpadhāātu).542 Chapter Three
494. Ekottara, TD, p. 736c17; Beal, Catena, 113. Sp. Hardy, Manual, 472, says that, at the end of the
kalpa, beings guilty of the five anantaryas (iv.96) get out of hell, but that "the doubter, the skeptic"
(the man in Dīgha, i.55, Samyutta, iii.207) is transported to the hell of another universe (see iv.99c).
495. A being whose actions should be punished by an animal rebirth will be reborn into another
universe. Hsüan-tsang: "The animals who live with humans and with the gods disappear at the
same time as do these."
On the animals in heaven, Kathāvatthu, xx.4.
Manuşyasahacarişṇava iti manuṣyasahacaraṇasīla gomahiṣādayaḥ.
496. He obtains the first dhyāna dharmatāpratilambhika. By dharmatā one should understand "the
particular transformation which the good dharmas then undergo" (kuśalānāṁ dharmāṇāṁ
tadānīṁ pariņāmavifeṣaḥ). This point is elucidated viii.38.
497. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 429a19; Ekottara, TD 2, p. 736c20; Mahāparinirvāṇa, TD 12, p. 753c14:
Seven suns come out at the same time from behind the mountain Yugandhara; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
690a15: Four opinions, 1. that the suns are hidden behind Yugandhara (?); 2. that one sun divides
into seven; 3. that one sun takes on a seven times greater force; 4. that seven suns, at first hidden,
then manifest themselves by reason of the actions of beings.
Saptasūryavyākaraṇa, above p. 376, quoted in Lokaprajñāpti, Mdo 62, fol. 66 (Cosmologie,
314); Pitāputrasamāgama (=Ratnakūṭa, xvi) in Śikṣāsamuccaya, 247. Pāļi sources, bibliographie of
Minaiev, Zapiski, ix.323; Sattasuriyuggamana in Anguttara, iv.3000, Visuddhi, 416 (Warren, 321).
Alberuni, i.326; Hastings, Ages of the World; Hopkins, Epic Mythology, 1915, 84, 99, Great
Epic, 475; Dictionary of St. Petersburg, s. voc. saṁvarta.
Mesopotamian origin of this theory (?), Carpenter, Studies in the History of Religion, 79.
498. See above p. 376.
499. Below 100c. When the receptacle world is empty, water (abdhātu) is produced which dissolves,
like salt, the receptacle world. This water, which is of Kāmadhātu, “binds” (saṁbadhnāti) a water of
the First Dhyana and the Second Dhyana. This water, which is thus of three spheres (Kāmadhātu
and two Dhyānas) disappears with the receptacle to which it corresponds.
Disappearance through wind: the wind disperses (vikirati, vidhvaṁsayatı) the receptacles of
the first three Dhyānas like a pile of dust (pāṁśurāśi).
On that which remains, note 504.
500. Vibhāśā, TD 27, p. 691b8, quoted by Saeki ad iii.45.
501. According to the rule enunciated below: yat paścāt saṁvartate tat pūrvaṁ vivartate.
502. According to other sources, 84,000.
503. According to the Mahāyāna, the 20 kalpas are of augmentation and diminution.
504. It has been explained, i.7, that the skandhas are time.
What does a kalpa consist of? Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 700b23: Some say that it is by its nature
rūpāyatana, etc.; the days-and-nights, etc., are totally the arising and the destruction of the skandhas;
as a kalpa is made up of days-and-nights, etc., it is of the same nature. But a kalpa is the time of the
Three Dhātus: thus it is five or four skandhas.Hui-hui: "kalpa, with respect to Kāmadhātu (and
Rūpadhātu), is five skandhas; with respect to Arūpyadhātu, it is four skandhas.The 'empty' kalpa
('the period when the world stays destroyed') is two skandhas [namely, says the gloss,
saṁskāraskandha and rūpaskandha (for ākāśa is rūpa)], since the days-and-nights, etc., do not exist
separate from the skandhas." A commentary on the Kofa observes that, according to the Mahāyāna,
time (kāla) is a viprayukta saṁskāra.[The 90th samskära of the list of the 100 dharmas,
Vijnaptimātra, Muséon, 1906, 178-194, R. Kimura, Original and developed doctrines, 1920, p. 55].
505. i. Asamkhyeya kalpas, "numberless kalpas" are the time an asaṁkhyeya number (10 to the
59th power) of mahakalpas last.Footnotes 543
[asaṁkhya = asamkhyeya, incalculable. samkhyānenāsaṁkhyeyā asaṁkhyā iti.]
Hsüan-tsang: Among the four types of kalpas which have been named, which should one
multiply in order to make "three numberles kalpas"? One should multiply the great kalpas, 10, 100,
1,000, and thus following until this multiplication gives "three numberless kalpas." That which is
termed "without number, numberless" (wu-shu' ) does not signify "incalculable" (pu k'o
shu). A chieh-tuo Sūtra says that the word "numberless" (asamkhyeya) is a number
among the sixteen numbers. What are these sixteen? As this Sūtra says, "One and not two..."
ii. The first asamkhyeya of the career of Śakyamuni begins under the former Śākya-
muni(Mahāvastu, i.1) and terminates under Ratnaśikhin. During this asamkhyeya there appeared
75,000 Buddhas (Kośa, iv.110; Rémusat, Mélanges posthumes, 116; numerical Dict., in Chavannes,
Religieux eminents, reads 5,000 in place of 75,000).
The second asamkhyeya ends with Dipaṁkara. Buddhas: 76,000.
The third asamkhyeya ends with Vipaśyin. Buddhas: 77,000.
There then follow 91 mahākalpas (in place of 100, as the Kośa explains, iv.112a).
Vipaśyin is the first of the seven "historic" Buddhas (celebrated in the Saptabuddhastotra); then
there are Sikhin, Viśvabhuj, Krakutsanda, Konākamuni, Kāśyapa, Śākyamuni. (References, Kern,
Manual, 64).
iii. In the Pāli sources (Cariyapitaka, i.1.1, etc.), the career of the Bodhisattva is four
asaṁkheyyas in length plus a hundred thousand kappas.Some later works, like the Sārasaṁgraha,
have Bodhisattvas of four, eight, and sixteen asaṁkheyyas, plus each time one hundred thousand
kappas.
506. A muktaka Sūtra, that is to say a Sūtra which does not form part of the Agamas: na
caturāgamāntargatam ity arthaḥ.Elsewhere a muktaka Sūtra is a non-authentic Sūtra.
Paramartha translates: yu= remaining, other; Hsüan-tsang: chieh-tuo = [vi]muktaka.
507. Our list is that of the Mahavyutpatti, 249 (which, according to Wogihara, is excerpted from the
Kosa). The numbers 14 and 15, in the MSS of the Mahävyutpatti, are prasuta, mahāprasuta, but the
Chinese versions give prayuta, mahāprayuta: the Tibetan (rab bkram) gives prakīrṇa or prasṛta.For
36, 37, Wogihara corrects samāptaḥ, mahāsamāptaḥ to samāptaṁ, mahāsamāptaṁ.
Our list, as Vasubandhu remarks below p. 480, has 52 terms: "Eight members, in the middle,
have been forgotten": aṣṭakam madhyād vismṛtam . . . see below, note 508.
On the great numbers, Georgy, Alphabetum Tibetanum, 640; Schiefner, Mélanges Asiatiques,
629; Rémusat, Mélanges posthumes, 67; Beal, Catena, 122; other sources and calculations in
Hastings, art. Ages of the world, 188b.
The Mahavyutpatti presents four types of calculation 246-249, excerpted from the Buddha-
vatamsaka and the Prajñāpāramitāśāstra, Skandhavyūha, Lalita, Abhidharma; then "worldly"
calculation (from 1 to 100).
The Buddhavatamsaka, quoted by Rémusat, teaches that "in the higher system, the numbers are
multiplied by themselves": there are ten numbers thus calculated beginning with asaṁkhya:
asamkhya, asaṁkhya², asaṁkhyaª…. [I think that the Tibetan version (Kandjour, 36, fol. 36) invites
us to apply this progression from koți (=10,000,000): koți, koți², koțiª and thus following up to
anabhilāpya-anabhilāpya-parivartanirdeśa which should be the 122nd term of this series].
"Nothing is certainly more unreasonable that all this numerical apparel... and yet one is obliged to
admit that the Buddhists have sometimes made use of it, either in order to sustain their imagination
in the contemplation of the infinity of time and space, or in order to make this idea nearer to those
rude spirits incapable of conceiving of this". (Rémusat).
The Brahmanical numbe are also very large. The lives of Brahmā, Nārāyaṇa, Rudra, Ïśvara,
Sadāśiva, Śakti keep increasing. Śakti lives 10,782,449,978,758,523,781,120 plus 27 zeros of
kalpas. This life is only one truti or second of a day in the life of Siva, which is represented in kalpas
by 37,264,147,126,589,458,187,550,720 plus 30 zeros. Concerning this, Alberuni (i.363) says: "If
those dreamers had more assiduously studied arithmetic, they would not have invented such
outrageous numbers. God takes care that their trees do not grow into heaven."544 Chapter Three
508. Vyākhyā: aṣṭau sthānāni kvāpi pradeśe pramuşitatvān na pațḥitāni / tenātra dvāpañcāśat
sthānāni bhavanti / ṣaṣṭyā ca saṁkhyāsthānair bhavitavyam / tāny aṣṭakāni svayaṁ kāni cin
nāmāni kṛtvā paṭhitavyāni yena şaṣṭiḥ saṁkhyāsthānāni paripūrṇāni bhaveyuh.Same doctrine in
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 891b10.
For Yasomitra the number asamkhya is the sixteenth of the series 1, 10, 100, 1000... We should
place in this list, in an undetermined place, the eight numbers which are lacking, by giving them
some name.
The editor of Mahāvyutpatti, 249, does not understand it thus; he adds, 53-60, apramāṇam,
aprameyam...anabhiläpyam.
Sarad Chandra Das gives our list as coming from the Kośa, 1-52: “Up to this number there are
sanscrit equivalents; from 53 to 60, there are no sanscrit equivalents, the Tibetan having introduced
new names to replace the lost originals." These new names (which one can translate as maitra,
mahāmaitra, karuṇa, mahākaruṇa . . . ) do not have, in fact, any resemblance to 53-60 of the
Mahāvyutpatti.
509. According to Paramārtha. The Lotsava, certainly less clear: de ltar na gnas gzhan drug cur
phyin pa de dag tu phyin pa’i bskal pa ni bskal pa grans med pa ces bya'o.
510. Opinion expressed in Ekottara, TD 2, p. 562b2, b25, Parinirvāṇa, TD 12, p. 624b21, TD31, p.
518a18 (Saeki). Altruism of the Bodhisattva, Kośa, iv.llla. That persons of little virtue cannot
believe in the Bodhisattva, vii.34. How the Bodhisattva considers others as his "self,"
Bodhicaryavatāra, viii.
511. We can thus understand: the excellent desire, for others, of temporal happiness (ābhyudayika)
and bliss (naiḥśreyasika) (=nirvāṇa, cessation of suffering), and, for himself the cessation of
suffering, that is to say, the quality of Buddha, because he is useful to others.
According to Saeki, the Prajñāpāramitāśāstra, 29.18, quotes some stanzas of the Samyukta
presenting the same doctrine.
Compare the four categories of Dīgha, iii.233, Anguttara, ii.95.
512. Different theory in the Păli sources, for example Sārasaṁgraha.
Sources are not in agreement on the date of the appearance of the last Buddhas; Vibhāṣā, TD 27,
p. 700c29, Dirghāgama, etc. (Rémusat, Mélanges posthumes, 116; Notes of the Foe koue ki, 189).
The Dirgha places, in the course of the ninth antarakalpa of our great kalpa, four Buddhas:
Krakucchanda (period when life is 40,000 years long), Kanakamuni (life of 30,000 years), Kāśyapa
(life of 20,000 years), Šakyamuni (life of 100 years) [same figures in Digha, ii.3, Afokāvadāna,
Avadānaśataka, etc.]; elsewhere we have 60,000, 40,000, 20,000 and 100.
Others say: No Buddhas during the first five antarakalpas; Krakucchanda in the sixth,
Kanakamuni in the seventh, Kāśyapa in the eighth, Sakyamuni in the ninth, Maitreya in the tenth.
The other Buddhas of the present Bhadrakalpa in the other antarakalpas.
"9
According to the Mahāyāna, we are in the first antarakalpa of our great kalpa: four Buddhas in
the period of diminution; one Buddha (Maitreya) in the period of augmentation. In fact, in the
comment of TD 14, number 452 ("The Birth Above of Maitreya"): "Why does Sākyamuni appear
in a period of diminution, Maitreya in a period of augmentation? By reason of their vows. . .
Prajñāpāramitāśāstra, TD 25, p. 89c12, p. 93a13. It is said that the Buddhas appear when
human life is of 84,000, 70,000, 60,000, 50,000, 40,00 30,000, 20,000, 100 years .
compassion of the Buddhas is constant. Their Dharma, like a good remedy, is ākālika. The gods live
more than 1000 x 1000 years and enjoy great pleasures [Yet they can be converted]. So much the
more mankind. Thus the Buddhas should appear when life is more than 80,000 years.
But the
513. The order of the kaṣāyas (sñig ma) differ according to the sources, Mahävyutpatti, 124 and the
numerical Dict. (Chavannes, Cinq cents contes, i.17, interesting): äyus dṛṣṭi kleśa sattva kalpa (dus
kyi sñigs); Dharmasaṁgraha, 91, kleśa dṛṣṭi sattva āyus kalpa; Bodhisattvabhūmi, i47, ayus sattva
kleśa dṛṣṭi kalpa; Karuṇāpuṇḍarīka, iii, āyus, kalpa, sattva dṛṣṭi kleśa; Lotus of the Good Law, 43,
kalpa sattva kleśa dṛṣṭi äyus.[The Buddhas who appear then preach the Three Vehicles].Three kaşayas, Kośa, iv.59.
On kalpakaṣāya, iii.99, note 555.
Footnotes 545
514. When life is of one hundred years, the five kaṣāyas are utsada, but not abhyutsada as when life
was formerly reduced.
515. The upakaraṇas are the dhānyapuṣpaphalauṣadhādīni, the fruits of the sphere. Their
deterioration or vipatti, is that their rasa, vīrya, vipāka and prabhāva become small; or rather again
the fruits of the sphere are completely absent. See Kofa, iv.85a.
516. Vyākhyā: kāmasukhallikā - kāmasukham eva kāmasukhalīnatā vā / kāmatṛṣṇā vā yayā
kāmasukhe sajyate. Atmaklamatha = ātmopatāpa, ātmapīḍā. anuyoga = anuşevaṇa (Dīgha, iii 113).
Compare iv.86a-c.
517. The Pratyekabuddhas take this name because, before obtaining the result, they did not receive
instruction, and because, having obtained the result, they do not give instruction.
518. Wassiliev, 276: "To the types of Aryans recognized by the Vaibhāṣikas, the Sautrāntikas add
two types of Pratyekas."
Vargacărin, in Mahāvyutpatti, 45; in the Commentary of Nāmasaṁgīti, vi.10. (The text only
speaks of khadga pratyekanayaka.)
Khaḍgaviṣāṇakalpa: Suttanipāta, third Sutta; Visuddhimagga, 234 (mahesi), etc.; Mahāvastu,
1.357 (his Nirvāṇa), Sikṣāsamuccaya, 194 (khaḍgasama), Divya, 294, 582.
Śrāvakapūrvin as pretapūrvin, etc., Avadānaśataka, i.259.
The Vargacarins have obtained the fruits of Srotaäpanna or of Sakṛdāgāmin in a period when
the Good Law exists; later, in a period when the Good Law has disappeared, they realize by
themselves the quality of Arhat. Since they experienced the terror (samvega) of existence under a
former Buddha,, they do not have to be terrorized (saṁvejanīya) again: thus the Vargacarins appear
even in a period when life continues to be augmented.
519. We shall see vi.23c at which moment the ascetic can pass from one Vehicle to another.
520. Pūrvakathā, a conjectural translation of snon gyi gtam; Hsüan-tsang has pen-shih★‡;
Paramārtha, pen-hsing ching p. 222a (pūrvacaryāsūtra).
Saeki refers to the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 241b2, to Bālapaṇḍita ("Weisse und Thor”), Chap. xiii,
and to Afokarājasūtra.This story is recounted in fact in Divya, 349, an excerpt from the Sūtra of
Aśoka as we have seen in Przyluski, Légende d'Açoka, 310 (JAs. 1914, 2, 520).
521. Anvaya = bodhihetu; thus "the Rhinoceros has one hundred kalpas as the cause of Bodhi.”
Vyākhyā: yathā khaḍgaviṣāṇā advitīyā bhavanti evaṁ te grhasthapravrajitair anyaif ca
pratyekabuddhair asaṁsṛṣṭavibāriņa iti khadgavisāṇakalpā ity ucyante.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 156b26, not two Pratyekas at the same time.
522. Rddher avişkaraṇāt, for example, Mahāvastu, iii.27.
523. Why would some lokottaravītarāgas be impossible? See Introduction, Chapter v.
524. Samghabhadra, TD 29, p. 524b8, indicates at first some other reasons which are, in his opinion,
the good ones, notably: "The Rhinoceros does not possess vaiśāradya.To persons attached to
personalism (ātmavāda), he desires to teach non-personality (nairātmya); but his mind is timid."
525. See below note 539.
526. Hsüan-tsang: These kings, by means of the movement of the wheel, govern all, thus they are
called Cakravartins. Etymology in Sumangala, i.249.
527. Fo-koue-ki (=Fo kuo chi), 134. The Dirgha only speaks of the king of the wheel of fire; the
Chi-she lun (=Kośa) distinguishes: 1. wheel of fire, Jambudvipa, life being 20,000 years; 2. wheel of
copper, Jambu and Videha, 40,000 years; 3. wheel of silver, Jambu, Videha, Godaniya, 60,000 years;
4. wheel of gold, four Dvipas, 80,000 years.546
Chapter Three
On the period when the Cakravartins appear, Dirgha, TD 1, p. 21c22, p. 119b27, Samyukta, TD
2, p. 194a6; TD 3, number 155.
Suvarṇacakravartin, see Vie de Hiouen-tsang (=Life of Hsian-tsang), 70; caturbhāgaca-
kravartin, Divya, 369 at the bottom (the Chinese versions understand: king of a continent,
Przyluski, Açoka); caturdvīpeśvara, Šikṣāsamuccaya, 175. Pāļi, late, cakkavāļacakkavattin, cāturanta,
dipa, padesacakkavattin (Rhys Davids and Stede).
Notes on the Cakravartins, Kofa ii. p., iv.77b-c, vii. 53c; Bodhisattvabhūmi, fol. 125b-126a
(cāturdvīpaka, jambudvīpeśvara); Maitreyasamiti, 86, 237, 246, where Leumann supposes a
Dvidvipa (king of two continents) = Didipa or Dudipa, which would give Brahmanical Dilipa, and
Dujipa, Jätaka, 543.129.
528. It is the teaching (nirdeśa) of the Prajñāpti that there are four types of Cakravartins. See
Kāraṇaprajñāpti, Chap. ii (analyzed in Cosmologie bouddhique, 329) [Takakusu, Abhidharma
Literature, 117].
529. Hsüan-tsang and Paramārtha: "as if made by some good craftsman." Nothing which
corresponds to lha rdzas.(But Foe-koue-ki, 133: a work of heavenly artisans) [Leumann,
Maitreyasamiti, 86].
530. Dīrgha, TD 1, p. 119b27; Samyukta, TD 2, p. 194a6; Ekottara, TD 2, p. 731b15; Vibhāṣā, TD
27, p. 310c8. This is the text of which we have the Pali recension, Dīgha, ii.172: yassa
raññokhattiyassa ... Quoted in Kāraṇaprajñāpti, Chap. ii, analyzed in Cosmologie, 328.
531. Anguttara, i.27, Digba, iii.114, Majjhima, iii.65, Milinda, 236.
Vyākhyā: asthānam: vartamānakālāpekṣayā. Anavakāśaḥ: anāgatakālāpekṣayā
The Pali recension has: ekissä lokadhātuyä dve arahanto...apubbam acarimam uppajjeyum...
532. Hsüan-tsang differs: What is the meaning of the expression, "Is there only one?" Does it refer
to a great Trisähasra universe...
533. Note of Saeki. The Sarvāstivādins say that only one Buddha appears in a universe of the ten
cardinal directions. The Sautrāntikas and the Mahāyāna say that, in the universe of the ten
directions, many Buddhas appear. See Kathāvatthu, xxi,6, the treatises of Vasumitra, etc.
(Mahäsaṁghikas, Lokottaravādins).
Samghabhadra, TD 29, p. 524c6. The Sūtra does not make any distinctions. No Sūtra says,
"Only in this world," or "Solely in a lokadhātu." How do we establish that the Sūtra solely refers to a
great Trisahasra and not to all the universes? Further the Sūtra (Brahmarājasūtra) says, “Is there a
Bhikṣu equal to Gautama...?"
534. Equal to the Buddhas who are equal for all beings.
535. Dīrgha, TD 1, p. 78c19, Dīgha, iii.113.
536. Thsans-pa'i mdo= Brahmasūtra; Paramärtha and Hsüan-tsang, Fan-wang ching:
Brahmarājasūtra (=Madhyama, TD 1, p. 547a). This formula can easily find a place in the
Brahmanimantaṇika, Majjhima, i329.
=
537. See Kośa, vii.55a. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 767b2. In the same way the memory of the Bhagavat
bears "naturally" on 91 kalpas (iv.109). The explanations of the Visuddhimagga, 414, on the triple
khetta of the Bhagavat: jātikkhetta, 10,000 cakkavālas which tremble at his birth; āṇākkhetta, a koți
and 100,000 cakkavālas where his parittas, magic formulas of protection, reign; visayakkhetta, the
field which is the object of his knowledge, infinite.
538. Paramārtha here stops the exposition of the "pluralist" thesis.
539. Samghabhadra refutes this argument. The comparison with the Cakravartins proves nothing:
their power is limited to the four continents; the power of conversion of the Buddhas is infinite,
since their "knowledge" (jñāna) attains to all the universes.
1Footnotes 547
540. All this argument in the Bodhisattvabhūmi, fol. 39.
Tatra prabhūtair eva kalpair ekatyo 'pi buddhasya pradurbhāvo na bhavati / ekasminn eva ca
kalpe prabhūtānāṁ buddhānāṁ prādurbhāvo bhavati / teșu ca teșu ... dikṣv aprameyā-
samkhyeyeṣu lokadhātuṣv aprameyāṇām eva buddhānām utpado veditavyaḥ / tat kasya hetoh /
santi daśasu dikṣv aprameyāsaṁkhyayā bodhisattvā ye tulyakālakṛta praṇidhānās tulyasam-
bhārasamudāgatāś ca / yasminn eva divase pakṣe mase samvatsara ekena bodhisattvena
bodhicittam praṇihitaṁ tasminn eva divase….. sarvaiḥ / yathā caika utsahito ghaṭito vyāyacchitaś ca
tathā sarve / tathā hi dhriyante 'sminn eva lokadhātāv anekāni bodhisattvaśatāni yāni
tulyakālakṣtapraṇidhānāānitulyadānāni tulyafīlāni tulyakṣāntīni tulyavīryāṇi tulyasamādhīni tulya-
prajnani prog của dasasu diks anantaparyantesu lokadbātusu / buddbaksetrang api trisabasra
mahasahasrany aprameyasankhyeyāni daśasu diktu samvidyante / na ca tulyasambhārasamudā-
gatayor dvayos tävad bodhisattvayor ekasmim lokadhātau buddhakṣetre yugapad ut pattyavakāśo'sti
prag evaprameyasaṁkhyayānām / na ca punas tulyasaṁbhārāṇāṁ krameṇānuparipāṭikayā ut pādo
yujyate / tasmad daśasu dikṣv aprameyāsaṁkḥyeyeṣu yathāpariśodhiteṣu tathāgataśūnyeṣu te
tulyasambhārā bodhisattvà anyonyeşu buddhakşetreşitpadyanta iti veditavyam // tad anena
paryayena bahulokadhātuşu buddhabahulyam eva yujyate na caikasmin buddhakşetre dvayos
tathāgatayor yugapad utpādo bhavati / tat kasya hetoḥ / dirgharātraṁ khalu bodhisattvair evam
pranidhanam anubṛmhitam bhavati yathāham eko'pariņāyake loke pariņāyakaḥ syāṁ sattvānāṁ
vinetā sarvaduḥkhebhyo vimocayitā... // punaś ca śakta ekas tathāgatas trisāhasramaḥāsāhasra
ekasmin buddhakṣetre sarvabuddhakāryaṁ kartum / ato dvitiyasya tathāgatasya vyartha eva
utpādaḥ . . . // [ekasya ca tathāgatasya] loka utpādāt sattvānāṁ svārthakaraṇaprasiddhiḥ
pracuratarā bhavati pradakṣiṇatarā tat kasya hetoḥ / teṣām evaṁ bhavati ayam eva kṛtsne jagaty
ekas tathāgato na dvitīyaḥ/asminn janapadacārikāṁ vā viprakrānte parinirvṛte vā nāsti sa kaści...
yasyāsmābhir antike brahmacaryaṁ caritavyaṁ syād dharmo vā śrotavya iti viditvābhitvarante
ghanatarena cchandavyāyāmena brahmacaryavāsāya saddharmaśravaṇāya ca/buddhabahutvam tu
te upalabhya nābhitvarerann evam eşām ekasya buddhayotpädät svakārthakāryaprasiddhiḥ
pracuratarā bhavati pradakṣiṇatarā ca.
541. Mahävyutpatti, 181, svayaṁyānam, pratyudyānam, kalahajitaḥ, śastrajitaḥ (read pratyudyāna,
svayaṁyāna, kalahajit . . . ) [var. astrajitaḥ].
542. Koṭṭarājan, see Mahāvyutpatti, 186.8. Saṁyutta, v.44: ye keci kuṭṭarājāno sabbe te rañño
cakkavattissa anuyantā (?) bhavanti.
543. Ṛddha sphita subhikṣa ākīrṇabahujanamanuṣya (Mahävyutpatti, 245.10, 11, 13, 14). Vyākhyā:
janāḥ prākṛtamanuṣyāḥ / manuṣyās tu matimantaḥ; JAs. 1913, i.602.
544. Dīgha, ii.173, Śikṣāsamuccaya, 175.
545. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 493a10, Ekottara, TD 2, p. 731b16, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 194a7. Majjhima,
iii.172, Samyutta, v.99; compare Dīgha, iii.59.
Lalita, 14-18, Mabarastu, .108. Digba, i.172, Majjbima, ii. 172, Mabābodbivamsa, 66
(according to Leumann, Maitreyasamiti, 86).
Vyakhyā: gṛhapatiratnam kośadhyakṣajātīyaḥ / parinayakaratnam balādhyakṣajātīyaḥ. Gṛha-
pati possess the divine eye, vii.53c-d.
546. The marks (iv.108, 110a) are enumerated in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 888a6-889a9; Pārśva examines
why there are thirty-two, no more no less.
Good Pāli bibliography in Rhys Davids-Stede.
547. Defasthatara is translated by Paramartha as "most correct" (ch'eng E), and comments: "not
inclined" (pup'ien). The Vyākhyā is illegible: deśasthatarāṇīti / atrasthānāni (?), translated as
gnas ma 'grus pa.
548. Tibetan: Because some [persons] were endowed with grasping, after having made provision
through attachment to taste and through laziness, a protector of the fields was rewarded.548
Chapter Three
Paramartha: Little by little, beings through attachment to taste, and through idleness, made
provision, and by means of riches looked to (var. hired) a protector of the fields. Hsüan-tsang: By
reason of the appearance of stocking up provisions and of robbery, in order to put an end (to
robbery), they hired (ku) a guardian of the fields.
549. Summary bibliography of the "Buddhist Genesis."
a. Aggaññasutta, Dīgha, iii.84 and i.17 (Dialogues i.105, iii. 9 and 25, meaning of the word
aggañña according to Buddhaghosa; O. Franke, 273). Visuddhimagga,417 (Warren, 324, Sp. Hardy,
Manual, 63).
b. Kandjour, Vinaya, iii.421-430, v.115-166, trans. by Schiefner, 6 June 1851, Mélanges
Asiatiques, i.395 (mentioned by Georgi, Alphabetum Tibetanum, 188; Pallas, Sammlungen über
die Mongolische Völkerschafter, ii.28; Kovalewski, Buddhistischen Kosmologie, Mem. de l'univ. de
Kasan, 1837, i.122 and the Ssanang Ssetsen of Schmid and by Rockhill, Life, 1.
Lokaprajñāpti, xi (analyzed in Cosmologie, 318) which quotes the Vasişthabhäradvāja
vyakarana (comp. Dīgha, iii.80).
Abhinişkramaṇasūtra, Kandjour, Mdo 28.161, translated by Csoma, JASB, 1833, 385, reprinted
by Ross, ibid. 1911.
c. Mahāvastu, i.338 and notes 615.
d. Beal, Catena, 109, Four Lectures, 151 (according to Dirgha, Madhyama, etc.)
550. Dirgha, TD 1, p. 147c28 (Compare Dīgha, i.17, 34).
Vyākhyā: dṛśyarüpatvād rūpiṇaḥ / upapādukatvān manomayāḥ / hastapadatadań-
gulyadyupetatvät sarvängapratyangopetaḥ / samagrendriyatvād avikalāḥ / kāṇavibhräntädyabh-
avad ahinendriyāḥḥ / darfaniyasaṁsthanatvāc chubhāḥ / ramaṇīyavarṇatvād varṇasthāyinah /
ādityādiprabhānapekṣatvāt svayaṁprabhāḥ / karmarddhisaṁyogenākāśacaratvād vihā-
yasaṁgamāḥ / kavaḍīkārāhārānapekṣatvāt prītibhakṣāḥ prītyāḥārā iti paryāyau / tathā dīrghāyuşo
dirgham adhvanaṁ tiṣṭhantīti.
Karmarddhi is defined vii.53c, where it is called karmajā ṛddhi.
551. Pṛthiviparpaṭaka, Mahāvyutpatti, 223.212;Hsüan-tsang: "earth-skin-cake", Param-
ärtha: "earth-skin-dried". Notes of Senart, Mahāvastu, i616 (MSS. paryaṁṭaka, par-
pantaka); Lex. paryața.
552. Atthasālini, 392.
553. Lists of Cakravartins descended from Mahāsaṁmata. The Lokaprajñāpti contains a list based
on the Abhidharma, another on the Vinaya (Cosmologie, 320, 322): Mahävyutpatti, 180;
Chavannes, Cinq cents contes, i.324, 330; Mahāvastu, i.348; Jātaka iii.454; Sumangala, i.258; JRAS.
1914, 414; Geiger, concerning the translation of the Mahāvaṁsa.
554. Hui-hui says: "This Šāstra does not totally explain how many years life diminishes or augments
by a year. The traditional opinion is that, every century, life diminishes or augments by one year
(This is the system presented by Rémusat, Mélanges posthumes, 103, with a computation which
appears to me to be erroneous: read 16,798,000 in place of 16,800,000). The Mahāyāna admits this
theory for diminution, but it thinks that, during the period of augmentation, the life of the child is
double that of the life of his father." In the Cakkavattisīhanāda (Dīgha, iii.68), persons of 80,000
years have children of 40,000; these, children of 20,000; then 10,000, 5,000, 2,500 or 2,000, 1,000,
500, 250 or 200, 100 years. Cosmologie, 314.
555. Vasubandhu follows Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 693a7.
According to the explanations that Chavannes concludes from the numerical Dictionary and his
commentary (Cinq cents contes, i.16) famine appears when life is thirty years long; sickness, when
it is twenty years; killing, when it is ten. This is kalpakaṣāya.
Vyakhya. There are three ends (nirýāṇa) of the kalpa: fire, illness, and hunger. Should we think
that these three scourges are produced successively at the end of each and every kalpa when life is
ten years long (dafavarṣāyuḥkalpa)? Or rather that these three scourges are produced in turn at theFootnotes 549
end of three successive kalpas? Scholars are divided; but we are followers of the second opinion
(which is that of TD 32, number 1644, quoted by Saeki).
556. Anguttara, i.159. “I have heard the ancient Brāhmins say. that the world was once
over-populated, such as Avici (?). How did it come to be that now mankind was destroyed,
diminished, and that the villages became non-villages. ? Now, Oh Brāhmin,men are
adhammarāgaratta, visamalobhābhibhūta, micchādhammapareta. They take up sharp arms and kill
one another... It no longer rains, there is hunger... (...micchādhammaparetānam [manussānaṁ]
yakkhā vā amanusse osajjanti . . . vā is unlikely; we have a variant vāle)." This passes into the
eschatological plan of Digha, iii70, the Cakkavattisīhanāda. (Famine and illness are absent, there is
only satthantarakappa).
557. Pāļi sources. Añguttara, i.160, dubbhikkhaṁ hoti dussassaṁ setaṭṭhikaṁ salākavuttaṁ tena
bahü manussā kālaṁ karonti. Saṁyutta, iv.323: The Bhagavat passes through the country with a
great following of Bhikkhus when famine was reigning, dubbhikkhe dvīhitike setatthike
salākāvutte.In the Suttavibhanga (Vinaya, ed. Oldenberg, iii.6.15, 87): in such a country duddhikhā
hoti dvīhitikā setaṭṭhikā salākāvuttā na sukarā uñchena paggahena yāpetum; commentary in
Samantapāsādikā, i.175 (where Buddhaghosa gives many explanations; some are in agreement
with those of Vasubandhu). Buddhaghosa gives the variant setaṭṭikā, a sickness of rice, that we find
in Anguttara, iv.269: women will have a similar sickness, as mañjeṭṭhikā (from mañjiṭṭhā,
madder-root) is the sickness of sugar-cane, as setaṭṭikà a type of wheat blight, is the sickness of rice.
Rhys Davids-Stede discuss the expression dvīhitikaduhitika (Samyutta, iv.195).
558. Paramartha and Hsüan-tsang translate samudga(ka) by chü-chi, to accumulate, bring
together; 'du-ba has the same meaning. The version of Hsüan-tsang is very free; Paramārtha
appears more literal: Now chi-chi, at that period was called chan-che (p. 223c). Further
lien-che (perfume box, etc., Couvreur, 1904, p. 197) is called chan-che.
[In Mahävyut patti, 233 (list of utensils) we have: 6. samudga (=za ma tog), 25. cañca (=gab-tse,
ga-ba-tse). For gab-tse (ga-ba-tshe, tse), the word lists give: "table for magical operations", Sarad
Chandra, Desgodins, etc.]
b. Divyāvadāna, 131 (the story of Meṇḍhaka, excerpted from the Dulva, vol. iii, Chap. on
Medicines, S. Lévi, Elements de formation du Divya, Toung-Pao, 1907, 11, note): dvādaśavarṣikā
anāvṛṣṭir vyākṛtā / trividhaṁ durbhikṣaṁ bhavişyati cañcu śvetāsthi falākāvṛtti ca / tatra cañcu
ucyate samudgake / tasmin manuşyā bijāni prakṣipya anāgatasattvāpekṣayā sthāpayanti mṛtānām
anena te bījakā[r]yaṁ kariṣyanti / idaṁ samudgakam baddhvā cañcu ucyate ...
559. This second explanation is slightly closer to that of the Divya.
560. Divya: vilebhyo dhānyaguḍakāni falākayākṛṣya bahūdakasthālyāṁ kvāthayitvā pibanti.
561. Dirgha, TD 1, p. 137b12; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 690a14, examines whence come the suns (created
at the origin of the world? created at the end of the kalpa by the actions of beings?), the water, the
wind; examine that which becomes things; is there pariņāma (iii.40d)? is there transformation in
fire, in water? Above, note 497.
562. [In the same way that, at the end of the world, the flame of Kamadhātu provokes the arising of
the flame of Rūpadhātu, above p. 477].
563. Saeki mentions here Dirgha, TD 1, p. 147c2, on the five types of seeds; the same the Vyākhyā:
pañca bījajātāni mūlabījaṁ phalubījaṁ bījabījaṁ agrabījaṁ skandhabījam.
Dīgha, i.5, iii.44, 47; Sumangalavilāsini, i81, etc. (Rhys Davids and Stede, s. voc. bīja): mūla,
khandha, phalu, agga, bījabīja; Fragments Stein, JRAS. 1913, 574, Rockhill in Revue Histoire
Religions, ix.168.
564. For nimittakāraṇa, samavāyikāraṇa, see Ui, Vaifeșika Philosophy, 136, 139, 141, 146.
565. Guna [dharma] and dravya [dharma] are defined Vaišeṣikasūtra, i.1.15-16, see Ui, Vaišeşika
Philosophy, p. 122.Footnotes 550
566. Vaišeṣikasūtra, ii.1.1: “The earth has smell, taste, smell, touch".
567. The Pailukas maintain that things (avayavidravya), wool, etc. are not consumed, or burned up;
the old attributes disappear; new attributes, arisen from the cooking, arise; but the things, which are
the support (āfraya) of the attributes, remain as they are (tadavastha) (Vyākhyā).
We have in Nyāyabindu, Calcutta, 1889, p. 86, a Pailuka, a disciple of Kaņāda; in the
Nyāyavārttikatāt pārya, 355 (ad 3.1.4) a Pailukaṇṭha.
568. According to Madhyama, 58.
569. We shall see in viii.11 that there are eight apakṣālas and that the first three Dhyānas are
sa-injita. (See also iv.46).
Anguttara, v.135: the thorn (kantaka) of the First Dhyāna is sadda; of the Second,
vitakkavicāras; of the Third, piti; and of the Fourth, assāsapassāsas. Kaṇṭaka is that which destroys
the Dhyāna, that which is incompatible with the Dhyāna (Kathāvatthu, ii.5), as the mind of women
is the kantaka of the chaste life; apakṣāla, on the contrary, is a certain vice, an imperfection or lack,
essential to a Dhyāna.
calamity-obstacle, and
Tibetan: skyon; Chinese versions: tsai = calamity; vipatti, tsai-wo
also kuo
fault, def in Maḥāvyutpatti, 245, 664 (see the notes to Sasaki's edition: apakṣāla,
apakṣala, apakṣaṇa, apācara), Sikṣāsamuccaya, 145 and Bodhisattvabhūmi in Wogihara.
570. See iv. p. 107, vi.24a, viii.101b.
571. Paramārtha adds: They obtain Nirvāṇa in this sphere.
572. Same doctrine and phraseology in Visuddhimagga, 421: evaṁ vinassanto'pi ca [loko]
nirantaram eva satta vāre aggina vinassati . . . vāto paripunṇacatusaṭṭhikappāyuke Subhakinhe
viddhamsento lokaṁ vināseti.
573. Hsüan-tsang: the text (wen ✩) of the Prajñāptipada.Paramārtha: fen-pieh_li-shih
Footnotes 709
1. Anguttara iii.415: cetanāhaṁ bhikkhave kammaṁ vadāmi, cetayitvā kammaṁ karoti käyena
vācāya manasā. Compare Atthasālinī p. 88; Kathāvatthu, p. 393; Madhyamaka, xvii.2 and 3: cetanā
cetayitvà ca karmoktaṁ paramarṣiṇņā / ….. tatra yac cetanety uktaṁ karma tan mānasaṁ smṛtam /
cetayitvā ca yat tūktaṁ tat tu kāyikavācikam //Madhyamakāvatāra, vi.89, quoted in Bodhicarya-
vatārapanjikā (v.3, ix.73), p. 472.
2. Vocal action is “voice,” vāg eva karma. However kāyakarma is defined as kāyena kāyasya vā
karma.
3. On cetană, see ii.24. Mrs. Rhys Davids (Psychology, p. 8), translates this as "thinking"; Aung
(Compendium, p. 16) translates it as "volition." "Volition" is only slightly satisfying, for we shall see
(below p. 565) that action includes a subsequent cetanā, "I have killed."
For the Jains, mental action is only semi-action (addhakamma), Majjhima, i.372 (Kosa, iv.105),
Uvāsakadasão, ii. App. 2, p. 18; SBE. xiv, pp. 83, 165, 179, 242, 315. Kośa, iv.73a-b.
4. Vyākhyā: Cetayitā ceti / evaṁ cedaṁ kariṣyāmīti. Madhyamakavṛtti, 397.1: evaṁ caivaṁ ca
kāyavägbhyām pravartisya ity evam cetasă samcintya yat kriyate tat cetayitvā karmety ucyate.
5. (a) Vijnapti is "that which informs” (vijnapayati), the manifestation of a mind either by means of
the body, by means of the voice. It is bodily in the first case, vocal in the second: kāyavijñapti,
information through the body, which we call an action, farīraceṣṭā, or viṣpanda (Madhyamakavṛtti,
p. 307), the kāyavipphandana or “bodily suffusion" of Mrs. Rhys Davids (Dhammasañgaṇi, 636,
Atthasālinī, p. 323); vāgvijñapti is information through the voice or words (Kośa, iv.3d).
The School holds (Kofa, iv.2b-3b) that kāyavijnapti is not an action, a movement of the body,
but a disposition, a "shape" of the body. The Sautrāntikas deny that shape exists in and of itself
(iv.3c).
But should vijnapti be considered as being, in its nature, action? This is the opinion of the
Vaibhāşikas and the heretics of the Kathāvatthu, viii.9, x.10 (the Mahiṁsāsakas, Saṁmitīyas, and
Mahāsāṁghikas) who believe that "action" and words constitute "action after having been willed"
of which the Blessed One speaks (iv.lb), an action distinct from volition, and rūpa in its nature. But
for the Theravādins (Atthasālinī, p. 88, 96, 323, Anguttara, ii.157, Saṁyutta, ii.39) and for the
Sautrāntikas (below p.559) action is volition (cetanā); "bodily action" does not mean "information
by the body," but a kāyasaṁcetanā, a volition relative to the body and which leads the body. (The
version of Aung, Points of Controversy, p. 225, is not totally correct.) (b) Avijñapti (i.11, iv.4) is an
action "which does not inform anything to another"; avijñapti is rūpa, but does not form part of the
rūpāyatana: it is classed within the dharmāyatana and is only known by the mental consciousness.
In order to make all this easier to comprehend, the person who commits a murder or takes the
vows of a Bhikṣu produces after his volition (cetanā) a bodily or vocal “information”—an action or a
word-and, at the same time, an invisible action, nevertheless material and made up of the primary
elements, which continues to exist in him and to increase, by reason of which he is either a murderer
or a Bhikṣu. This invisible action, created by certain visible or audible actions and which “informs,"
is called avijñapti, "non-information"; it is considered to be either bodily or vocal accordingly as it is
created by an action or by a word.
When a person gives orders to an assassin, he does not accomplish the action by which the
murder is committed; the order that he gives is solely a preparation for murder; he is then not guilty
of "the bodily information of murder." But, at the moment when the person assassinated is
murdered, a "non-information" of murder arises in him: he is, by this fact, guilty of murder.
When a person enters into a Dhyāna—which supposes detachment from the defilements of
Kāmadhātu-he does not pronounce the vows by which one renounces killing, etc. He does not
produce "vocal information" by which the monk produces this "non-information" which
constitutes his monkhood and which is called discipline (samvara, iv.13). But in a Dhyāna, the mind
is strong enough to create, by itself and without intervention of "vocal information," the action of
"non-information," or discipline.
6. The text has apare, "according to others." The Vyākhyā holds that the "others" are the
Vātsīputriyas. The gloss of the Japanese editor, Saeki, mentions the Sammitiyas.710 Chapter Four
7. According to the Dhammasangani, bodily vijňapti is "to advance, withdraw, to fix the gaze, to
look at all sides, to advance the arms, to withdraw them, etc."
8. Hsüan-tsang: "For when the body moves, it moves by reason of action."
9. The Vyākhyā adds: “or rather a kṣaṇa is the minimum length of time" (iii.85d). See ii.46a-b.
10. Hsüan-tsang: "since it perishes later."
11. Extinction does not have a cause, see Kośa ii.46; Madhyamakavṛtti pp. 29 note 5, and p. 173 note
8,222, 413. The Şaḍdarśanasamuccaya (ed. Suali, 46) quotes a Sutra of the Sautrāntikas: pañcemāni
bhikṣavaḥ saṁjñāmātraṁ pratijñāmātraṁ saṁvṛtimātraṁ vyavahāramātraṁ / katamāni pañca/
atīto'dhvā anāgato'dhvā sahetuko vināśaḥ ākāśaṁ pudgala iti / Vedāntasūtra ii.2, 23; Nyā-
yāvārttikatāt paryaṭīkā (Viz. S.S.), 383.
12. According to the Vyākhyā: Sthaviravasubandhuprabhṛtibhir ayaṁ hetur uktaḥ. According to
the gloss of Saeki, "According to the School of the Sthaviras."
13. Kṣaṇa eva kṣaṇe means kṣaṇe kṣaṇa eva which is further glossed by tasminn eva kṣaṇe. It arises
by reason of merit, and immediately perishes by reason of demerit; reborn by reason of merit... Or
it arises by reason of demerit, perishes by reason of merit ... Or rather kṣaṇa eva kṣaṇe signifies
mukhye kṣaṇeʼnaupacārike kṣaṇe.
14. Vyākhyā: Šakyaś caisa kāraṇaparikalpa iti vistaraḥ / dharmād adharmavināṣa iti kāraṇapari-
kalpa iti sarvatra saṁskṛte dvyaṇukādau anityeṣu rūpādiṣu karmaṇi ca śakyate kartum ato na
vaktavyam etad agniṣaṁyogāt kāṣṭhādīnāṁ vināśa ity evamadi.
15. According to Saeki, the Sammitiyas.
16. Compare Asaṁga, Sītrālaṁkāra, xviii.82.
17. Hsüan-tsang, who is translated above, departs from the original: "... this is to simply repeat
your affirmation, since the existence of similar atoms is not proved. If it were proved, then these
atoms could be joined together; but the self nature of the parts of a shape is not proved, as is the case
for the parts of a thing of color (na ca saṁsthānāvayavānāṁ varṇādivat svabhāvaḥ siddhaḥ) that is
to say, the parts of a "long" thing are not "long," etc.: how can these parts, by their coming together,
bring about a determined shape?
18. One sees an army without seeing its soldiers; but this does not prove that an army exists apart
from its soldiers. In the same way one sees shape without distinguishing its color.
19. According to Hsüan-tsang. The Tibetan has: First there is produced a certain resolution
(saṁkalpa). When one has thus willed, a volition is produced whose function or action it is to set
into motion (vartayati), and which is "the action after having been willed."
20. For avijnapti of the sphere of Kamadhātu depends on vijñapti, bodily and vocal action, or rūpa;
it does not accompany the mind as does the avijñapti of Rūpadhātu. But see iv.75c-d.
21. The Rapasamgrahasutra. Compare Dīgha, iii.217; Vibhanga, pp. 13, 64.
22. The Vyākhyā here quotes a part of the discourse of the Buddha to Cunda on the two types of
meritorious works (see Minayev, Recherches, p. 185-186, and below iv.117a-b), an extract of the
story of Ghoşila in the Vinaya of the Sarvāstivādins, see E. Huber, Sources du Divyāvadāna, BEFEO.
1906, p. 18.
Upadhi means the thing (ārāma, vihāra, etc.) given to a monk or to the Samgha; the merit that
proceeds (tadbhava) from this upadhi is called aupadhika.
Mahācundasitra (Madhyama, TD 1, p. 427c29): saptemäni Cunda aupadhikäni punya-
kriyāvastāni mahāphalāni yāvan mahāvaistārikāṇi yaiḥ samanvāgatasya frāddhasya kulaputrasya
vā kuladuhitur vā carato vā tiṣṭhato vā svapato vā jāgrato vā satatasamitam abhivardhata eva
punyam upajāyata eva punyam / katamāni sapta/ iha Cunda śrāddhaḥ kulaputro vā kuladuḥitā vā
caturdiśāya bhikṣusaṁghāyārāmaṁ pratipadayati / idaṁ Cunda prathamam...Footnotes 711
The non-material meritorious works do not include offerings: they essentially consist of the joy
that the believer experiences from the nearness, from the presence, from drawing near to the
Tathāgata or a Śrāvaka. The seventh includes the taking of the Refuges and the undertaking of the
prohibitions.
Iha Cunda fräddhaḥ kulaputro vā kuladuhitā vā śṛṇoti tathāgatam vā tathāgataśrāvakaṁ vā
amukaṁ grāmakşetram upaniśritya viharatīti śrutvā ca punar adhigacchati pritiprāmodyam
udāraṁ kuśalaṁ naiskramyopasaṁhitam / idam Cunda prathamaṁ niraupadhikaṁ punyakriyā-
vastu.
See Śikṣāsamuccaya, p. 137 (Ratnarāfisütra). Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 309 and the sources quoted
in the notes.
Pāli sources: Anguttara, ii.50, 54; and the discussion in the Kathāvatthu, vii.5: pari-
bhogamayaṁ puññam vaddhati and x.9: samādānahetukaṁ sīlam vaddhati. The Kathāvatthu
touches on some other points relative to the doctrine of avijñapti, viii.9, x.8, 11-12.
23. The Kathāvatthu denies that saṁvara is kamma (xii.1).
24. Compare Sumangalavilāsinī, 305, the third type of virati, proper to the Aryans and not
susceptible of being cut off, or setughātavirati; Atthasālinī, p. 103, has samucchedavirati; below
v.33a-b.
The Dhammasangani, 299, defines right speech (sammāvācā): catūhi vacīduccaritehi ārati
virati . . . anatikkamo setughāto. According to Buddhagħosa (Atthasālinī, p. 219) setuṁ hanatīti
setughāto: right speech is the destruction (ghāta) of the dike through which the transgressions of
the voice pass. The translator (Psychology, 87) adopts this interpretation and refers to Anguttara
i.220, 261, ii. 145. But, in these passages setughāta = setubandha = setu = a dike, obstacle: "The
Blessed One has declared that maithuna is a setughāta.” “Thus, monks, there is a setughāta with
respect to laughing." "The Nigantha teaches that one destroys former actions through penitence
and that one dikes them up (setughāta) by abstention (akaraṇa).” The Mahävyutpatti, 255.9, has
sāṁparāyikāṇāṁ setusamudghātāya; Tibetan version: "with a view to arresting the defilments by
means of a dike"; Chinese version: "with a view to arresting the defilements like a torrent." See also
Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 525 the definition of Nirvāṇa jalapravānirodhabhūtasetusthānīyaḥ.
25. rnal 'byor spyod pa dag. Paramartha: The ancient masters of the Yogācāra (hsien-chiu
kuan-hsing shih #É). Hsüan-tsang: yü-chia shih U.
Saeki has a long note 7b-8a.
It follows from the Vvākhyā that the term Yogācāra does not here designate the follower of a
certain philosophic school but simply an ascetic: "The Yogācārin who actualizes the Path (mārgaṁ
saṁmukhīkurvāṇaḥ) takes possession of a mental disposition (āfaya) and a psycho-physical
substrate (āfraya), whereas he takes possession of pure morality (anāśrava fīla) as he takes
possession of right view: having acquired this pure morality, he abides in a natural morality
(prakṛtifīlatā)." Or rather (atha vā) the Masters maintain that, in this same pure absorption, there
is a rūpa of the same nature, that is to say pure (anāsrave’pi samādhau tadevaṁvidham rūpaṁ ta
ācārya icchanti).
Sikṣāsamuccaya, 138: yadi bhikṣavo yukto yogācāro mama śikṣāyāṁ pratipannaḥ sarvasa-
ṁskāreṣv anityadarsi … ..
On yogācāra in the Mahāvastu, i.120.9, see the remarks of the editor, i469. The passage is
obscure.
There follows some relevant references in the Abhidharmakośa:
i.17. Vyākhyā: In the system (darfana) of the Yogācāras, the manodhātu is distinct from the six
vijñānas.
i.41. The Vijñānavādins defend the thesis: vijñānaṁ paśyati.
ii.24. The Vyākhyā quotes the definition that the yogācāracittas give rise to adhimukti (note 117
of our translation).
ii.44e. The doctrine of the former masters of the samāpattis quoted by the Sauträntikas (p. 231
of our translation).712 Chapter Four
iii.15c. Definition of a Gandharva. Bhāṣya: "The former masters"; Vyākhyā: Pūrvācārya
yogācārya Aryasangaprabhṛtayaḥ.
iii.63a-b. Phases of the moon. Opinion of the former masters; but according to the Vyākhyā, the
Yogācārins.
iv.75. Bhäsya: "The former masters," but, according to the Vyākhyā: In the system
(ºnayena) of the Yogācārins.
v.8. Vyākhyā: "According to the Yogācārins (ºmati), there are one hundred and twenty-eight
klesas.
v.43b-c. Definition of the avarabhāgīyas attributed to apare. These "other masters" as the
Yogācārins (Vyākhyā).
vi.10a-b. The ascetics (yogācārya) who practice aśubhā are of three types, ādikarmika .. .
26. According to the gloss of Saeki. On this point of doctrine, see i.31d and Vyākhyā, p. 14.
27. The expression sāsava upādānīya in Samyutta iii.47, Añguttara iii.248 (definition of the
upādānaskandhas).
28. Panca cetokhila, Digha, iii.237, q.v.; Mahävyupatti, 10.24; vyāpādakhiladveşa.
29. Hsüan-tsang adds here: If one says "How do the qualities and the actions of a certain person
produce a transformation in another person who is thinking of another thing?" This difficulty also
presents itself in the theory of avijñapti: how do the qualities and the actions of a certain person
cause a certain thing, the avijñapti, to arise in another person?
30. Compare Anguttara, ii.54 and the Ratnarāfisūtra, quoted in the Sikṣāsamuccaya, p. 138. The
phraseology of our Sūtra differs from these two sources; Hsüan-tsang differs here from the Tibetan.
He has: "An outflowing of merit moistens his series and a sukha without measure flows into his
body."
31. According to P'u-kuang, the Bhadanta is Dharmatrāta (See i.20a-b). See TD 41, p. 108b6.
32. According to Hsüan-tsang: However whoever has this threefold volition while carrying out
himself, without any error of person, the action of murder, is touched by the transgression of
murder. If the Bhadanta refers to this case, then he is correct.
33. Vyākhyā: Āśayaś cãśrayaś ceti / āśayaḥ prāṇātipātādyakaraṇāśayaḥ śraddhādyāśayo vā / āśraya
āfrayaparāvṛttiḥ. "Intention” refers to the intention of not committing murder, or the intention of
faith. When one says that an ascetic obtains a certain āfraya, one means that he has undergone a
modification (paravṛtti) of his psycho-physiological substrate. (The āfraya is defined ii.5, 6, 36c-d,
44d).
P'u-kuang explains: Aśraya consists of chanda, or of adhimukti, or of chanda and of adhimukti..
The afraya is the cetana which is produced at the same time as the āfraya; it serves as the support
(āśraya) of the aśraya . . .
The meaning of parāvṛtta is clearly stated in Vyākhyā iv.14c: “When the gender of the mother
or the father is parāvṛtta, that is to say, when the quality of mother or father is destroyed by the
parävṛtti of gender..
The tradition of Asanga is heir to the expression aśrayaparāvṛtti, Sütrālaṁkāra, ix.12. This
refers, as S. Lévi says, to a revolution of the very basis of the being, of the appearance of a new
personality: a Pṛthagjana becomes an Aryan, a woman becomes a man, a man becomes an animal,
etc.
On parāvṛtti, see vi.41.
34. Numerous and divergent definitions of the eight lokadharmas, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 871b29-cl.
35. Here Hsüan-tsang has two pādas which are absent in Paramärtha "It depends (upādadāti) on
primary elements which are the support (āfraya) of the vijñnapti.” Vibhāṣā, TD 27, , P. 684c12.Footnotes 713
36. Certain masters say that vijñapti and avijñapti arise from the same four primary elements. They
ask: "Are there four primary elements which produce two ayatanas, or two ripas? Yes, they
produce rupāyatana and dharmayatana, fabdayatana and dharmayatana." The Bhadanta Ghosaka
says: “The Abhidharma masters say that this is not correct; it is impossible that the same four
primary elements produce both a subtle result and a gross result…” (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 684c23.)
37. The Tibetan version omits this first paragraph.
38. Vyākhyā: Samutthāpakacittāekṣatvād asamāhitacittāvijñaptyadhikārāc ca na svapnasamā-
dhyadyaupacayikamahābhūtajā.
39. Hsüan-tsang makes two pādas out of this phrase: "The vijñapti is solely an outflowing... "The
Bhasya of Hsüan-tsang adds: "For the rest, it is like the avijñapti of a non-absorbed state."
40. Avyākṛta, see ii.54, iv.9c at the end.
41. According to the principle vitarkya vicaryavacam bhāṣate, ii.33a-b, p..
42. Dīgha, i.18, 221; above ii.31; below v.49c, 53c; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 670b24-c25.
43. But the Sastra says: fabdadhātunā kaḥ samanvāgataḥ / āha / kāmarūpāvacaraḥ /
ko'samanvāgataḥ / ārūpyāvacaraḥ / If the beings of Rüpdhātu are "endowed" with sound, it cannot
be a question of an external sound, one not belonging to a living being (asattvaṣaṁkhyāta). Thus
one should attribute to the beings of Rūpdhātu the type of sound that one makes with the hands, etc.
In order to avoid this criticism, some other masters say, "Vijñapti …”
44. Two opinions: 1) the vijñapti which is produced in the Second Dhyāna and above is of the
sphere of the First Dhyana, being produced by a mind of the sphere of the First Dhyana, according
to the rule given in viii. 13. This is the opinion of the Vaibhāşikas. 2) This vijñapti is of the Second
Dhyana and above. One vijñapti of a higher sphere is thus produced by a mind of a higher sphere.
When the beings of these Dhyānas talk among themselves, etc. (parasparasaṁbhāṣaṇādikur-
vatām), their vijñapti is anivṛtāvyākṛta.
45. Hsüan-tsang: "The first opinion is correct." Gloss of Saeki: "Such is the opinion of the author."
46. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 741a10. The Bhadanta says: There are four reasons why one uses the word
kusala: because it is good by nature, by association, in origin, and absolutely. Good by nature: some
say: hrī and anapatrāpya; some say: the three kuśalamūlas... Absolutely good: Nirvāṇa, called good
because it is calm (kṣema).
According to the Vibhajyavādins, jñāna is good by nature; the vijñāna, etc. associated with
jñāna, is good by association; the actions of the body and the voice which proceed from it are good in
origin; and Nirvāṇa absolutely good. The definitions of akusala are parallel (i.e., moha is bad by
nature).
47. The other kušalas are not.
48. Divya, 255.16. On the good, bad, and neutral roots, see v.20.
49. According to the Tibetan. Paramärtha and Hsüan-tsang: "Bodily action, vocal action and the
cittaviprayuktasaṁskāras.” This is also the reading of the Vibhāṣā. Saṁghabhadra (TD 29, p.
546b27 and following): Bodily action, vocal action, jāti, etc. (lakṣaṇa, ii.48c) and the präptis of the
two absorptions without mind (nirodha and asaṁjñisamāpatti).
50. When one again takes possession of the roots of good through doubt (vicikitsā) (iv.80), the
praptis of these roots are good: now they are neither good in and of themselves, by association, in
origin, nor absolutely so. In the same way, the präptis of innate good (ii.71b) are good and are not
included in any of the four categories. Samṁghabhadra responds to this objection, TD 29, p. 546b27
and following.714 Chapter Four
51. The doctrine of the Kathāvatthu on good, bad, and neutral, is presented xiv.8; Nibbana is
avyākata, xi.1, xiii.9 xiv.8.
52. Vibhāşă, TD 27, p. 610a5.
53. Paramartha: "If this were the case, then when a person free from mind (acittaka) produces
avijnaptisila, where would his anuvartaka mind be?" Hsüan-tsang: "If this were the case, how could
a person free from mind produce fila?”
Suppose that a person, while he is receiving ordination (upasampādyamāna) and is thus
"binding" his bodily actions (kāyavijñaptim ābadhnan), enters into nirodhasamāpatti and so
becomes free from mind. When he produces restraint (saṁvara) in himself, how can bodily action
(kāyavijñapti)—which supposes restraint (ºantargata)-take place after this ceremony (karma-
vācanāvasāna)?
54. Rūpa (the action, vijñapti) is not “contradicted," that is to say "abandoned,” by means of vidyā,
that is by the Path of Seeing, as is the case for the false opinion of personalism, etc. (satkāyadṛṣṭi):
for the very persons who have seen the Truths are "endowed” (samanvāgata) with rūpa. It is not
contradicted by avidyā, as is the case for the Pure (anāsrava) Path, for avidyā exists while one creates
rūpas (actions) which are defined or non-defined as having a moral value, and while the prāptis
(ii.36b) of these rūpas continue; and it also exists in the contrary case.
Thus, one cannot say that this rūpa is to be abandoned by Seeing, or is no longer not to be
abandoned. It is only to be abandoned through Meditation.
55. The Vyākhyā explains: "Because it is turned inwards and outwards (antarbahirmukha-
pravṛtta)." Hsüan-tsang: "Because it is accompanied by vikalpa (savikalpakatva), and because it is
turned outwards."
56. Hsüan-tsang: "Because they are turned outwards, they are free from vikalpa."
57. Hsüan-tsang places iv. 12d here: "(1) The pure mind is neither initiator nor mover, because it is
only produced in absorption; nor (2) a mind arisen from retribution (vipākaja), because it is
produced spontaneously, without effort (anabhisaṁskāravādin).”
58. Hsüan-tsang: "A mover generally of the same type, but sometimes different."
59. "Teaching," anuśāsanī. Hsüan-tsang: "The mind of the Buddhas, in the teaching of the dharma,
etc., either increases or at least does not decrease."
60. According to Saeki, the Mahāsāṁghikas, etc. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 410b26: The Vibhajyavādins
praise the Blessed One, saying that his mind is always absorbed, because his right memory and
knowledge are firm; they say that the Buddha is never sluggish (middha), because he is free from
obstacles (āvaraṇas).
61. Anguttara, iii.346, Theragāthā, 696-697: gacchaṁ samāhito nāgo țhito nāgo samāhito / sayaṁ
samāhito nāgo nisinno pi samāhito / sabbattha samvuto nāgo esa nāgassa sampadā /The Sanskrit
has: caran samāhito.
The Vyākhyā establishes that, in the Sūtra, the Buddha Bhagavat receives the name of Nāga:
Tathāgata Udāyin sadevake loke … . . āgo na karoti kāyena vācā manasā tasmān nāga ity ucyate.
62. A Sikşamānā is a "probationer." According to one opinion which Takakusu (I-tsing, p. 38; 97)
quotes, a Śikṣamānā is a woman who undertakes the precepts with a view to becoming a
Śrāmaņerikā; she is included (in the Păli list) among the Śrāmaņerikās. But as we shall see, the
Sikşamănă discipline is identical to the discipline of the Sramaṇerikā. But the Sikşamāṇā is a
candidate for the state of Bhikṣuṇī; see iv.26c-d and Cullavagga, x.1.4 (Vinaya Texts, i. p. 296).
Yogācărins: Why did the Blessed One, with respect to the Bhikṣu precepts, establish two
precepts, that of Bhikşu and that of the Srāmaṇera, whereas he established three sets of precepts
with respect to the Bhikṣuṇi precepts, that of Bhikṣuṇī, Śikṣamāṇā, and Śrāmaņerikā? Because
women have many defilements: thus they progressively take up the Bhikṣuṇi precepts. If a womanFootnotes 715
shows joy and faithfulness to a small number of the Śrāmaṇerikā precepts, one should give her the
Śikṣamāṇā precepts, one should not precipitously give her the full number of precepts; rather, she
should cultivate two years during which …..
The Ta-chih-tu lun, TD25, p. 161c4. The Śrāmaṇera, the possessor of the ten precepts, is called
to undertake the full number of precepts. Why is there a Sikşamāṇa in the Bhikṣuṇīdharma? In the
time of the Buddha, the wife of a merchant, pregnant without her knowing it, left the householder's
life and received all the precepts... It was established that women cultivate the precepts for two
years, undertaking six dharmas, and then they could undertake the full number of precepts.
According to the Vinayamātṛkāsūtra (8.25) the discipline of the Bhikṣu contains two hundred
and fifty dharmas; that of the Bhikṣuṇī, five hundred dharmas. According to the Ta-chih-tu lun, TD
25, p. 161c4, the Bhikṣuṇī undertakes five hundred precepts; if one were to detail them, then there
would be eighty thousand precepts; the Bhikṣu undertakes two hundred and fifty precepts; if one
were to detail them, then there would be eighty thousand precepts.
63. The causes that determine the loss of restraint are enumerated iv.38.
64. The Vyākhyā gives an example: the monk who renounces food "at the wrong time" is less
exposed to committing killing than a layman.
65. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 646c10: He who undertakes a later discipline does not abandon the earlier
discipline. The Upāsaka who undertakes the Śrāmanera precepts does not abandon the five
precepts of the Upasaka; he takes up the precepts of the Srămanera; he thus possesses at one and
the same time fifteen rules of discipline... The Bhikṣu will thus possess two hundred and sixty-five
precepts. Some other masters say that the Upāsaka takes up Śrāmaṇera precepts, but not by
abandoning the five Upāsaka precepts and taking up the five Śrāmanera precepts: he thus
possesses ten precepts... If a person possesses at one and the same time two sets of
precepts, or
three sets of precepts (Upāsaka, Śrāmaṇera, Bhikṣu), why is he called according to the latter
name,--Bhikşu, and not Upāsaka? …..
66. The Tibetan and Paramārtha say: "If it were otherwise, he who abandons the Bhikṣu precepts
would not be an Upasaka." Hsüan-tsang: .Upāsaka, etc.” Saeki says that a Bhikṣu who renounces
the Bhikṣu precepts becomes a Śrāmaṇera; likewise, a Śrāmaṇera becomes an Upāsaka.
67. Divya, 160: Rambhaka ārāmika Ṛddhilamātā upāsaka śramaṇoddeśikā Cundaḥ śramaṇoddeśa
Utpalavarnă bhikṣuṇī...
Anguttara, ii.78: bhikkhusu bhikkhunīsu upāsakesu upāsikesu antamaso ārāmikasamaṇud-
desesu.
Prātimokṣa of the Sarvästivādins, v.57 (J.As. 1914, p. 515).
The Vyākhyā reproduces below iv.30d the formula pronounced by the framaṇoddeśa, the
liturgical name of the Śrāmanera.
68. See Mahavyut patti, 268, where the sixth virati is formulated: gandhamalyavilepannavarṇaka-
dhāraṇavirati.
69. The Vibhāṣā (TD27, p. 229c29-230b3) gives ten explanations for the word fila: cold or cooling;
calm sleep, for he who observes fīla obtains calm sleep, and always has good dreams; repeated
exercise (abhyāsa), by reason of the incessant practice of the good dharmas; absorption (samādhi);
ornament (compare Sumangalavilāsinī, p. 55); stage or pond, according to the stanza: "In the pure
stage of the Law of the Buddha, morality is the pond, and the Aryans wash themselves of all
defilements and arrive to the other shore of the qualities." Šila defined iv.122.
70. The avijnapti which constitutes the Prātimokṣa saṁvara results from a vijñapti. The avijñapti
arisen from a Dhyāna and pure avijñapti arise from the mind in a state of absorption, from an
impure mind of the sphere of the Dhyanas, or from a pure mind.
71. It is a cause of action, because the restraint (saṁvarastha), with a view to guarding the restraint
(parirakṣaṇārtham), accomplishes actions (kriyā) consisting of bodily and vocal actions. It is an716 Chapter Four
effect of action, because in the case of the avijnapti of the Prātimokṣa-it is the result of a vijñapti;
and because in the case of the avijñapti arisen from an absorbed mind-it is the result of a volition
(cetanā) arisen from absorption.
72. According to this etymology, we have prātimokṣa, but there is a svārthe vṛddhividhāna, as in
vaikṛtam = vikṛtam, and vaišasam = viśasaṁ (Vyākhyā).
On the meaning of pratimoksa, see Kern, Manual, p. 74 (something serving as a spiritual
cuirass); Oldenberg, Bouddha (1914), p. 419, note (Entlastung, pratimuc=loslassen, Divya, 94.18,
137.15, Manu, x.118). Moreover pratimuc also signifies "to bind."
Indeed the idea of "obligation" or "restraint" expresses the definition of the Mahāvagga-
Niddesa which also adds an etymological explanation: silam patiṭṭhā ādicaraṇam samyamo
samvaro mukhaṁ pamukhaṁ kusalānāṁ dhammānaṁ samāpattiyā.
73. But Visuddhimagga, p. 16: pātimokkham eva samvaro pātimokkhasaṁvaro.
74. In the Abhidhamma (Atthasālinī, p. 103), samādānavirati, “abstention following upon
engagement" (in opposition to sampattavirati) refers to the virati obtained through the
Prātimokṣa.
Samādānafīla, the morality that one obtains by undertaking an engagement, a resolution: “I
shall not do either this or that" (the Prātimokṣa precepts), is distinguished from dharma-
tāprātilambhikaśīla, the morality acquired without engagement or vocal action: this is the discipline
acquired through the fact of the possession of a Dhyana (for one only takes possession of a Dhyana
by disengaging himself from the defilements of Kāmadhātu, iv.26), or by entry into the Path (pure
discipline which includes the certain abstention from certain actions = the samucchedavirati of the
Atthasālinī, p. 103). See above note 24 and iv.33a-b.
75. This is the samucchedavirati of Atthasālinī, p. 163; it includes akaraṇaniyama, the impossibility
of committing a transgression.
76. Anāgamya (viii.22c) is the stage of absorption preliminary to the First Dhyana. In this stage the
ascetic obtains detachment from the defilements of Kämadhātu: he does not detach himself from
these defilements in the First Dhyana, for, in order to enter the First Dhyana, he should be detached
from these same defilements.
There are nine categories, strong-strong, strong-medium, strong-weak, medium-strong,...
of the defilements of Kāmadhātu: these nine categories are destroyed or abandoned by nine paths,
the anantaryamärgas.
The practice of each of these märgas thus includes "abandoning” and, at the same time,
"discipline."
The nine vimuktimārgas of anāgamya do not include abandoning (vi.28, 65c); the
ānantaryamārgas and the vimuktimārgas of the Dhyāna properly so-called and of dhyānāntara
(viii) have no relationship with the defilements of Kāmadhātu, since they are detached from the
defilements proper to the Dhyānas.
In the anantarayamārgas and vimuktimārgas, the ascetic either cultivates the worldly path, and
in this case the discipline is called "arisen from Dhyana"; or he cultivates the superworldly path and
in this case the discipline, even though arisen from a Dhyāna, or in the middle of the Dhyāna, is
called pure (vi.49).
77. Samyutta, i.73; Dhammapada, 361; Udānavarga, vii11. kayena samvaro sādbu sādbu và cây
saṁvaro / manasā saṁvaro sādhu sādhu sabbattha samvaro. The Chinese translators translate
sādhu as an exclamation, "Good!" The text of the final stanzas of the Prātimokṣa (L. Finot, Journal
Asiatique, 1913, ii.543) has käyena saṁvaraḥ sādhuḥ sādhur vācā ca saṁvaraḥ; but Kumārajiva
translates "What happiness!"
78. Anguttara, iii.387: cakkhundriyasamvarasamvuto viharati.
79. The Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 984c21) gives some other definitions: "According to some,
indriyasaṁvara is mindfulness and attentive consciousness; according to others, apramāda;Footnotes 717
according to others, the six perpetual attitudes (satatavihāra); according to others, the non-
possession of aparihāṇa and aparijñāna, and the possession of the Path that opposses them; and
according to others, the undefiled dharmas.”
On the different samvaras of the Visuddhimagga (pātimokkha sati, ñāṇa, khanti, viriya-
samvara), see Warren's analysis JPTS 1891, p. 77 and following, and the text p. 7-11.
80. In order to prove this thesis, the Vyākhyā quotes the Agama: anyatarā kila devatā bhikṣum
viṣayeṣv indriyāṇi vicārayantam avocat / bhikṣo bhikṣo vraṇaṁ mā kārṣīr iti / bhikṣur āha /
pidhäsyāmi devate/devatāba/ kumbhamatram bhikṣo vraṇam kṛtvā kathaṁ pidhāsyasi / bhikṣur
āha / smṛtyā pidhāsyāmi saṁprajanyena ca.
In Anguttara, v.347, 350, the person who does not watch over his sense organs is one who na
vaṇam paticchādetā.
81. The possessor, the possessor of the prapti of...: the presence, in the complex that constitutes
the self, of the viprayuktadharma which is the prapti (ii.36). One can have prapti of a past, present,
or future dharma (v.25).
82. Hsüan-tsang adds: “It results from this that these persons do not possess future avijñapti: the
avijnapti which is not of absorption is not possessed in a future state."
83. "He who is absorbed and he who is placed within the Path": this last expression presents a
difficulty. If one understands āryamärgastha in the sense of "a person in possession of the Path"
(mārgasamanvita), one arrives at the conclusion that an Aryan, even outside of an absorption, i.e.,
in a normal state (prakṛtistha), possesses present avijñapti. Stha would thus be understood in the
sense of "having mounted upon" (abhirūḍha), as one says: naustha, "on a boat": thus āryamārgastha
= mārgam abhirūḍhaḥ samāpannaḥ - the Aryan who, at the present time, meditates on the Path, a
meditation which only takes place in a state of absorption.
It is simpler to follow another opinion (anyaḥ punar . . .)according to which the Karikā should
be understood: "a person absorbed and one who, being in the Path, is absorbed” (samā-
hitāryamārgasthau = samāhitaḥ samāhitāryamārgasthaś ca).
84. Vijñapti can be (1) saṁvaralakṣaṇā, for example, all the actions of a monk which conform to his
discipline. The monk possesses all these actions, of the past, up to the moment when he loses his
restraint (fikṣānikṣepaṇādibhiḥ, iv.38); (2) saṁvaralakṣaṇā, all the killings which have been
committed by a butcher: the butcher possesses all these actions, of the past, up to the moment when
he renounces this lack of restraint and takes it upon himself to kill no more; or (3)
naivasaṁvaranāsaṁvaralakṣaṇā, the worship of a Stūpa, etc.: one loses these actions, these
vijnaptis, when the ardour of one's faith ceases...
85. Hsüan-tsang adds:"Lack of restraint is a karmapatha only at the moment when it arises."
86. But he produces (samutthāpayati) and possesses avijñapti when he is agitated with a strong
volition (tīvracetana).
87. It may be that the Pṛthagjana also possesses avijñapti without possessing vijñapti (Vyākhyā).
88. Tibetan: "The Prātimokṣa discipline, if another is informed of it, is also acquired in informing
another."Paramartha, in the Kārikā:"through mutual information of another"; Bhāṣya: “If another
informs concerning this, this informs another." Hsüan-tsang: “Information from another. One
who informs another is called another." (Thus we have:"Information from another = information
from another who himself informs.")
89. Svāma upasampadā, Mahāvastu, i. p. 2; Mahāvagga, i.6, 28-29; Milinda, p. 76, 265.
90. The Tibetan text has simply "of the Five," the Vyākhyā explains: “that is, Ajñātakauṇḍinya, etc.”
Paramärtha: "in the case of the five Bhikṣus, Kauṇḍinya, etc., at the moment when they obtained718 Chapter Four
duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti (vi.25d).” The fragment published by Hoernle, Manuscript Remains, i.
p. 13, has pancakānāṁ jñānābhisamayena upasaṁpadā.
91. According to the Tibetan: "in the case of Ãjñiata”; in Mahāvagga, i.6.32, Ajñātakauṇḍinya is
ordained by the formula: “Come, Oh Bhikşu… “But Paramärtha and Hsüan-tsang: "in the case of
Yasas, etc."
The technical name of this ordination is ehibhikṣukayā upasampadā; the person summoned by
ehibhikṣukā (ehibhikṣukayā ābhāṣita) becomes a monk. These words are addressed to a single
person or to many: ehi bhikṣo cara brahmacaryam . . . eta bhikṣavaḥ carata brahmacaryam; it is
accompanied by the miracle that the Vyākhyā describes (according to a text close to the stanza,
Divya, 48, 281, 342): ehīti coktas tathāgatena tāyinā / muṇḍaś ca kāṣāyadharo babhūva . . .
(Compare Mahāvastu, iii.430; Dhammapada Commentary 21-23, Fausboll, 1855, p. 167,
Burlingame, i. p. 280, etc.) We have ehibhikṣukā in Mahāvastu, i.2, Avadānašataka, i.330, ii.113,
Divya, and Kofa: ehibhikṣukatā in the Hoernle fragment; ehibhikkupabbajjā in Dhammapada,
1855, p. 119; ehibhikṣunīvāda, Divya 616. See the formulas of Mahāvagga, i.6.31, Majjhima, iii.2.
Par. 18.1 (Vinayapitaka, iii. p. 24). Compare Satapatha, i.1.4.2.
92. All of the images that Kāśyapa saluted broke into pieces; he came close to the Blessed One and
did not salute him, fearing that the body of the Blessd One would perish (māsya rūpavināšo bhūd
iti). Knowing his intention, the Blessed One said: "Salute the Tathāgata!” Kāśyapa saluted, and
seeing that the body of the Blessed One was not harmed, he said: ayaṁ me fāstā, “He is my master."
By this, he was ordained. Compare Mahāvastu, iii.51, 446; Sūtrālaṁkāra, trans. Huber, p. 161.
93. Praśnārādhanena: the Blessed One was satisfied (ārādhita) by the answers (praśnavisarjanena).
.. In the Hoernle fragment we should read: [sodā]yinaḥ praśnavyākaraneṇa upasaṁpadā.
94. Gurudharmabhywpagamena, Cullavagga, x., Anguttara, iv.76, Bhikṣuṇīkarmavacana (Bulletin
of the School of Oriental Studies, 1920).
95. She was locked in the harem and sent a messenger to the Buddha in order to obtain the
pravrajya. On Dhammadinnă, see Majjhima, i.299 and Therīgāthā, 12, where the story is very
different.
96. The officiant (vinayadhara) is the jñāptivācaka. A frontier land or a border land: pratyantikeṣu
janapadeṣu. Mahāvagga, vi.13.11, ix41; Divya, 21.18 (pratyantimeşu); Mahāvastu: pañcavargena
ganena upasaṁpadā.
97. See Minayev, Recherches, 272; Takakusu, in Hastings' ERE, vii.320.
98. Vyākhyā: Buddham Saraṇaṁ gacchāma iti trirvacanenopasaṁpat. Paramārtha: “By saying the
Three Refuges three time," translation confirmed by vi.30d.
In Mahāvagga, i. 14, the Sixteen are ordained by the formula, "Come!..." See the ordination of
Subhadda, Dialogues, ii.169.
99. Vyākhya: Saṁvṛter iti saṁvarasya.
100. Vyakhya: Tena visabhāgāśrayeṇa tatra samādāane'prayogat / asaraṇāc cetarāfrayeṇa tat
samādāanaṁ na smarati.
101. Hsüan-tsang: "One does not undertake it as one undertakes the good [restraint]."
102. On the upavāsa, see Wieger, Bouddhisme chinois, i.149 (Vinaya in Ten Recitations);
Oldenberg, Bouddha, 2nd edition, p. 372; Rhys Davids, Buddhism, 1907, pp. 139-141; Minayeff,
Recherches, p. 166. Anguttara, i.205; Suttanipata, 400.
On the upavasa repeated or of long duration, see De Groot, Code du Mahāyāna, 62. The six days
of upavāsa, Watters, Yuan-Chwang, i.304, Chavannes, Cinq cents contes, i.26, note 2; the four days
and their dates, Takakusu, I-tsing, 63, 188.
The half-month of the Blessed One, Mahāvastu, iii.97, is a prolonged abstinence in the manner
of the Jains (see the editor's Introduction).Footnotes 719
103. Paramārtha and Hsüan-tsang, in the Kārikā and the Bhāsya, digress from the order of the
Tibetan.
Smras bzlas pa yis = “murmuring after he had spoken” (?). Paramārtha = anu paścāt vādin;
Bhāşya: "immediately upon the giving [of the upavasa], after he speaks..."
104. Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 647b23): From whom should one undertake the upavāsa discipline? One
obtains this discipline by taking it from the seven classes of persons (ch'i-chung: the seven
"parişads" of Takakusu, I-tsing, p. 96; monk, novice, nun, probationer, female novice, layman and
laywoman). Why? Persons who have not undertaken the precepts (chieh ) during their whole life
are not worthy of being precept masters (chieh-shihÉM).
105. Paramartha: "He rejects ornaments which are not old. Why? The ornaments that one uses
constantly do not produce vanity as do new ornaments." "Habitual" should be nityaka; nityaka
bhojana, Mahāvastu, i.602, iii.253, is understood as "ordinary."
106. The restraint of the fast arises (for him) at sunrise, and the efficacy of making this restraint
arise belongs to the mind which he has formed to oblige himself to undertake the fast. The Vyākhyā
says, “Sa bhuktvāpi gṛhṇīyāď” iti / sûryodaya eva saṁvara uttişṭhate samādānaniyamacitta-
syotthāpakatvät/ bhuktvägrahaṇaṁ tv abhivyaktyartham. Paramärtha translates word for word sa
bhuktvāpi gṛhṇīyāt. Hsüan-tsang: if some obstacle is encountered, he nevertheless obtains
complete abstinence."
107. On the diverse readings and interpretations, uposatha, upoșadha (Lalita, Mahāvastu, i.177,
Avadānakalpalatā, vi.76), poșadha (Mahävyutpatti, 266), posaha (Jaina), see S. Lévi, Observations
sur une langue precanonique du Bouddhisme, J.As. 1912, ii.501.
gso-sbyon is explained: "that which nourishes [merits], and which washes away [trans-
gressions]."
Upoşadhikā, such as Māyādevī at the descent of the elephant = niyamavatī, iv.74a-b. Poşadhika,
Mahävyupatti 270.13.
108. See the Uposathasutta (Visuddhimagga 227), Anguttara, i.211.
109. Paramartha and Hsüan-tsang quote the stanza: "As it increases the good pure mind of oneself
and others, the Blessed One (Buddha Sugata) called it Poşadha."
110. In Anguttara, iv.388, the Uposatha is made up of nine items: one adds the meditation of
compassion.
111. Vyākhyā: Šīlaṁ pārājikābhāvaḥ saṁghāvašeṣādyabhāvaḥ. On the expression pārājika
(=*pārācika), samghāvašeșa, saṁghādisesa (=*samghātifesa), see S. Lévi, Langue precanonique du
Bouddhisme, J.As. 1912, ü.503-506. The saṁghāvafeşas would be the transgressions which
"separate the transgressor from the rest of the community" in contrast to the pārājikas which
"imply definitive exclusion." Ryōsaburo Sakaki (Vyutpatti, 255-256) quotes Burnouf, Kern, and
Lévi. The Chinese translate seng-ts'an = That which destroys the Sangha.
112. Compare Anguttara iv.248, where the order of the items differs.
113. On pişta see Harşacarita, 45.2, 123.2, 273 (F. W. Thomas).
114. Saṁghabhadra responds to this objection.
115. On Upāsakas and the place they occupy at the side of the Sangha, Burnouf, Introduction,
279-282; Spence Hardy, Eastern Monachism; Oldenberg, Buddha 1914, p. 182, 317, 429; Minayev,
Recherches, 296; Foucher, Art greco-bouddhique du Gandhara, ii.86; Przyluski, Légende d'Açoka, p.
207-8.
Cullavagga, v.20, Añguttara, iii.366, iv.344, important concerning the relations of the Sangha
and Upāsakas.
The major text is the Mahānāmasutra many passages of which are discussed in the Kofa. Other
relevant passages in the notes of Buddhaghosa, Sumangalavilāsinī, p. 235.720 Chapter Four
relevant passages in the notes of Buddhaghosa, Sumangalavilāsinī, p. 235.
The Upāsaka is considered a “monk” (Anguttara, ii.8), since he has the right to "give" the
upavāsa (see the Vibhāṣā above note 104), since he is called to confess his transgressions (iv.34a-b):
he is a "tertiary." But Upāsaka signifies "he who worships [the Three Jewels]" (Sumangalavilāsinī,
p. 234), and we shall see that, for the Sautrāntikas, one can be an Upāsaka without taking upon
himself the rules of training (fikṣāpada) the observation of which makes him a perfect Upāsaka
(note 116.vi).
Whether a layman can obtain the "results of the religious life" (framanyaphala), and especially
the quality of Arhat, see Kathāvatthu iv.1, Milinda, 242, 265, 348. According to one group of
sources, the layman, even if he is a kāmabhogin, can enter the Path; if, even if living in the world, he
upholds chastity (brahmacarin; see for example Ralston, Tibetan Tales, 197), he can obtain the
result of Anāgāmin; but in no case does he become an Arhat [It is in this sense that one should
understand Dhammapada 142; Udāna, vii.10; Majjhima, i.466, 483, 490; the texts do not clearly say
whether a lay kamabhogin can obtain the result of Srotaäpanna and Sakṛdāgāmin. But Anguttara
iii. 451 enumerates twenty layman who have obtained the quality of Arhat; see Samyutta v.410.
Milinda, like the Kośa, believes that a layman can become an Arhat: but at the moment when he
becomes an Arhat, he becomes a monk; that very day he enters the Order; if the Order does not
exist, he enters an ascetic brotherhood. [Wasslilieff, p. 218, followed by Minayev, Recherches, p.
220, is mistaken on the meaning of the Tibetan source, see Kofa, vi.30.] Normally, heaven is the
reward for the person who, incapable of abandoning the pleasures whose inanity he understands
(Theragāthā 187), and recoiling before the obligation of chastity (Suttanipāta 396, Divya, 303),
contents himself with observing the Five Precepts and the upavāsa.
On the teaching given to the laity, sermons on generosity, the precepts, heaven, etc., see
Majjhima, i.379: Cullavagga, vi4, 5, Mahāvagga i.7, 5, etc.; Dīgha ii.113. Samyutta iv.314; Divya,
300, 617; Przyluski, Légende d'Açoka, 196, 353. Senart, Piyadasi, ii.208. See iv.112.
The sick or dying layman visited by the āvāsika (resident monk), etc., Anguttara iii.261,
Majjhima, iii.261; lacking monks, by layman, Samyutta, vi.408.
The layman reveals the Sūtras to the Bhikṣus, Mahāvagga iii.5,9.
Superstition, the danger of the layman (Kośa, iv.86).
116. The Mahānāmasūtra in Añguttara iv.220 and Saṁyutta v.395 (Sumangalavilāsinī 243) has
simply: yato kho mahānāma buddhaṁ saraṇaṁ gato hoti dhammaṁ saraṇaṁ gato hoti samgham
saraṇam gato hoti ettāvatā kho mahānāma upāsako hoti - One becomes an Upāsaka by taking the
Three Refuges.
The Sanskrit Mahānāmasūtra (Saṁyukta, TD 2, p. 236b17) contains in addition a short formula
added to the taking of the refuges "Consider me as an Upāsaka.” (The same in Divya, 47, where we
have: Upāsikāṁ cāsmān bhagavān dhārayatu). This Sūtra is partially quoted in the Vyākhyā:
Kiyatā bhadanta upāsako bhavati / yataḥ khalu mahānāman gṛhī avadātavasanaḥ puruṣaḥ
puruṣendriyasamanvāgataḥ . . . upāsikāṁ māṁ iyatopāsako bhavati. (Vyākhyā: Gṛhīty uddeśa-
padam/avadātavasana iti nirdefapadam/ puruşa ity uddeśapadam/puruşendriyasamanvāgata iti
nirdesapadam). Hsüan-tsang adds to the words of the candidate the words karuṇām upādāya … … .
dharaya.
iii. A more complete formula with the same variants, Anguttara i.56, Samyutta iv.113, v.12,
Cullavagga, vi.4.5, Dīgha 1.85: So aham bhagavantaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi dhammaṁ ca bhikkhu-
samgham ca / upāsakaṁ maṁ bhagavā dhāretu ajjatagge pāņupetaṁ saranam gatam. Com-
mentary of the Sumangalavilāsinī: maṁ bhagavā "upāsako ayam" ti evam dhāretu jānātu: "May the
Blessed One recognize me as being an Upāsaka.” Pāṇupetam ti pāṇehi upetam: that is, "As long as
my life lasts, may the Blessed One consider me as upeta (having come to him), not having any other
master, an Upāsaka having taken the Three Refuges, doing what is suitable (kappiya). May one cut
off my head if I say of the Buddha that he is not Buddha..." See note 126.
iv. The formula that Vasubandhu describes as that of the Dṛṣṭasatyasūtra (see note 125), and
which is quoted, in its first part, by the Vaibhāşikas (page 598, line 28) with the reading prāṇāpeta
in place of prāṇopeta (reading interpreted and discussed p. 598, line 31 and p. 600, line 10):
Upāsakaṁ māṁ dhāraya adyāgreṇa yāvajjīvaṁ prāṇāpetaṁ [faraṇaṁ gatam abhiprasannam].Footnotes
721
v. The Sarvästivādin formula (given in the Shih-sung chieh-1
b-mo pi-ch’iu yao-yung, TD 23, p.
496a14, edited and translated by Wieger, Bouddhisme Chinois, i.146-7): “I, so-and-so, from today to
the end of my life, take refuge in the Buddha, the best of two legged beings... Know that I am an
Upāsaka having taken definitive refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, Samgha, rejoicing (abhiprasanna =
lo) in the Dharma of the Buddha Sākyamuni, having undertaken the Five Silas." This is repeated
three times. Then one explains the Five Silas and the candidate answers that he will observe them.
The expression "having undertaken the Five Precepts" (shou wu chieh ) replaces the
prānapeta of formula iv.
vi. We possess the Sanskrit original of the expression: "having undertaken the Five Silas,” in
the Abhisamayalamkārāloka, commenting on the Astasāhasrikā prajñāpāramita, p. 137. We learn
that the Vinaya has two readings (pāṭha). According to the first, the candidate begs the master (who
receives him as an Upāsaka) to consider him as an Upāsaka who has taken the Three Refuges;
according to the second, to consider him as an Upāsaka who has taken the Three Refuges and the
Five Precepts.
Trifaraṇaparigrahāt (read ºgamanāt) pañcaśikṣāpadaparigrahāc copāsakas tathopāsiketi
dvidhābhedaḥ / trifaraṇaparigrhitam (read ºgatam) upāsakaṁ mām ācāryo dhārayatu / tathā
trifaraṇagatam pañcaśikṣāpadaparigrhītam upāsakam mām ācāryo dharayatv iti viniyadvidha-
pāṭhāt. (According to a bad copy of the Calcutta MSS, Rajendrala!, Buddhist Literature, p. 194).
There are thus two types of Upasaka: one who has undertaken only the Refuges, and one who
has undertaken the Three Refuges and who also undertakes the Five Precepts.
vii. Nepalese formulary which is very confused (the renouncing of the ten transgressions
precedes the taking of the Five Precepts) in Adikarmapradīpa (p. 189 of my edition in Bouddhisme,
1898), summarized by Minayev, Recherches, p. 296.
117. Paramārtha: "No, for the person in question produces the five renouncings."
118. We have iv.38 dama = samvara, but the Tibetan translates dama as 'dul-ba.
119. See above note 116.iv.
120. Vyākhyā: Yathaiva hi bhikṣur labdhasamvaro'pi jñapticaturthena karmaṇā śikṣāpadāni
yathästhūlaṁ grāhyate prajñāpyate / itaś cāmutaś ca pārājikādibhyas tava saṁvaraḥ/ anyāni ca te
sabrahmacariṇaḥ kathayisyantiti.
121. When the Śrāmaṇera says: Aham evaṁnāmā taṁ bhagavantaṁ tathāgatam arhamtaṁ
samyaksambuddhaṁ śākyamunim śākyādhirājaṁ pravrajitam anupravrajāmi grhasthalingam
partyajāmi pravrajyālingaṁ samādadāmi / śrāmaṇoddeśaṁ māṁ dhāraya and repeat this formula
(evam yāvat trir api), he acquired the discipline of the frāmaṇera which is then explained to him in
detail.
122. The Mahāvyut patti, 84, adds aparipūrṇakārin before paripūrṇakārin; the Chinese and Tibetan
versions translate pradeśakārin = one who observes (spyod-pa, hsing ) for a day (ñi-tshe = "one
day" and also pradeśa).
The Vyākhyā quotes the Sūtra (Mahānāmasūtru, Saṁyukta, TD 2, p. 236b): Kiyatā bhadanta
upāsaka ekadeśakārī bhavati….. paripūrṇakāri / iha Mahānāmann upāsaka prāṇātipātaṁ prahāya
prāṇātipātad virato bhavati / iyatā Mahānāmann upāsaka śikṣāyām ekadeśakārī bhavati . . .
dvābhyām prativirataḥ pradeśakārī bhavati / tribhyaḥ prativirataś caturbhyo vā yabhūyaskārī
bhavati / pañcabhyaḥ prativirataḥ paripūrṇakārī bhavati.
Chavannes, Cinq cent contes, i.244, illustrates this text.
123. Paramārtha: "They are so called because they observe;" Hsüan-tsang: "So termed with
reference (yüch) to their observing."
124. Hsüan-tsang continues: "If it were otherwise, the Upāsaka of one precept would be called
'undertaker of one rule' ... " The question is to know whether there are not some Upasakas, not
endowed with the discipline in all its five parts, but who are engaged in observing one, two, three, or
four rules. No, according to the Vaibhāṣikas: the ekadeśakārin is an Upāsaka who violates four of
(722 Chapter Four
the rules that he has undertaken.
In Anguttara, iii.215, the Upåsaka Gavesin, silesu aparipärakärin, declares to his comrades:
"From this day forward, consider me as sīlesu aparipürakärin."Then he undertakes, one by one, the
obligations of a Bhikṣu [who is the only person with the complete precepts]. Anguttara, iv.380,
v.131.
125. According to the Vyākhyā, the Dṛṣṭasatyasūtra: with reason, as this results from the very text
of Vasubandhu, page 600, line 10: "Further..."
Drstasatyasutra signifies "the Sūtra in which a candidate, an Upāsaka, has seen the Truths."
This refers to the text Divya, 75, or to a similar text: the Blessed One destroyed the false opinion of
personalism of the Brahmin Indra, who obtains the result of Srotaäpanna: sa drṛṣṭasatyaḥ
kathayati / atikrānto’ham bhadantātikrāntaḥ (The Pāļi reads abhikkantam ) / eşo'ham
bhagavantam buddham faraṇaṁ gacchāmi dharmaṁ ca bhikṣusaṁghaṁ ca/upāsakaṁ ca māṁ
dhāraya adyāgreṇa yāvajjīvam praṇoptetaṁ faraṇaṁ gatam abhiprasannam (Edition: gatam /.
abhiprasanno'thendro brāhmaṇa . . . ; same text, Divya, 462, with the best reading).
·
Saeki says that the Dṛṣṭasatyasūtra is the Sūtra of Śrona the son of Gṛhapati (Samyukta, TD 2,
p. 6b25): "Śroņa, having removed all dust, abandoned all defilement, obtained the pure eye of the
Law, at the moment when he saw the Law... he rose and said to Śāriputra, 'I, from today onward,
take refuge..."" Possessors of the eye, candidates for the quality of Upasaka, are the kings Udena
and Sona (S, iy.113): but they employ the ordinary formula: upāsakaṁ māṁ Bhāradvājo dhāretu
ajjatagge pāņupetaṁ saraṇaṁ gatam, omitting the abhiprasanna of the Sanskrit (On abhiprasanna,
see Samyutta, v.225, 378).
126. Such is indeed the meaning of the expression prāṇopeta = srong dan bsno ba = “risking one's
life" = "giving up, abandoning one's life” (Hsüan-tsang). We see in note 112.iii, that this is the
interpretation of Buddhaghosa.
127. Pāṇupetam can be explained by prāṇebhyo'petam, prāṇair apetam, prāṇātipätādibbyo'petam.
This last version "freed from killing, etc." justifies the Vaibhāsika doctrine. To say "Know that I am
an Upăsaka free from killing" is to undertake abstaining from killing.
128. The kuddānukhuddakas do not form part of the precepts, Anguttara, i.231.
129. See the translation of Saṁghabhadra's commentary, xxiii.4, fol. 84 and following, in the
Introduction.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 177a16. Some say that taking Refuge in the Buddha is taking refuge in a body
made up of the head, the neck, the stomach, the back, the hands, and the feet of the Tathagāta. It is
explained then that this body, born of a father and mother, is impure (säsrava) dharmas, and is thus
not a locus of refuge: rather, the Refuge is the Aśaikṣa dharmas of the Buddha which form Bodhi,
the dharmakāya. Some say that taking Refuge in the Dharma is to take refuge in the Three Truths
of [Suffering, Arising, and the Path]; or in the good, bad, and neutral dharmas, etc.; or in the rules
imposed upon the Bhikṣus: "One should do this, one should not do that." It is explained then that all
these dharmas are conditioned (samṁskṛta) and impure; that they are thus not the refuge; and that
the Refuge is solely the Truth of Extinction (nirodhasatya), the end of thirst, Nirvāṇa.
Some say that taking Refuge in the Sangha is to take refuge in the Sangha of Pravrajitas of the
four castes (ssu-hsing ch'u-chia). It is then explained that the attitudes (īryāpatha), etc.
(wei-i hsing-hsiang) of this Sangha are impure: the Refuge is thus the Śaikṣa and Aśaikṣa
dharmas which make up the Sangha.
130. The designation "Buddha” also refers to other dharmas, and other guṇas, but not principally so
(apradhānyena).
131. This is the dharmakāya, vii.34; Muséon, 1913, p. 266.
132. Hsüan-tsang: rūpādikāya. See vii.31.
133. Vyākhyā: Laukikamärgasya punyajñānasaṁbhāralakṣaṇasya lokottarasya ca kṣayajñānādilakṣaṇasyā
vilakṣaṇa tvāt tulyatvät.Footnotes
723
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 177c21. If one takes Refuge in a Buddha, the refuge will be partial; and if one
takes Refuge in all the Buddhas, why does one say: "I take Refuge in the Buddha," and not "in all the
Buddhas?"... To take Refuge in the Buddha is to take Refuge in all the Buddhas whose number
exceeds that of the sands of the Ganges... The word "Buddha" embraces all of the Buddhas, because
they are of the same species. When one takes Refuge in the Sangha, is this to take refuge in one
disciple of the Buddha or in all of them?...
134. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 178a24, quotes the same text: tatra bhagavāṁs trapusabhallikau vaņijāv
āmantrayate sma / ete yuvāṁ buddhaṁ faraṇaṁ gacchatam / dharmaṁ ca / yo'sau bhavisyaty
anāgate'dhvani saṁgho nāma tam api faraṇaṁ gacchatam. (Excerpt from the Introduction to the
Saṁghabhedavastu of which a fragment, discovered in Turkestan [(Miran)], has been published in
JRAS. 1913, p. 850). Compare Mahāvagga, i.4; Mahāvastu, iii.304; Lalita, p. 386; Dulva, iv.54b.
Numerous variants.
135. Many opinions, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 177cl.
136. Dbammapada 188-192; Udānavarga, xxvii28-30; Diyāvadānd, p. 164; Vibbāsā, TD 27, p.
177a4.
137. We have bahuṁ ve saraṇam yanti . . . ; Divya: bahavaḥ śaranaṁ yanti, which Paramārtha
translates. The Tibetan Udänavarga has phal-cher.
138. Khema, Divya: śreṣṭha; Udānavarga and the principal Chinese versions.
139. Vyākhyā: Akriyāyām akaraṇe niyama ekāntatā akriyāniyamaḥ / so'karaṇasaṁvaraḥ akara-
ṇalakṣaṇaḥ saṁvaraḥ / na samādānikaḥ saṁvara ity arthaḥ / sa ca Sautrāntikanayenāvasthāvišeṣa
eva/ Vaibhāṣikanayena tu fīlängam avijñaptir iti.
See above note 24, some references to the Păli sources, setughātavirati = samucchedavirati,
sampattavirati, samādānavirati; p. 48, the distinction between samādānašīla and dharmatāprā-
tilambhikaſīla. The Abhidhamma has many points of similarity with the Abhidharma, but the
correspondence is not perfect.
The Vaibhāşikas attribute pure samvara, or restraint, to an Aryan (iv.17c); this saṁvara is not
simply akaraṇa, but a certain rūpa, avijñapti, a setu (see note 24); the Sautrāntikas do not admit the
existence of avijnapti: for them the series of the Aryan has become incapable of certain actions (see
note 145), the seeds of these actions having been eliminated: akaraṇasaṁvara, an immovable
avijñapti which the Vaibhāşikas postulate, is not a thing in and of itself but is akriyāyām ekāntatā, a
certain abstention resulting from a transformation of the personality.
140. Hsüan-tsang: “They have not, with respect to the series of all beings, said, 'I renounce
incontinence." "Paramartha: "They have not, with respect to this series (asmāt saṁtānāt), said, 'I
renounce...
141. Hsüan-tsang translates: "If lying is authorized, he would transgress all the rules. Having
transgressed the rules, at the time when he is interrogated,-if lying has been authorized,-he
would say, 'I have not done it,' and because of this there would be many transgressions of the rules.
Also the Blessed One, desiring that one uphold the rules, places the renouncing of lying in all of the
rules, asking, 'How could an Upāsaka, if he violates the rule, declare it himself and prevent new
transgressions?""
Compare the Sūtra to Rāhula on lying, Majjhima, i.415; the edict of Bhabra.
142. Pratikṣepaṇasāvadya, pratiṣedhaº, prajñaptiº, in opposition to what is a transgression by its
very nature or prakṛtisävadya. This is transgression of one who does a forbidden action, because he
does not respect the law (fäsana) of the Blessed One (iv.122c).
143. On jalogi, see Conciles bouddhiques, Muséon, 1905, p. 290; Lévi, J.As. 1912, ii. p. 508.
144. The text is quoted in the Vyākhyā: Māṁ śāstāram uddiśabdhiḥ kuśāgreṇāpi madyam na
pātavyam. In Divya, 191, we have: māṁ bho bhikṣavaḥ śāstāram uddiśabdhir madyam apeyam724 Chapter Four
adeyam antataḥ kuśāgreṇāpi, which Speyer corrects to uddiśya [bhava]dbhir... Huber, Sources du
Divya, BEFEO, 1906, 31, sanctions this correction, and shows the relation of the Divya with the
79th prayafcittika.
The Blessed One not only forbids strong liquor in inebriating quantities (madaniya). For the
sick Upāsaka who consents to eat dog meat but not to drink wine, and who quotes the "Sūtra of the
House," see Sitrālaṁkāra, Huber, 434. Chavannes, Cinq cents contres, iii. 14.
Four upakkilesas: surāmerayapana, methuna, jätarüpa, and micchajiva (Anguttara, ii.53,
Atthasālini, 380).
145. See above p. 604. If one puts milk mixed with alcohol into their mouths, the milk would enter
their mouths, but not the alcohol, Sumangalavilāsinī, p. 305.
146. Mdo (Csoma), xxvi, 425.
147. Four kāyaduścaritas, killing, stealing, forbidden sex, and surāmaireyapramādasthāna. Alcohol
is missing from the classical lists of the kāyaduścaritas, Mahāvyutpatti, 91, etc.
148. Hsüan-tsang translates: "because, by reason of the transgression of this rule, one would
commit a transgression which is by its nature a transgression.” The Vyākhyā says: If drunk but once,
strong liquor is mortal (vyasanībhavet), for the Blessed One said: trīņi sthānāni pratiṣevamāṇasya
nāsti tṛptir vā alaṁtā vā paryāptir vā / madyam abrahmacaryam styānamiddhaṁ ceti. Same
teaching in Anguttara, i.261 (soppassa bhikkhave pațisevanāya natthi titti, surāmerayapānassa…
methunadhammasamāpattiyā...).
"
149. The same quantity of madya is madanīya or non-madaniya depending upon circumstances.
150. The five balas of the Saikṣas are fraddhā, vīrya, hrī, apatrāpya, and prajñā. The order differes in
Anguttara, iii. 1.
151. Vyākhyā: Yadi hrīmattvät tadanadhyācaraṇam ajñātam udakādivat kasmān na pibanti.
152. The Nandikasūtra says: surāmaireyamadyapramādasthānenāsevitena bhāvitena bahulīkṛtena
kāyasya bhedän narakeşipapadyate. Compare Digha, iii. 182: surämerayapramädaṭṭhānānuyogo
apayaniko; the same for jūtappamadaṭṭhāna.
153. Dīgha, iii.195, 235, Anguttara, iii.212, Samyutta, ii.167.
154. Notes of Palmyr Cordier.
a) Surā = annāsava. Vyākhyā: Annāsava iti taṇḍulakṛtaḥ. Rice beer or alcohol. This is what
Hemādri says ad Aṣṭāṁgahṛdaya 1.5.67: fālipiṣṭakṛtaṁ madyam. This is also confirmed by the
Vaiḍūryakabhāṣya or the autocommentary of Vägbhata, where sură = 'bru-chan = gro-chań, cereal
beer, wheat beer, grain alcohol, in conformity with the Mahāvyutpatti, 230.36 where surā = 'bru'i
chan (Amarakośa, 2.10.39, surā = chan).
Surā = arrack or raki (rice aquavit, a Persian word Sanskritized under the form of akra, a word
which is missing, in this sense, in non-medical dictionaries).
b) Maireya = dravyāsava (rdzas las sbyar ba'i btun bo) = tafia. Vyākhyā: Dravyāsava
itikṣsurasādikṛtaḥ.
=
According to Aruṇadatta's commentary on the Astängahṛdaya, 1.7.40, maireya = kharjūrāsava =
alcohol from dates. The Vaiḍūryakabhāṣya explains bu ram chan = rum or tafia; whereas
Candranandana (Padārthacandrikā) and Hemädri say dhanyāsava alcohol from grains.
Mahāvyutpatti,230.38, sbyar ba'i chań; Amarakośa, 2.10.42, makes maireya the synonym of asava
(me-tog chan), a liqueur from flowers (of Lythrum fruticosum, etc.) and of sidhu (bur chan); rum,
tafia.
c) Pagaphalakodravādayo'pi ... Vyākhyā: Adiśabdena nispāvādayo'pi grhyante [MSS.
neşyāvaº].
Pūgaphala, areca nut (areca cathecu, palm). Sanskrit synonyms, pūgīphala = kramuka = pohala =
guvāka. Mahāvyutpatti, 231.34, Pūgaphala = gla gor sho fa = kramuka, Aṣṭāngahṛdaya, 4.12.25 and
ºnighanțu, 121. Amarakośa, 3.4/3.21 go yu.Footnotes 725
Kodrava, tsi-tsi, Aṣṭāṁganighaṇtu, 198; Śarat Candra, tsi tse tsi tsi; Mahāvyutpatti, 228.14 ci
thse. Nispāva, common lablab (a type of bean). Missing in the Mahāvyut patti and, at least in the
botanical sense, in the Amarakośa.
155. According to the Vaibhāsikas, the preparation, the chief action and the consecutive action of
undertaking the Prātimokṣa discipline (iv.69c-d) have respectively for their purpose to "bind” the
preparation, the chief action and the action consecutive to murder, etc. The preparation of the
Prātimokṣa considers the preparation of killing, to which it is opposed, and says to it in some
manner: "I bind you (samvṛṇomi); do not arise!"
156. An important point in the theory of the existence of the past and the future, v.25 (see also i.34d,
trans. p. 99).
157. Compare Yogasūtra, ii.31. We see, Divya, p. 10, that the butcher of sheep, taking up the
obligation of morality (fīlasamādāna) for the night, obtains great benefits: a daytime hell, a
nocturnal paradise.
158. The Tibetan has: "relative to former beings who, having become Buddhas, have entered into
Nirvāņa."
159. "To kill sheep"; to kill is translated by gsod.
"Elephant-driver," nāgabandhakā hastipakāḥ (Vyākhyā). Glaṇ po che 'chor ba or 'thser ba,
"he who hunts with an elephant, who torments an elephant" (compare the gaddhabādhin of
Cullavagga, i.32).
"Slaughterer of fowl,” kukkutän ghnantīti kaukkuţikāḥ, (Vyākhyā); compare Mahavyutpatti,
286.93, khyi 'chor ba or 'thser ba: "he who hunts with dogs, who torments dogs" through confusion
of kukkura with kukkuța (?).
Văgurika, according to Mahävyutpatti, 186.92 (rgyas 'chor ba= he who hunts with a net) and
Amarakośa, 2.10.27 (vāgurā= ri dvags 'dzin = mṛgabandhinī; vāgurika = bya brñi ba = jālika = bya
rgya pa) which means "poacher, trapper.” But the Vyākhyā makes an animal of vāgurā: paṁpā (?)
nāma prāṇijātir vāgurākhyā tām ghnantīti vāgurikāḥ and the Tibetan version transcribes (ba gu ri
'chor ba).
Compare the lists of Anguttara, i.251, ii.207, iii.303, 383.
160. Chavannes, Cinq cents contres et apologues, iii. p. 117, no. 415 (TD 4, number 203).
161. Paramartha: "One obtains lack of restraint in two ways: through personal action, and through
approval."
162. See iv.41c-d.
163. According to the Chinese versions. The orginal has: “I shall constantly give food for a day, a
month, a fortnight (tithibhakta, ardhamāsabhakta).
Vyākhyā: Adiśabdena maṇḍalakaraṇādi grhyate (see below note 182).
164. Compare Mahāvagga, ii.36.1, etc.; Pārājika, i.8.2.
165. Mahāvyupatti, 266.16. Patanty aneneti patanīyam. These are the four Pārājikas: unchastity,
stealing of a certain importance (yathoktapramāṇam adattādānam), killing of a human being
(manuṣyavadha), and lying relative to one's supernatural powers (uttarimanuṣyadharmamṛṣāvāda)
(Finot, J.As. 1913, ii.476). See some instructive glosses in Wieger, Bouddhisme chinois, i. p. 215
(1910). On the word Pārājika, see S. Lévi, J.As. 1912, ii.505, and Wogihara, Bodhisattvabhūmi, p. 36.
166. The Vyākhyā mentions an argument taken from Scripture. It says in the Vinaya: “An immoral
(duḥśīla) monk who gives advice (anuśāsti) to a nun commits (āpadyate) a saṁghāvaśeṣa
transgression." Now “immoral" means "guilty of a Pārājika," for the text opposes a prakṛtisthaḥ726 Chapter Four
filavan monk to an immoral monk. Thus the monk guilty of a Päräjika remains a monk, since he
can be rendered guilty of a samghävafeşa. Vinaya uktam/duḥfilas ced bhikṣur bhikṣuṇīm anušāsti
saṁghāvašeşam āpadyata iti / āpannapārājiko hi bhikṣur duḥšīlo'bhipreto nānāpannapārājikaḥ
prakṛtisthaḥ filavan iti viparyayena vacanãt / ato'vagamyate / asty asya duḥšīlasyāpi sato
bhikṣubhāvo yasmāt saṁghāvafeşam äpadyata ity uktam iti
167. This text (the Sarvästivādin Vinaya In Ten Recitations, TD 23, p. 157a7-b2) has passed into
Mahāvyutpatti 278: abhiksuḥ aśramaṇaḥ, aśākyaputrīyaḥ, dhvasyate bhikṣubhāvāt, hatam asya
bhavati śrāmaṇyam mathitam patitam parăjitam, apratyuddhāryam asya bhavati śrāmaṇyam,
tadyathā tālo mastakacchinno'bhavyo haritatvaya / duḥfilaḥ papadharmo'ntaḥpütir avasrutaḥ
kafambakajātaḥ.
Compare Ksitigarbhasūtra in Šikṣāsamuccaya, p. 67. On kaśambaka, below P. 615.
168. All the editions of the Mahävyutpatti, 270.37-40.
169. The regularly ordained Bhikṣu (jñāpticaturthopasampanna), 270.41.
Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 557c14) recalls that there are five samghas: 1. samgha with modesty,
2. samgha of speechless sheep, 3. samgha of followers (p'eng-tang ) 4. saṁgha in the
popular meaning of the word (lokasaṁvytisaṁgha = sammutisamgha), and 5. samgha in the
proper sense of the word (paramārthasaṁgha = dakkhiṇeyyasaṁgha).
170. Compare Pārājika, i.8.1:. . . ayam (ñatticatutthena upasampanno) imasmim atthe adhippeto
bhikkhū ti. Vasubandhu: asmims tv arthe … ..
171. See note 167; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 356b25; this comparison, in Majjhima, i.250, 331, 464, ii.256,
refers to the defilements.
172. Compare Cullavagga, i25.1, Vinaya Texts, iii. p. 120.
173. Kāraṇḍava, Mahāvyutpatti, 228.23, an herb that resembles the yava.
Kāśambaka, Mahāvyutpatti, 278.16; also Kāśmabakajāta (Śikṣāsamuccaya, p. 67, Aṣṭasāhasrikā,
p. 181), kaśambūka, kaśambuka (Wogihara) = pütikāṣṭham.
Utplāvī (?) nāma vrihimadhye'bhyantarataṇḍulavihīnah (Vyākhyā). The orginal has: atho
palāvinam, as the Pāļi shows: Anguttara, iv.169 and Suttanipäta, 281 quoted in Milinda, 414:
kāraṇḍavaṁ niddhamatha kasambuṁ apakassatha tato palāpe vāhetha assamaṇe samaṇamānine.
174. The Cundasutta in the Uragavagga; Mahāvyutpatti, 223.55-58; mārgajina (Samyutta, i.187),
according to the Vyākhyā, the Asaikṣa and the Saikşa; according to Saeki, the Buddha and the
Pratyekabuddhas; märgadaifika, the Buddha or Säriputra, etc.; märgajivin, Nanda, etc., according to
Saeki (mārge jīvati šīlavān bhikṣur māraganimittaṁ jīvanāt). Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 341c6. Añguttara,
iv.169, samaṇadusī samaṇapalāpo samanākāraṇḍeva.
175. Mahävyutpatti, 270.10, Sūtrālaṁkāra, xi.4. Vyākhyā: a' monk, through extensive lust, is
rendered guilty of unchastity (striya abrahmacaryaṁ kṛtvā); immediately alarmed (jätasamvega) he
thinks, "I have committed a frightful (kaşta) action,” without a single thought of hiding his crime
arising within him, he approaches (upagamya) the Sangha and confesses: "I have done this
transgression." On the instructions of the Sangha (āryasaṁghopadeśāt), he carries out his penance
(daṇḍakarma kurvāṇaḥ) which consists of abstaining from contact with the Bhikṣus (sarva-
bhikṣvanavakrāntikatva), etc. He is called a fiksādattaka. If his immorality destroys his quality of
Bhikṣu, he will no longer be a Bhikṣu, or a penitent. Notice too that he is not to receive a new
ordination. According to the glosses of Yuan-hsien (quoted by Wieger), the penitent is placed after
the monks, but before the novices; he does not take part in ecclesiastical actions; but he will be
rehabilitated if he becomes an Arhat.
176. Milinda, p. 257, has some curious theories on the privileges that an immoral Bhikşu still
maintains.
177. The good of the sphere of Dhyāna belongs to the gods of higher spheres and to the ascetics
who, here below, cultivate the Dhyānas.Footnotes 727
178. The acquisition of the pure discipline is not mentioned as a cause of the abandoning of the lack
of restraint; for the discipline of Dhyana always precedes pure discipline.
179. The masters of Gandhāra; Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 566c27) accepts this opinion.
180. The Kāśmirians. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 608b24.
181. When one says: ālam samādānena; in other words pratyākhyānavacanena.
182. Avijñapti is lost for one who does not act according to his undertaking, yathāsamättam
akurvataḥ.
Vyākhyā: Tadyathā buddhaṁ avanditvā maṇḍalakam akṛtvā vā na bhokşya iti tadakṛtvā
bhuñjānasya... In the Bhikṣuṇīkarmavācanā (Bulletin of the School Oriental Studies, 1920, p. 128)
there is mentioned the trimandala which is constructed before the taking of refuge. De La Vallée
Poussin thought that this trimandala was the triratnamandala mentioned in the ritual of the
Bodhisattvas (Adikarmapradīpa, in Bouddhisme, Études et Matériaux, 1989, p. 206).
183. Paramārtha transcribes yantra (yen-to-lo). “Etc.” refers to fastra, vișa, etc.
184. Vyākhyā: One should say that the vijñapti, which has given rise to this avijñapti, is abandoned
at the same time that it is, for its prāpti is cut off by these six causes. But there can be avijñapti
without a vijñapti, as we see from iv.67; and [elsewhere], one speaks of the avijñapti as if one were
speaking of the vijñapti. According to others, the prāpti of a vijñapti included in neither-restraint-
nor-lack of restraint does not continue (anubandhini); thus the author does not here have to occupy
himself here with the abandoning of vijnapti.
185. Further, in certain cases, by detachment from kāma (vairāgya): for example good
dissatisfaction (kuśala daurmanasyendriya, ii.1, trans. note 79).
186. All the klešas are upakleśas, but not all upaklešas are kleśas. See v.46.
187. Mahävyutpatti, 271.13-20.
188. The Theravādins (Kathāvatthu, iii.10) maintain that there are no precepts among the gods
because there is no lack of restraint among them. See below iv.44a-b.
189. By reason of their māndya.
190. Not the Prātimokṣa discipline, because the gods do not have samvega, terror-disgust.
191. The Tibetan version of the Bhāśya skips this Kārikā.
By the practice of dhyānāntara (viii.22-23) one is reborn in the elevated part of heaven of the
Brahmapurohitas, which is called dhyānāntarika, where the Mahābrahmãs dwell (ii.41d; iii.2d). But
birth among the Mahābrahmāṇas is an obstacle (āvaraṇa) (iv.99), for entry into the Path and the
pure precepts which make up the Path are impossible for Brahma, who thinks that he is
svayambhu, self-created; etc. (vi.38a-b).
192. Paramārtha: The pure precepts among the gods of Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu, with the
exception of the dhyānāntarikas and the asaṁjñisattvas, and among the gods of Arūpyadhātu …..
The gods born in Arūpyadhātu virtually possess the restraint of ecstasy and the pure precepts, but
not at the present time.
193. The Abhisamayālaṁkārāloka, ad Aṣṭasāhasrikā, p. 62, quotes the Abhidharmasamuccaya:
kāmapratisaṁyuktaṁ kuśalaṁ puṇyam rūpārūpyapratisaṁyuktam āniñjyam. Commentary on the
Bodhicaryavatāra, iii. 10.
194. Absent in the Tibetan version, but given by Paramārtha. Hsüan-tsang: "Good action in
Kāmadhātu is called punya because it does good to another and produces an agreeable retribution;
bad action is called apunya because by it, one harms another and produces a disagreeable
retribution."
195. The Vyākhyā (iii.101d) admits two readings, anejya from ejr (kampane) and aninjya from igi728 Chapter Four
(gatyarthe). Variants mentioned by Wogihara in his edition of the Mahāvyupatti, 21.49, 244.124:
aninga, aningya, aniñjya, āniñjya. Modern opinions, Lotus, p. 306; Childers (i); Senart,
Mahāvastu, i399 (MSS animja); Leumann, Album Kern, 393; Kern, note in Bodhicarya-
vatārapanjikā, p. 80 (Vedic anedya = anindya); E. Muller, Simplified grammar, p. 8. (See De La
Vallée Poussin's note in Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 365).
ii. Anenja action. The three abhisaṁkkhāras (puñña, apuñña, āneñja), Dīgha, iii.217, Samyutta,
ii.82, Madhyamakavṛtti, xvi.1. (āneñiya). This is the action "leading to immovability" of Warren (p.
180, according to the Visuddhimagga, p. 571); the action "of imperturbable character" or "for
remaining static" of Mrs. Rhys Davids (trans. of Kathāvatthu, p. 358, ad xxii.2). [This is without
doubt the action which Vasubandhu describes here, the action in the domain of the higher spheres.]
iii. Anenja mind, cittassa āneñjatā, “non-agitation of the mind"; mind, absorption, dhyāna, or
the saint qualified as āneñjapatta, āniñjyaprāpta: Udāna, iii.3, Nettippakaraṇa, 87, Puggalapaññatti,
60, Anguttara, ii. 184, Visuddhimagga, 377, Wogihara, Bodhisattvabhūmi, 19. This is a mind in the
Fourth Dhyana where, according to the heretics of Kathāvatthu xxii.3, the death of an Arhat takes
place (compare Kofa, iii.43, Digha, ii.156, Avadānafataka, ii.199); acala mind, niriñjana.
The ānenja mind, the foundation of magical powers (iddhi) is, in Visuddhimagga, p. 386, a
mind which is not inclined (na iñjati) towards rāga, etc. This is not a mind in the Fourth Dhyāna,
but a good and absorbed (samāhita) mind. (On ṛddhi, see Kośa, vii.48). In Samyutta, iv.202, the
aniñjamāna, aphandamāna, etc., mind is rid of maññitas, iñjitas, phanditas, papañcitas, and
mānagatas which consist of saying “I am,” etc. The same for the injita of Anguttara ii.45.
v. In Majjhima, ii.254, 262, the viññāṇa becomes 1. āṇañjupaga 2. ākiñcaññāyatanupaga 3.
nevasaññānāsaññānāyatanupaga. Āṇañja is obtained by abandoning the notion of kama and rupa;
ākiñcañña by abandoning, in addition, the notion of āṇañja; nevasaññānāsaññānāyatana by
abandoning, in addition, the notion of ākiñcañña. It appears that āṇañja corresponds to the first two
stages of Ärūpyadhātu (see Kofa, viii).
196. yad atra vitarkitaṁ vicaritam idam atrāryā iñjitam ity āhuḥ / yad atra prītir avigatā idam
atrāryā iñjitam ityāhuḥ / yad atra sukhaṁ sukham iti cetasa ābhoga idam atrāryā iñjitam ity āhuḥ.
Madhyama, TD 1, p. 743al. Compare Majjhima, i454... idam kho ahaṁ Udāyi injitasmiṁ vadāmi
/ kim ca tattha injitasmim / yad eva tattha vitakkavicārā aniruddhā honti idaṁ tattha injitasmim.
197. Paramartha and Hsüan-tsang: In the Aniñjyasútra: pu-tung ching.
198. Vyākhyā: Aniñjyānujvalabhāginam ākampyānukülabhāginaṁ mārgam ārabhya.
According to Hsüan-tsang: "The Blessed One declares them non-agitated, and considers them
(lit. "points out," chü “grasping in the hand") as producing a non-agitated retribution (vipāka)”;
according to Paramartha: "... with reference to (yeh) the Path capable of producing a pratyaya of
non-agitated good."
199. Hsüan-tsang: "How can an agitated Dhyāna produce a non-agitated retribution? Even though
this Dhyana includes agitation due to its defilements (apakṣāla), nevertheless it is called non-
agitated, because, with respect to its retribution...'
"
200. According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 596b13. Put more clearly, the retribution of good action is
agreeable sensation when it takes place in Kāmadhātu and in the first three Dhyānas.
201. Sukhā vedanā means (1) the sensation of pleasure (kāyika sukha) and the sensation of
satisfaction (saumanasya) in Kāmadhātu and the first two Dhyānas; (2) the sensation of
satisfaction in the Third Dhyāna (ii.7, viii.9b).
202. See iii.43.
203. See iv.13c-d: "the precepts of beings of this world,” aihikafīlam. Paramārtha: In Kāmadhātu,
bad action is termed disagreeable sensation...The Kārikā says "in Kāmadhātu" in order to indicate
that this action does not exist elsewhere.
204. Objects, or the psycho-somatic complex (afraya), ii.57.Footnotes 729
205. Quoted in Vyākhyā, iii.43.
206. i. Dhyānāntara is an intercalary dhyāna between the First and Second Dhyānas, or, as the
Tibetans translate it, a dhyāna higher (khyad par) than the first through the absence of vitarka (see
viii.22d); it is a type of annex or prefatory absorption of the First Dhyāna. (See above p. 620).
Samadhidhyāna, the dhyana consisting of absorption, or bliss, is distinguished from
upapattidhyāna, existence in a certain heaven corresponding to each Dhyāna.
Action in dhyanantara (dhyānäntarakarman) is action by which one obtains dhyānāntara-bliss
and dhyānāntara-existence.
ii. The Karikā allows two interpretations as indicated by the Bhāṣya: dhyānāntarakarmaṇo
vipākatas = since there is retribution of action from dhyānāntara; and dhyānāntare vipākatas = since
there is retribution in dhyānāntara.
Paramartha translates the original literally; Hsüan-tsang: "Because intermediate [action]
produces retribution."
207. Vyākhyā: Dhyanāntarakarmaṇo dhyānāntaropapattau vipākena veditena bhavitavyam/ tatra
sukhā duḥkhā vā vedanā nāsti / tasmād asyāduḥkhāsukhā vedanā vipakā iti . . . = "Dhyānāntara
action should, in dhyānāntara existence, have a retribution which is sensation. Now, in
dhyānāntara, is neither agreeable, nor disagreeable sensation, so neither-agreeable-nor-
disagreeable sensation [which is found there] is the retribution of the said action. Thus above the
Fourth Dhyana there exists action which is neither-agreeable-nor-disagreeable in feeling."
208. "Or rather" = if we consider the second interpretation of the Karikā.
209. Vyākbyā: “Dbyānāntare và kasya cit karman onyasya vip ako vedanana syat na sambbavati.”
"Or rather, in dhyānāntara, there will no retribution in the form of sensation of any action different
from dhyanántara action, for one cannot say that a retribution experienced in dhyānāntara is a result
of an agreeable action in the First Dhyāna, that it is a result of a disagreeable action in Kāmadhātu,
nor that it is a result of an action of the sphere of the Fourth Dhyāna.”
Hsüan-tsang translates: "Or rather there will be no action [which is retributed in dhyānāntara]”
(huo ying wu yeh *).
Paramärtha: "If this were the case [=if intermediate action is absent below the Fourth Dhyāna]
then dhyānāntara action would not have any retribution; or rather, in dhyānāntara, there would be
an action different in nature [= retributed]." [Now one cannot say that dhyānāntara sensation is the
retribution of any other action].
210. Hsüan-tsang: "This action produces the sensation of pleasure (sukhendriya) of the principal
dhyāna as its retribution.” [Gloss of Saeki: of the First Dhyāna.] Which means: the action which the
dhyānāntara produces, is retributed in sensation, but in the principle Dhyana.
211. Do these masters maintain that there is no sensation in dhyānāntara existence (dhyānān-
taroapapattau)? No. But they say that this sensation is not a retributive result, but an outflowing
result (ii.57c).
212. Good action free from vitarka is the action which produces dhyānāntara; its retribution is solely
mental sensation. Thus it is false that the retribution of action which produces the dhyānāntara is
the sensation of pleasure of the dhyana itself (of the First Dhyana of which the dhyānāntara is the
higher annex); it is false also that this retribution is not sensation. For action free from vitarka exists
only in dhyānāntara and above.
213. What one feels (anubha) is sukha, or pleasure, not action ...
214. According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 596a23, where however the order differs ("twofold" becomes
"fivefold").
215. Same text Samyutta, iv.41.
Vyākhyā: Rūpaṁ pratyanubhavati no ca rūparāgaṁ pratyanubhavatīty arthaḥ / atha vā no ca
rūpam rāgeṇa pratyanubhavaty alambata iti.730 Chapter Four
216. Mahānidānadharmaparyāya: yasmin samaye sukhāṁ vedanāṁ vedayate dve asya vedane
tasmin samaye niruddhe bhavataḥ; compare Digha, ii.66.
217. The problem of the necessity of the retribution of action presents some difficulties. One must
take into consideration the multiple givens of the problem. See notably (iv.120) the distinction
between action which is "done" (kṛta) and that which is "accumulated" (upacita): action will not be
"counted" or "accumulated" if it is followed by repentance, confession, etc. In fact, action is only
completed by its prstha or consecutive action (iv.89); the gravity of an action depends on the gravity
of its preparatory action, its principal action, and its consecutive action (iv.119). Accumulated action
is not necessarily retributed. The character of the retribution of an action can necessarily change:
such an action to be experienced in hell in the next life can be retributed here in this world
(Angulimāla is a good example) (iv.55). In fact, with the exception of mortal transgressions (iv.97),
crimes do not hinder one-except in the case of "false views" cutting off the roots of good (iv.79):
and even persons with these can be reborn after this life (iv.80c-d)-from becoming "detached
from Kāmadhātu,” and, as a consequence, of being reborn in the next life in the heavens of
Rūpadhātu (iv.55): in which case the transgressions which are not of necessary retribution were as
if they had not been committed; the others are retributed here below. These transgressions, with
the exception of those which necessarily ripen in the bad realms of rebirth, do not hinder one from
entering the Path: from this then the mind, perfumed by the powerful roots of good (purity of
conduct, respect for the Three Jewels) becomes refractory to the maturation of former actions-
which are non-determinate which could produce a bad realm of rebirth: "An ignorant person,
even if he has committed a small transgression, avoids the bad place. Compact, a small mass of iron
sinks; the same iron, in a great mass but fashioned into a vessel, floats" (vi.34a-b, Anguttara, i.249).
By planting a little root of good in the field of merit which are the Buddhas, one suppresses the
retribution of actions of unnecessary retribution (vii.34 ad finem). The Kofa, iv.60, speaks of "pure"
(anāsrava) action which destroys other actions.
Another problem is that of the order in which different actions are retributed: they are heavy,
numerous, close (see Kofa, ix., “Refutation of the Pudgala,” at the end; Visuddhimagga, p. 601).
The Buddha declared that the retribution of action is incomprehensible, and he forbade any attempt
to understand it (Anguttara, ii.80 Madyamakāvatāra, vi42, Milinda, 189, Jātakamālā, xxxiii. 1-3). A
very clear point for the Buddhists, but one that is obscure for us, is that there is action and
retribution, but that there is no agent. It has been discussed whether all suffering is retribution or
whether it has come out of retribution (Visuddhimagga, 602, Kathāvatthu, vii.10, Madhya-
makāāvatāra, vi41, Karmaprajñapti, at the end). Compare Deussen, Vedānta (1883, 497-8);
Vasubandhu devotes one chapter, his "Refutation of the Pudgala," to this problem.
Interesting to Buddhology and to the Lokottaravādins are the following questions: does the
Buddha experience the retribution of his former transgressions? (iv.102, at the end), and, how does
one explain the animal rebirths of the Bodhisattvas? (vi.23c).
218. See Childers, 178b; Warren, 245; Visuddhimagga 601, Compendium, 144. The older sources
oppose ditthadhamma vedaniya to the action which leads to hell (Anguttara i.249), and to action
experienced later, samparayavedaniya (ibid., iv.382).
219. Hsüan-tsang: "Or rather one says that there are five actions"; Paramartha: "Furthermore,
there are five actions."
220. The Chinese translators depart from the original: "There are some actions whose result is close
and small; there are some actions whose result is distant and great...
This is indeed what the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 594a15, teaches: "Action to be experienced in the
present life produces a near result: one can thus say that it is strong; how can one say that other
actions, of distant result, are very strong? Action to be experienced in the present life produces a
near result, but weak: one cannot say that this action is very strong... The yava obtains its fruit after
six months, a result more distant but greater than that of flax; the khadira (ch'ü-li-shuſ) has
its fruit after five, six, twelve years, but this fruit is greater than it; the tāla has its fruit after one
hundred years, but this fruit is the greatest."Footnotes 731
221. Paramartha and Hsüan-tsang: "Some other masters say "There are four alternatives (chi=
word, päda).'"
222. Vyākhyā: Dārṣṭāntikāḥ sautrāntikāḥ.
223. Hsüan-tsang adds two words to the Kārikā:
"Four, good"; that is to say: "The doctrine of the four actions (50a-c) is good.” Bhāṣya: "Actions to
be experienced in the present life,' etc. are the three determinate actions; indeterminate action is the
fourth. We say that this is good, for, by solely indicating here action determinate or indeterminate
with respect to the time period of its retribution, the four categories of action taught in the sūtra are
explained." Gloss of Saeki: "By saying that this is correct, the Šāstra does not condemn the theory of
five or eight actions."
224. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 595c18.
225. See ii.52a, iii. 19. Samyutta, i.206; Mahävyutpatti, 190; Windisch, Buddhas Geburt, 87 and the
sources cited. On embryonic life, see the note on prāna, Kośa, iv.17a-b.
226. The intermediate being belongs (along with its subsequent life) to a single nikāya.
Intermediate existence and the following existence form only one existence (nikāyasabhāga).
Thus the actions of intermediate beings, maturing completely in the intermediate existence or in
the following existence, are all "to be experienced in the present life."
This refers to the retributive result (vipāka); see ii.52a.
227. Literally: "this is projected by upapadyavedaniya action, action to be experienced in the
following existence, after having been reborn [once]." Hsüan-tsang: . by upapadyavedaniya
action, etc." (Better: for an intermediate existence can be projected by an action to be experienced in
a later existence).
228. The text has yathā tathā ceti. Vyākhyā: “Either by the mind which holds that killing is
meritorious (punyabuddhyā), or by hatred, etc. The Persian (pārasika) who kills his father or
mother believing that he is doing a pious act... (see iv.68d). Hsüan-tsang: "Killing... with a light
or heavy mind." Paramãrtha: (i shuai erh hsin ‹› ) (TD 29, p. 238c2).
229. According to the Vinaya in Ten Recitations, 51.1; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 593a15.
Those who insult their mothers are punished in this life, Divya, 586.
230. Hsüan-tsang adds: “Such stories are numerous."
231. Majjhima, ii.220, Anguttara, iv.382: Can the action "to be experienced in this life" be
transformed into action "to be experienced in a future life" (samparāyavedaniya) .….. ?
The same problem is examined in the Karmaprajñapti, Mdo, 82, 246b: “There are eight types
of actions: to be experienced agreeably, disagreeably, in this world, later, to be experienced in a small
manner, to be experienced gradually, ripe, and unripe. Can action to be experienced agreeably,
through energy and effort, be changed into action to be experienced disagreeably? No, this is
impossible... Can unripe action be changed into ripe action? Yes and no. Some, in order to carry out
this transformation, cut off their hair, their beard, their hair and beard, and torture themselves by
different paths and bad penitences: but they fail. Others, through energy and effort, obtain the result
of Srotaäpanna..." "There are three actions: actions to be experienced in this life, in the next life, or
later. Does it happen that one who experiences the first one also experiences the other two? Yes,
when one obtains the quality of Arhat, the retribution of the other two actions occurs."
232. Hsüan-tsang translates: "The person who departs from the Path of Meditation," that is to say:
"who departs from the result of Arhat," for this result marks the end of the Path of Meditation on
the Truths.
233. That is to say, one who leaves the absorption in which he has "seen" the Truths (vi.28d).
234. Vyākhyā: In fact, action free from vitarka cannot have a retribution belonging to a lower stage
including vitarka and vicāra.732 Chapter Four
235. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 598c7: Daurmanasya arisen from the action of attention (manaskāra),
including strong imagination (vikalpa), is abandoned through detachment: but the same does not
hold for a retributive result.
236. Cittakkbepa = ummada (Aiguttara).
237. Paramartha adds: "And there are other causes.” Hsüan-tsang: "Trouble of the mind arises
from five causes: 1. retribution, 2. fear, 3. attack of demons....
238. Upadrava = attack of demons and the evil that results from it; compare Jätakamālā, 41.15.
According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 658a11.
239. On the amanuşyas, see Kofa, iv.75c-d, 97b, iii.99c-d; Kāraṇaprajñapti, p. 344 of Cosmologie
bouddhique.
Dīgha, iii.203, Milinda, p. 207, Sukhāvatīvyūha, Para. 39. Śikṣāsamuccaya, p. 351.
Abhisamālamkārāloka (ad Aşṭasāhasrikā, p. 383): pretadir amanuşyaḥ.
Pāṇini, ii.4.23.
240. The Vyākhyā quotes the Sûtra: Bhagavän Mithilikāyāṁ (?) viharati sma Mithilāmravane /
tena khalu punaḥ samayena Vasişthasagoträyā brāhmaṇyaḥ şaṭ putrāḥ kālagatāḥ / sā teşāṁ
kālakritayā nagnonmattā kṣiptacittā tena tenānunbiņdati... And the rest up to the conversation of
Väsişthi with her husband after the death of their seventh infant: "Formerly you were afflicted by
the death of your sons; now you are not afflicted. This is without doubt because you have eaten your
sons (nūnaṁ te putrās tvayā bhakṣitāḥ).” To which she answers (compare Therīgāthā, 314):
putrapautrasahasrāṇi jñātiasaṁghaśatāni ca /
dirghe'dhvani mayā brahman khāditāni tathā tvayā //
putrapautrasahasrāṇāṁ parimāṇaṁ na vidyate/
anyonyam khadyamānānāṁ tāsu tāsūpapattișu //
kah focet paritapyeta parideveta vā punaḥ /
jñātvā niḥsaraṇaṁ loke jāteś ca maraṇasya ca //
sāhaṁ niḥsaraṇaṁ jñātvājāteś ca maraṇasya ca /
na focāmi na tapyāmi kṛte buddhasya śäsane //
Read Vāsişthi (and not Väsiṣṭha) in the nice piece where the Blessed One praises the
universality of his preaching, Sutralamkāra, trans. Huber, p. 205.
241. The five fears are: ajīvikābhaya, aflokabhya (=akīrti), parişacchāradhyabhaya (=sabhāyāṁ
saṁkucitya), maraṇabhaya, durgatibhaya (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 386b21). See Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 46.
The readings of the Dharmasaṁgraha, 71, are capricious.
242. Dharmatābhijñatvät: "Everything that is impure (säsrava) is suffering, conditioned things are
impermanent, and the dharmas are unsubstantial."
243. According to the Jūänaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 973c2; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 609a1. In Vibhanga,
368, rāga, dveșa and moha are kasāvas. But Anguttara, i.112, distinguishes vanka, dosa and kasāva.
244. Color (kaşaya) is rañjanahetu, a cause of coloring, like attachment (räga) which, in fact,
"attaches" and "colors" (rafjayati).
245. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 600a26; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 589c16; Añguttara, ii.230; Dīgha, iii.230;
Atthasālini, p. 89; Netippakaraṇa, 158.184. Anguttara, iii.385: akaṇham asukkaṁ nibbānam
abhijayati.
246. Compare Yogastra, iv.7.
247. This is the answer of the third masters, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 591a15.
248. The same action "projects" an existence and the intermediate existence which leads to it
(iii.13a-b). There is no intermediate existence proceeding rebirth in Ārūpyadhātu.
249. The Vyakhya quotes the Sutra: Asti karma ſuklaṁśuklavipākaṁ tadyathā prathame dhyāne /
evaṁ yāvad bhavāgre.Footnotes 733
250. See iv.1. Vyākhyā: Saṁtānata etad vyavasthānam iti / ekasmin samtāne kuśalaṁ cākuśalaṁ ca
samudācaratīti kṛtvā kuśalam akuſaleņa vyavakiryate. On the consequences of this theory of mixing,
Anguttara, 1.249 (translated by Warren, p. 218).
251. By definition, absorption (samādhi), which is the opposite of evil (akusala), does not exist in
Kāmadhātu. It happens, only in Kamadhātu, that one cuts off the roots of good through false views
(mithyadṛṣṭi); but one can never root out false views by Right Views (samyādṛṣṭi).
252. The Theravādins, Kathāvatthu, vii.10, maintain that "supramundane" actions have
retribution.
253. The text has mahatyāṁ fünyatāyām, that is to say the Mabāfumyatärthasūtra (Vyākhyāá).
Madhyama, TD 1, p. 739b21: ekāntaſuklā ānanda afaikṣadharmā ekāntānavadyāḥ … (Majjhima,
iii.115 does not correspond).
254: Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 711c3; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 589c26. fukladharmāḥ katame / kuſalā dharmā
avyakṛtāś ca dharmāḥ.
255. The pure dharmas are not Dhātu, nor integral to the Dhātus (na dhātur na dhātuapatitāḥ). On
what engenders (janayati) and arrests (viruṇaddhi) the process (pravṛtti), see ii.6.
256. Each moment of the Path is a psychological complex that includes, among other mental states,
cetanā or "volition.” According to the definition, iv.lb, this cetanā is action.
The four dharmakṣāntis, vi.25c; detachment from Kāmadhātu, vi.49.
257. Vyakhyā: Na hi tasya (kufalasya) svabhāvaprahāṇam iti / präpticchedaḥ prahāṇam /
prahīṇasyāpi kufalasya saṁmukhībhāvāt / tadālambanaklefasya prahāṇāt tasya kuśalasya
prahāṇam bhavati / tadālambanaklefaprahāṇaṁ ca navamasya tadalambanakleśaprakārasaya
prahāṇe sati bhavatīti navamānantaryamāragacetanaiva kṛṣṇaśuklasya karmaṇaḥ kṣayāya bhavati /
tadā hi navamasya kleśaprakārasys präpticchedevisaṁyogapräptir utpadyate / tasya ca kṛṣṇaśuk-
lasya karmaṇo'nyasyāpi cānivṛtāvyākṛtasya säsravasya dharmasya visaṁyogaprāptir utpadyate.
258. Literally: "Action abandoned through Seeing is black; all other is black-white when it arises
from käma." Objection: One should say kāmāvacaraṁ dṛgheyaṁ kṛṣṇam: "Action of Kāmadhātu
which is abandoned through Seeing, is black"; in fact, there are actions abandoned through Seeing
which do not have a black retribution, namely certain actions of Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu.
Response: the qualifier kāmaja, arisen from kāma (that is to say from Kāmadhātu), refers to the
first pāda.
259. According to the principle, na dṛṣṭiheyam akliştam, i.40c-d.
260. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 449c2; Anguttara, i.273; Dīgha, iii.220. Suttanipāta, 700; Mahāvastu,
iii.397. Moneya is the quality of Muni or the action of a Muni (munitā vā munikarma vā; Childers
(Supplement, p. 617) "conduct worthy of a Muni." Rgāveda, x.136.3. Col. Jacob, Concordance, p.
748, for the value of muni in the Upanișads and the Gītā.
261. Masma is explained: muner idaṁ maunam. Bodhicaryāvatāra, p. 346, why the Buddha receives
the name of muni: threefold silence, defined as here, or silence of samāropa and apavāda.
262. This does not refer to all bodily and vocal actions that an Arhat can accomplish, but to actions
which are characterized as Arhat or Aśaikṣa (vi45). The actions in question are by their nature
avijňapti, non-information: the silence of the body is thus avijñapti-of-the-body characteristic of the
Arhat. Actions which are vijnapti (kāyavijñapti, vāgvijñapti) are necessarily impure (säsrava) and
one cannot attribute the quality of asaškṣatva to them. (See above).
263. Paramartha differs: "Action of the body and the voice are abstention by nature. Action of the
mind is exclusively cetană (volition); as it does not include vijnapti, one cannot, by knowing through
induction that it is abstention, say that it is silence."
264. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 454a16; Anguttara, i.272, Dīgha iii.219. tīņi soceyyāni käyasoceyyam
vacīsoceyyaṁ manosoceyyam.734 Chapter Four
265. Vivecana, Hsüan-tsang: to arrest, to cause to cease. To arrest persons who believe that one
obtains purity (fuddhidarfin) only by virtue of not speaking (tūṣṇimbhāvamätra) or through
ablutions (kayamaläpakarṣaṇa).
On "false silence" and the "silence of the Aryans," see Theragăthā, 650, Suttanipāta, 388,
Samyutta, ii.273,Anguttara, iv.153, 359, v.266, Mahāvagga, iv.1.13; Vanaparvan, 42.60: maunān na
so munir bhavati.
On ablutions, see Theragathā, 236, Udāna 19 (Udānavarga, xxxiii.14), Majjhima, i39;
Aryadeva, Cittavisuddhiprakarana.
Kosa, iv.86a-c (superstitions of the laity); v.7, 8 (filavrata).
266. Saṁyukta, TD 2, p. 94b16; Dīgha, iii.214, Anguttara, i.49, 52, etc.; Samyutta, v.75.
267. Bad volition, or bad action of the mind, is bad cultivation of the mind.
268. Mental action, manaḥkarman, is exclusively volition, cetanā, iv.lb.
269. Vyākhyā: Daṛṣṭāntikāḥ sautrāntaikaviśeṣā ity arthaḥ. See iv.78c-d where this doctrine is
attributed to the Sautrāntikas.
This discussion is taken from Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 587a7.
270. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 437b24 and following; compare Anguttara, v.292, Majjhima, iii.207. Our
Sūtra has: saṁcetanīyaṁ karma kṛtvopacitya narakeşüpapadyate / katham ca bhikṣavaḥ
saṁcetaniyaṁ karma kṛtaṁ bhavaty upacitam / iha bhikṣava ekatyaḥ saṁcintya trividhaṁ käyena
karma karoty upacinoti caturvidhaṁ vācā trividhaṁ manasā . . . / kathaṁ bhikṣavas trividham
manasā bhavati vyāpannacitto yāvan mithyādṛṣṭi[ka]ḥ khalu bhikṣava ihaikatyo bhavati viparī-
tadarsi...
This Sūtra does not mention any mental action apart from abhidhyā, etc.; thus it is abhidhyā, etc.
which is mental action.
271. Compare Majjhima, i.35, 279; Madhyama, TD 1, p. 790b18.
272. Mithyādṛṣṭi is defined iv.78b-c. It is the parama vajja, Visuddhimagga, 469; it produces all bad
dharmas, Majjhima, iii.52.
273. Madhyama, TD1, p. 437b28, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 274a6; Dīgha, iii.269. See also Manu, xii.2-7.
274. Hsüan-tsang adds: "light greed, etc."
275. Madyādivirati, that is to say madyatāḍanabandhanādivirati; compare Dīgha iii.176. Dānejyādi
(sbyin, mchod sbyin); adi refers to snapanodvartanavișama(?)hastapradānādi. Ijyā is almost a
synonym of dana; Hsüan-tsang has kung-yang- pūjā; snapana and udvartana can be acts of
pājā. Mahävyutpatti (Wogihara ed.) 245, 378-379 (snāpana, utsadana).
276. Priyavacanādi; ādi refers to dharmadefanāmārgakathanādi.
277. All of the following discussion is according to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 635a17.
278. The vijnapti (vocal action) by which I order a killing, panavijñapti, forms part of the
preparation (prayoga) of this killing and is not considered as the deed itself. It is not mauli vijñapti,
the principal vijnapti. The action of killing of which I am guilty and now endowed with is thus solely
avijñapti.
279. Paramārtha: "done in person." Hsüan-tsang: "Six evil deeds are certainly avijñapti; these [six],
accomplished in person, and adultery, are of two types."
280. Hsüan-tsang: "if there is death, etc.” The same holds for stealing, etc., as for killing.
281. Abstention from killing is a path of material action. When one undertakes the precepts
(samādānafīla), that is to say, the Prātimokṣa precepts, there is necessarily vijñapti (the declaration:
"I renounce killing"), for these precepts are always "undertaken from another” (parasmād ādīyate)
(iv.28). When one obtains a Dhyāna, which supposes the abandoning, at least provisionally, ofBuda (kuten talaga ka
200 gradual
Footnotes
735
the defilements of Kāmadhātu and of bad actions-one acquires the abstention from killing by this
very fact, without any vijňapti being necessary; the same holds when one obtains the pure precepts
(three parts of the Noble Path). This morality does not depend on being undertaken (samādāna); it
results from the very nature of things (dharmată): the possessor of a Dhyana possesses the
avijñapti which is the abstention from killing.
282. At the moment when the chief or principle action is created, an avijñapti arises which
continues and which is consecutive to this action; furthermore one can, after having committed the
action-after having killed the animal-commit actions analogous to this action-hitting the dead
animal, cutting his flesh, etc. (tasya karmapathasya anudharmam anusadṛśaṁ karma): each of these
actions is consecutive action.
283. The description which follows is according to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 583b12: "... . if, with a mind to
kill, he destroys the life of another (prāṇātipāta), the evil action of the body (kāyavijñapti) and the
avijnapti of this moment, are the killing properly so-called . . .
"
284. Principle action (the killing) is the achievement of the result of the preparatory action; he who
prepares the killing (yo hi prayujyate), but does not produce the killing (maulaṁ karmapathaṁ na
janayati), receives the "result of the preparation," but not the achievement, or completion, of this
result (tasya prayogaphalam asti na tu phalaparipūriḥ).
285. Vyākhyā: Iha kaścit parasvaṁ hartukāmo mañcãd uttiṣṭhati śastraṁ gṛhṇāti paragrham
gacchati supto na vety ākarṇayati parasvaṁ spṛśati yāvan na sthānāt pracyāvayati tāvat prayogaḥ /
yasmin tu kṣaṇe sthānāt pracyāvayati tatra yā vijñaptis tatkṣaṇikā cāvijñaptir ayaṁ maulaḥ
karmapathaḥ / dvābyāṁ hi kāraṇābhyām adattādānāvadyena spṛśyate prayogataḥ phalaparipūrtaš
ca / tataḥ param avijñaptikṣaṇāḥ prṣṭhaṁ bhavanti / yāvat tat parasvaṁ vibhajate vikrīņīte
gopayaty anukirtayati vā tāvad asya vijñaptikṣaṇā api prştham bhavanti.
286. Maraṇabhava is defined iii.13c-d.
287. Literally: "and that the killing is not destroyed."
288. Hsüan-tsang: hsi É.- uparata, nivṛtta; Paramārtha: wei she wei hsi ***.
289. Prayogaphala = maulakarman. The pathway of the principal action thus takes place prāṇino
mṛtāvasthāyām.
290. Vyākhyā: Yathā parasvaṁ hartukāmaḥ kāryasiddhaye parakiyam hṛtvā tena pašunā balim
kuryāt...
291. Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 576a10) refutes these objections.
292. See Atthasālinī, p. 102.
293. One of the sources of the following definitions is the Karmaprajñapti (Mdo 72) fol. 210a; see
also Vibhāṣā, TD 27,] P. 605c4.
294. This is the classic example. See the interesting story, Chavannes, Cinq cent contres, iii.287, and
the references.
295. See above note 228. The Karmaprajñapti attributes the killing to the parents to the Brāhmanas
of the West called mchu-skyed. Mchu gives oștha, tuṇḍa or maghā which is a Nakṣatra: perhaps
Maghaja or Maghābhava.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 605c16. There is, in the West, some Mlecchas called Mu-chia who have
this opinion, who establish this system: "Those who kill their decrepit and sick fathers and mothers
obtain merit and not transgression. Why? A decrepit father has ruined organs and is no longer
capable of drinking and eating; if he dies, he will obtain new and strong organs, he will drink anew
warm milk; one who has sickness has many painful sensations: dead, he will be freed from them.
Thus he who kills them does not commit any transgression." Such killing arises from ignorance.
Mu-chia = Maga, or more properly Magu and Muga under the influence of the initial labial [this736 Chapter Four
according to S. Lévi]. On the same Mages, see below note 302.
The Mahāyāna admits that one may kill a person who is going to commit a mortal (änantarya)
transgression, Sikşāsamuccaya, p. 168.
296. Compare Jataka, Fausboll, vi.208, 210; Nariman in Revue Histoire des Religions, 1912, i.89
and JRAS. 1912, 255; J. Charpentier, in the Zeitschrift für Indologie und Iranistick, ii. p. 145
(Leipzig, 1923), which compares the Kambojas, pious killers of kitas, patangas, bhekas, kimis and
makkhikās, to the Zoroastrians of Vendidad 14.5-6 and of Herodotus, i.140.
297. According to Hsüan-tsang, this is the opinion of certain Tirthikas; according to Paramārtha,
the opinion if the Tirthika P'in-na-ko(Vinnaka?). Hsüan-tsang: "Serpents . . . harm humans; he
who kills them produces great merit; sheep... are essential to nourishment: killing them is not a
transgression."
On the killing of animals and the use of meat and fish, see 1. the Fifth and Sixth Pillar Edicts of
Aśoka; 2. the "pure three," adittha, asuta, aparisańkita, Majjhima, i.368, Anguttara, iv.187, Dulva,
III. fol. 28 (apud Rockhill, Life, p. 38 note); for fish only, Mahāvagga, vi.31, 14 and Cullavagga,
vii.3.15 (schism of Devadatta); in Dulva, IV, fol. 453, Devadatta reproaches the Buddha for
authorizing "pure" meat; Religieux éminents, p. 48, Takakusu, I-tsing, p. 46, 58, etc. The meat of
humans, of elephants, etc., is forbidden; 3. E. W. Hopkins, “The buddhistic rule against meat,”
J.Am.Or.Soc. 1906, 455-464.
It is forbidden to cut off the leaves of a tree (above iv.35a-b), to trample down green herbs
(tiņāni), or to destroy "living beings having an organ” (ekindriya jīva). Mahāvagga,iii.1.
298. Vyākhyā: Anyalābhasyänthe parasvaṁ haranti yathāśvaḥārikāḥ.
299. The original is furnished us by the Syādvādamañjarī (Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series 1900, p. 32)
which shows the lack of authority of Brahamanical texts. These texts say: na hiṁsyāt sarvabhūtāni,
but they order the killing of five hundred and seven animals in the Aśvamedha; they say: nănṛtaṁ
brüyāt, and then explain the five types of lies that are permitted; the same: adattādānam anekadhā
nirasya paścãd uktam / yady api brāhmaṇo hathena parakīyam ādatte balena vā tathāpi tasya
nādattādānam yataḥ sarvam idaṁ brāmaṇebhyo dattam / brāhmaṇānāṁ tu daurbalyād vṛṣalāḥ
paribhuñjate / tasmād apaharan brāhmaṇaḥ svam ādatte / svam eva brāhmaṇo bhunkte svaṁ
vaste evaṁ dadātīti. Compare Manu, i.101 (Bhāgavata Purāņa, 4.22.46). The reading dharbalyāt
(Manu: änṛśamsyāt) is certain: dmas pa..
300. Hsüan-tsang: Persians praise abrahmacarya with their mothers, etc.
301. Gosava, transcribed by Paramartha (ch'u-so-p'o, translated by ba lan 'bran, “born of
bulls."
The Vyakhyā has: Tatra mohaprädhänyād upaiti mätram abrahmacaryarthe / upasvasāram
upaitīti vartate / upasvasāram upaiti bhaginīm ity arthaḥ / upasagotrām upaiti samānagotrām ity
arthaḥ / upahā (?) yajamānaḥ. It is clear that Yasomitra did not understand this Vedic text very
well.
The helpfulness of M. Keith has permitted us to discover Gosava in the Jaiminiya Brāhmaṇa,
ii.133: tasya vratam / upa mātaram iyād upa svasāram upa sagotrām vişṭhā vindet tat tad
vitişțhetānuduho ha lokaṁ jayati. Here we have Vasubandhu's source. M. W. Caland consented to
explain and to complete the translation that he has given to this passage (Jaiminiya in Auswahl, p.
157). Apastambha Srauta xxii.13: tenestva samvatsaram pasuvrato bhavet/upāvahāyodakam...;
another Sūtra has upanigāhya pibet: M. Caland corrects upanigāhya to upāvahāya, “to lower."
Viştha would be "natural need,” viştheta would signify "to spread the legs." We would thus have:
"In whatever place the need grasps him, he satisfies it." The end signifies: "He seizes the world of
the bulls."
This translation is with reference to the Tibetan version. Vidhi-mat qualifies the water: one
cannot translate "the ritual water." Better to understand this as "he who has undertaken the rite
drinks the water...
99Hsüan-tsang: "Women and men undertake the vow of bulls (govrata); they sip water; they cut
grass with their teeth; they either stay in one place, or they go about; without distinguishing who is
their parent or who is distant from them, as they encounter them, they unite with them."
Paramartha: "Furthermore, as in the Gosava sacrifice,the other women sip water, chew grass;
men go about, taking their parent, or taking their daughter, aunt, elder or younger daughters,
women of the same clan, etc.”
Footnotes 737
302. This is the opinion of the Tirthika P'in-na-ko (Paramärtha). Hsüan-tsang adds: “a ladder, a
road, or a ship".
According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 606a16: "In the West, there are some Mlecchas called Mu-chia
who have this opinion, who establish this system that there is no transgression in having
intercourse... Why? Because their women are like dried beef …..
"
Compare Divyāvadāna, p. 257 (xviii. story of Dharmaruci): panthāsamo matṛgrāmaḥ
tirthasamo 'pi ca matṛgrāmaḥ / yatraiva hi tīrthe pitā snāti putro'pi tasmin snäti . . . api ca
pratyanteşu janapadeşu dharmataivaişā yām eva pitädhigacchati tâm eva putro'py adhigacchati...
303. This is the stanza: na narmayuktaṁ vacanam hinasti … Syādvādamañjarī, p. 32; Mbh. i.82.16,
etc.; compare Gautama, v.24; Vasiṣṭhasmṛti, xvi.30. Max Muller, India, What can it ... p. 272: venial
untruths.
304. Nānāvāsa (translated literally by the Lotsava, gnas sna tshogs and by Paramārtha, pu kung
chu, translated by Hsüan-tsang as chieh-t'an “precept alter," which is elsewhere the
equivalent of sīmā, see iv.39b) is explained in the Vyākhyā: Nānāvāsaṁ pravišatīti maṇḍalam
pravišatīty arthaḥ / nānāvāsa bi tasmin mahāsīmāmaṇḍale bhavanti.
305. For the Sanskrit sources, A Fragment of the Sanskrit Vinaya; Bhikṣuṇīkarmavācana, Bulletin
of the School of Oriental Studies, L.iii (1920). For the Pāļi sources, see for example K. Seidenstucker,
Pali Buddhismus (German Pali Society); Kern, Manual, p. 78.
One should understand that preparatory action lasts up to the last moment of the third
karmavācana.
306. Paramartha translates: "Until the moment when one says the four nifrayas (i), all vijñapti
and avijñapti dependent (i) on this principal action, as long as the series is not cut off,-is
consecutive action." Hsüan-tsang is also obscure: chih (yavat) shuo(aroc) ssu-ip¶|k(catvāro
niśrayāḥ) chi(ca) yu (seşa, anya) if(niśraya) ch'ien A (prădurbhavanti ?).
Vyākhyā; Catvāro niśrayāś cīvarapinḍapātaśayyasanaglānapratyayabhaiṣajyalakṣaṇāḥ.
307. Note of Saeki: A parityāga thought is a tatkṣaṇasamutthāna cause (iv.10) which is
simultaneous to the deed itself.
Parityāga, yons-su 'dor ba, translated by Hsüan-tsang as wu-so-ku, "not to regard, to
neglect," is a euphemism for "to destroy, kill." See below note 313. Compare Atthasālinī, p. 91:
gabbham...pāpakena manasānupekkhako hoti, "to not be indifferent with regard to the embryo"
that is, "to desire its destruction."
"Mind of violence," parușacitta; Paramartha: she,rough, harsh, uneven, karkafa; Hsüan-
tsang: ts'u (audārika) as in pāruşya.
308. Adhiṣṭhāna = adhikaraṇa, vişaya.
Atthasālini, p. 101.
309. Vyākhyā: Nāmakāyādhiṣṭhānā mṛṣāvādādayo vāg nāmni pravartata iti kṛtvā. See Vyākhyā ad
iii.30c-d.
310. See p.
311. This refers to the principal action itself.
312. Paramartha: "If a person has the intention 'I shall kill so-and-so'; and if, with respect to such a
one, there is the notion of 'such a one'; and if he kills such a one and not another by error, then by
643.738 Chapter Four
reason of these three factors the killing is the action itself."
Samcintya = samcicca, Mahāvyutpatti, 245.68; Pär. iii. Karmaprajñāpti, Mdo 62, chap. xi.
Buddhaghosa, Atthasalini, p. 97 (=Sumangalavilasini, p. 69); Sp. Hardy, Manual, p. 478; Bigandet
(1914), ii. 195. Five things are necessary for killing: pāṇa, pāṇasaññitā, vadhakacitta, upakkama, and
marana. The killing itself can be sähatthika, āṇattika, nissaggika, thāvara, vijjāmaya, and iddhimaya.
(See the translation of Maung Tin and Mrs. Rhys Davids, Expositor, 129: vijjā = art, iddhi =
potency).
313. Hsüan-tsang: "There is killing even when there is doubt: a person, with respect to the object
that he desires to kill, is in doubt: 'Is this a living being or not? And, if it is living, is it such a one or
another?' then he makes the decision: Whether this is one or the other, I shall kill him': by reason
of this parityāga thought, if he kills a living being, he commits the action." Paramartha: .by
reason of these three factors, there is the action (above, note 312). If this is the case,then a person
can be in doubt and kill (=commit the transgression of murder): 'Is this a living being or not? Is this
such a one or not?' This person, with respect to the object to be killed, is determined to kill:
Whether this be one or the other, I shall kill him.' There is thus production of a parityāga thought.
If he kills, he obtains the transgression of killing."
The Tibetan gives us: "There is only a parityāga thought" or better: "He has indeed a parityāga
thought."
We do not see how parityāga differs from māraṇa.
314. The skandhas are momentary, that is, perish in and of themselves (svarasena vinaśvara). How
can their destruction be caused by an external cause? (See ii. trans. p. 244, and iv.2b.)
315. Prāna depends on the mind since it does not exist among persons who have entered into the
two absorptions of unconsciousness (ii.42).
Atthasālinā, p. 97: prāņa = satta, jīvitendriya.
316. An objection may be formulated against the first definition that there is no āśvasapraśvāsa
during the first four periods of embryonic life. Thus killing an embryo during this period will not be
an action in and of itself. Hui-hui quotes the Wu-fen chieh-pen (a Mahīśāsaka Prātimokṣa, TD 22,
number 1422) which makes the embryo up to the forty-ninth day the manuşyavigraha of Pārājika
iii (See Prātimokṣa of the Sarvāstivādins by Finot-Huber, J.As. 1913, ii.477, and Bhikṣuṇī-
karmavācana, p. 138).
317. In fact, there is no living being, prāṇin, that can be called dead.
318. Vyakhya: Pudgalaprastisedhaprakaraṇe. This refers to the last chapter of the Kofa. (The
passage referred to by Vasubandhu is translated by Stcherbatski, The soul theory of the Buddhists, p.
853; Hsüan-tsang's translation, TD 29, p. 152b.)
319. Quoted ad ii.45a (trans. p. 233) and ciii.3c.
320. Milinda pp. 84, 158; Kathāvatthu, xx.1. Sutrākṛtānga,ii.6, 26 (Sacred Books, 45, p. 414), also ii.2
(five types of killing). See above note 3. Nirgrantha = nagnāṭaka.
321. The Tibetan adds: "In the same way the sufferings of illness and the herbs which cause death
are guilty" (?? nad pa la gnod pa dan si ba na sman pa rnams. Reading doubtful). Not in the Chinese
translations.
322. Atthasālini, p. 97-98. Mahāvyutpatti, 281.28-33: adattasya pañcamāṣakādeḥ steyacittena
manuşyagatiparigrhitasya tatsaṁjñayā haraṇahāraṇayor datenäpi. Bhikṣuṇīkarmavācana, p. 137-8
antataḥ phalatuşam api parakīyaṁ nādātavyaṁ kaḥ punar vādaḥ pañcamāsikam uttara-
pancamasikam và ..
323. Vyākhyā: Nänyatra saṁjñāvibhramät/yadi devadattadravyaṁ haramīti yajñadattadravyaṁ
harati nādattādānaṁ ity abhiprāyaḥ. Correct: anyatra saṁjñāvibhramāt. Compare p. 76, line 12,
anyatrājñānāt; p. 65, line 4, anyatra glänyāt; Para. 4, anyatrābhimāanāt, etc.1
Footnotes 739
324. See iv.121, a different doctrine.
325. Opinion of the second masters of Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 585a7; an erroneous opinion, for, as they
admit, the guardians of a Stūpa would not steal what belongs to the Stūpa.
326. Vyākhyā: Parivartakaṁ mṛtasya bhikṣof cīvarādidravyam (parivatteti, "to exchange,"
Cullavagga, vi.19?). According to the Tibetan, to take the goods of a dead person (fi ba'i nor phrogs
na); according to Paramärtha and Hsüan-tsang, to take the goods of a hui-ch'uan,that is, of
a pratikränta (Mahävyutpatti, 130.17).
327. The Sangha of the parish, Hsüan-tsang: chieh-nei seng ; Paramārtha: chih pu kung chu
jen £T##^= nānāvāsagatāḥ; Tibetan: 'tshams kyi nan du gtogs pa rnams = antaḥsimā-
paryapannāḥ.
328. Atthasalini, p. 98. According to the Mahayana (i.e., the Yogācāra) quoted by Saeki, there are six
prohibitions: 1. avişaya, agamya: males, and women such as one's mother, etc.; 2. amārga ananga:
only the yonimārga; 3. asamaya: when the woman is having her period (hui-hsia), is
pregnant, is nursing a baby, has undertaken the Upaväsa, or is sick; 4. asthāna; 5. "without
measure," mānam atikramya gacchati; and 6. ayoga: "not conforming to the rules of the world.".
329. Hsüan-tsang adds: . . . and the rest to: protected by the king." See the classic list
Mahävyutpatti, 281.251 (pitrrakṣitä, etc.).
330. Mahāvyutpatti, 281.26-27: praviṣṭaḥ sparśasvīkṛtau / prasrāvakaraṇe prasrāvakaraṇasya
mukhe varcomārge vā. Compare Sikṣāsamuccaya, p. 76: evam svastrīşv apy ayonimārgeṇa
gacchataḥ; Suttavibhanga, i.9.3: angajātena vaccamaggam . . . passāvamaggam . . . mukham … ..
331. Saeki glosses the hui-ch'u (distant place, etc.) of Hsüan-tsang by a-lien-jo aranya;
Paramartha: "place where one cultivates brahmacarya.” “Open place” is doubtless abhyavakāša.
332. Vyākhyā: Garbhinigamane garbhoparodhaḥ/apyayanti (? see iv.103) stanyopabhogāvastha-
putrikā strī / abrahmacarye hi tasyāḥ stanyaṁ kṣīyate / bālakasya vā puṣṭaye tatstanyam bhavati.
333. = poṣadhikā, iv.28 = sārakkhā of Atthasālinī, p. 98. Hsüan-tsang: "When the woman has
undertaken the upavāsa.” Šikṣāsamuccaya, p. 76: evam upavāsasthāsu ... See the Sanskrit
commentary on the Uvāsagadasão, ed. Hoernle, p. 11, on the laws of marriage among the Jains.
334. Hsüan-tsang adds: “And vice versa. The same if one were to be mistaken with respect to the
path, the time, etc."
335. Vyākhyā: Anyasmin vastuni prayogo'bhipreto'nyac ca vastu pribhuktam.
336. The version of Paramārtha: “Lying is saying this discourse with another mind in order to
explain the meaning" (although in the kārikā we have: "indeed lying to another ...").
337. Hsüan-tsang: To which time period does the expression "who understands the sense"
(arthābhijñā) refer to? Should we understand "he who understands at the present time [through
manovijñāna] what he has heard?" Or should we understand: "he who is capable of presently
understanding what he has presently heard [through the srotravijñāna]?” What consequences
do
these two solutions lead to? In the first hypothesis, the sense of the discourse, the object of mental
consciousness and vocal vijñapti [which the hearer misunderstands], would disappear at the same
time as the auditive consciousness [which is mistaken], and the action will only be avijnapti [since
the mental consciousness has not yet arisen]. In the second hypothesis, this objection does not hold,
but as he does not understand the sense, how, at the moment when he understands, can he be said to
be "capable of understanding?" The best explanation is that "he who is capable of understanding" is
one in whom there are no causes of confusion, and in whom the auditive consciousness has already
arisen. One should explain the text in a manner that does not lead to objections.
338. Dirgha, TD 1, p. 50b27; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 861b20; Anguttara, ii.246, iv.307; Majjhima, iii.29;
Dīgha, iii.232: cattāro anariyavohārā: adiṭṭhe diṭṭhavāditā, assute sutavāditā, amute mutavāditā,740 Chapter Four
aviññāte viññātavāditā. Apare pi cattāro anariyavobārā: adiṭṭhavădită... (Compare Majjhima, i
135, quoted verbatim in Vijñānakāya, fol. 12b, which, like the Pali sources, places vijñāta after
mata.)
Buddhism employs the traditional phraseology (Upanishads) and is at great pains to interpret
it.
339. The Vyākhyā (with an unclear reading) gives Mähakimätar. In Saṁyutta, iv.72, the hearer of
this discourse is Mālunkyaputta (Māluṁkyā). Tibetan: mchod byed kyi ma can. Paramărtha:
mo-lo-chih-mu, which supposes a reading Māhakimätar; P'u-kuang: man-mu✪(man:
long hair, etc.) which gives Mother Mālā, or Mother Alakī, or even Mallikāmätar (Mahāvyutpatti,
240.14: man-hua- Mallika; for the different Mallikäs, see Kern, Manual, p. 40. Hsüan-tsang:
ta-mut="he who has for his mother the Great One (Mahallakimätar?)." For mchod byed kyi ma
can, compare Sarad Chandra Das: mchod ldan ma = mahilā (from maha, religious festival = mchod)
[The remarks of S. Lévi and J. Przyłuski have been used for this note.]
Majjhima, i.135, iii.261 adds pattam pariyesitam anuvicaritam manasā (na upādiyisāmi na ca
me tannissitaṁ viññānaṁ bhavissati) to diṭṭham sutam mutam viññātam.
340. Samyutta, iv. 72, only gives three synonyms: atthi te tattha chando vā rāgo vā peman ti/ no
hetam bhante. The stanzas which follow (iv.72-76), which are Theragāthā, 794, are quoted by
Samghabhadra, TD 29, p. 579a18.
Hsüan-tsang gives alaya and nikanti in transcription (ni-yen-ti); compare Dhammapada, 411
and Commentary to 348 (Fausboll, p. 413: älayaṁ nikantim ajjhesanam parivuṭṭhānaṁ gāhaṁ
parāmāsaṁ tanham, Hsüan-tsang has tṛṣṇä in place of räga and places tṛṣṇä after preman.
341. Paramartha and Hsüan-tsang have only: yan manaḥpratyakṣībhūtaṁ tad vijñātam.
342. The Yogācāras (Vyākhyā): Yat pratyakṣīkṛtaṁ cakṣuşā …….
343. Vyākhyā: Pratyātaṁ pratisaṁveditaṁ sukhādy asamāhitena cittena / adhigatam samāhitena
laukikenaive na lokottareņa / laukikavyavahārādhikärät. That which is known in pure, or
supramundane absorption is not vijñāta, but jñāta.
344. The problem discussed in this paragraph is also treated by Buddhaghosa (Atthasālini, pp.
90-95). There are many points of contact between the two presentations: a monk can lie through
his silence, and a possessor of magical powers can kill an embryo; thus one can commit
trangressions of the voice and the body by means of the mind.
345. Vācā parākrameta = vācā paraṁ mārayet: when one kills by speech.
346. This is the story of the Dandaka Forest, etc., empty of living beings through the anger of the
Rşis (Majjhima, i378; Upalisútra, quoted by Vasubandhu, Vimsika, 20, Muséon, 1912, i.) which
proves the gravity of mental action (see below iv.105a-b), Milinda, p. 130. For the mention of this
episode in the Saddharmasmṛtyupasthāna and the references in the Rāmāyaṇa, see S. Lévi, “Pour
l'histoire du Rāmāyaṇa,” J.As. 1918, i97. In the Rāmāyaṇa, the Daṇḍaka forest was depopulated
through the curse of the Rşi Uśanas.
Vasubandhu, in Vimfaka, 20c-d, proves that demonic beings would not intervene (see below
note 348).
347. In fact, in the Bhikṣuposadha, the Vinayadhara asks (anufräv): "Are you pure?" (kaccit[s]-
thaparisuddhāḥ). If a Bhikşu does not declare his transgression (satīm āpattim) and by this very
silence acquiesces (adhiväsayatı), he lies (mṛṣāvādī bḥavet). Compare the Pratimokşa edited by L
Finot, J.As. 1913, p. 476, 488 (with the reading: taträyuşmataḥ pṛcchāmi kaccit sthātra
parisuddhāḥ). Mahāvagga, ii.3.
348. "This is a difficulty to be resolved by the Vaibhāşikas."
Samghabhadra explains: In fact (arthatas), the Rșis ordered (ājñāpitāras) the killing. Some
demonic beings (amanuşya), knowing (avetya) their sinful intention of destroying living beings
(sattvaparityagapravytta päpäfaya), came to the Rşis. How did the Rşis manifest (vijlapti) theirFootnotes
741
intention? By reason of their anger, they modified their bodies and their voices; if they cursed, there
was certainly movement (cesta) of the body and voice. Some other masters say that all avijňapti of
the sphere of Kamadhātu does not depend on a vijñapti. For example, the Five (pañcaka) in
obtaining the result at the same time as the Prātimokṣa discipline (above p. 592): in this same way a
bad avijñapti can arise without there being a vijñapti. Would one say that the Five previously
created vijnapti? It would also be the same in other cases. So too in the case of the Rşis. With respect
to lying at the confession ceremony (poṣadhamṛṣāvāda), the fact that the guilty monk
(aparifuddha) enters the assembly, sits down, and remains there as he should (svam īryapāthaṁ
kalpayatı), and says what he should say, signifies that there was for him a vijñapti previous [to the
moment when he acquiesces by his silence]. (Vyākhyā; Samghabhadra, TD 29, p. 580a7).
349. Atthasālini, p. 99.
350. In Atthasālini, p. 100, pharusā vācă is a curse or malediction, words "by which one does violence
to oneself or to others" (yāya attānaṁ pi paraṁ pi pharusaṁ karoti). Buddhaghosa gives some
examples of mental curses: a mother desires that an enraged buffalo crush the child that goes into
the woods in spite of her prohibitions against him doing so, or that the house collapse on her
children; the school master desires the death of his lazy students. In these cases, there is no pharusā
vācă. But on the contrary, there is pharusā vācā when one says "Sleep well" to a person that one
wants to assassinate.
351. Manu, xii.7: anibaddhapralāpa.
352. This monk is a mithyājīvin (iv.86b). Mithyājīva is defined by the Vyākhyā as kuhanā lapanā
naimittikatā naişpeşikatā. Wogihara (Bodhisattvabhūmi, Leipzig, 1908) has a long note on these
four terms and quotes the definition that the Vyākhyā gives here of the term lapanā: lapanāṁ
karotīti läbhayafaskāmatayā sevābhidyotikāṁ vācaṁ niścārayatīty arthaḥ: it would thus be
appropriate to translate lapanā by “flattery," as do Paramärtha and Hsüan-tsang. But the sources
quoted by Wogihara (namely TD 26, number 1537, the Dharmaskandha, etc.) show that they refer
to a monk who flaunts his own merits. See Majjhima, iii.75; Vibhanga, 352, commented on in
Visuddhimagga p. 22 and following, JPTS. 1891, 79.
353. Laulya (Sikşāsamuccaya, p. 69).
354. Mahāvastu, ii.355: ye saṁgaṇikārāmāḥ … … . ; Divya, 464.19; Majjhima, iii.110; Childers, p. 447.
´The Atthasālinī, p. 100, gives the recitation of the battle of the Bhāratas and the kidnapping of Sită
as examples of samphappaläpa.
99
355. Tibetan: "... are endowed with naiskramya, are not endowed with stegs-snags"; Hsüan-tsang:
come from out of naiskramya, are capable of producing naiskramya, do not prepare a defiled
mind.” Paramärtha gives the original of stegs-snags as mithyā-rasa. Nekkhamma is opposed to
samganika in Majjbima, ii110. See iip.
356. Vyakhya: Avaha= därikäyā dārakagṛhāgamanam; vivāha = dārakasya därikāgṛhāgamanam; or
rather, according to others, äāvāha = praveśanaka (free union?), vivāha = parinayana. Compare
Childers, āvahana, vivāhana, Senart, Piyadasi, i.203 (marriage of a son or daughter)-
Mahävyutpatti, 223.246-7 (āvāha = bag ma gton ba = to give a daughter in marriage; āvāha = bag ma
len pa = to take a woman); 281.261-262 (where the meanings are reversed).
357. Atthasālini, p. 101: aho vata idam mam'assā ti.
358. The translation of Paramartha and Hsüan-tsang.
So'bhidhyām loke prahāya vigatābḥidhyena cetasã bahulaṁ viharati / vyāpādaṁ styānamid-
dham auddhatyakaukṛtyaṁ vicikitsaṁ loke prahāya tīrṇakānkṣo bhavati tīrṇavicikitso'kathaṁkathi
kuśaleṣu dharmeșu / sa pañca nīvaraṇāni prahāya . . . Saṁyukta, TD 2, p. 207b12. Dīgha, iii.49,
Majjhima, iii.3, Anguttara, ii.210; quoted and commented on in Vibhanga, p. 252 where abhidhyā is
explained as rāga sārāga, etc. It results from this text that the term abhidhyā is synonymous with
kāmacchanda, the first nivarana. On the nīvaraṇas, see Kofa, v.59.742 Chapter Four
359. Manu, xii.5: manasāniṣṭacintanam.
360. Atthasālini, p. 101: apravināsāya manopadosalakkhano... aho vatayam ucchijjeyya vinasseyyā
ti.
361. Atthikavāda is opposed to năstidṛṣṭi (Majjhima, i.515).
As the Bhasya shows, mithyadṛṣṭi is the ditthivipatti of the Puggalapaññatti, a doctrine
condemned in the Sūtra as belonging to Ajita Kesakambali (Dīgha i.55, Majjhima, i.515, TD 2, p.
109a22, Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 1027b17, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 505a6, treatise "Refutation of the
Pudgala," trans. Hsüan-tsang, TD 29, p. 152).
Pāļi sources, Kathāvatthu, xiv.8-9, whose commentary quotes notably Majjhima, i.388, and
Samyutta, iv.307, where filavrataparāmarfa is designated a micchäditthi (Kofa, v.7) punished by
hell or by an animal existence (The same in Theragāthā, 1091, Commentary, on the realm of
rebirth of the person who believes that the doers of karma are reborn in heaven). But Atthasālinī, p.
358, distinguishes micchādiṭṭhi niyatā (=nāstidṛṣṭis śubhāśubhe of the Abhidharma) from the other
micchādiṭṭhis (see below note 438), and, p. 101, teaches that it is solely through the negation of
action, etc, that the kammapatha of micchādiṭṭhi is realized, not by other wrong views (The
Expositor translates:... kammapathabhedo hoti na aññadiṭṭhihi “the distinctive stage of the course
of action is reached by the views: there is no result... and not by other views"; kammapathabheda,
"realization of the deed itself," should be understood as vacībheda, “words").
362. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 598a24. Why not consider volition, cetanā; as a deed in and of itself? Cetanā
is action. What is called deed, is where the cetana goes... The same way that where the King goes is
called the King's Road, but the King is not the road. The dharma which coexists with the cetanā
can serve as a road for the cetand and will thus be called a road of action (=the deed itself). But in the
case where one causes another to kill, much time can pass between the order to kill and the killing
itself: thus if the cetanā for the killing has disappeared, how can one say that the dharma (the action
of killing) was a road of the cetanā? Let us say, rather, that the dharma which can coexist with a
cetană is a road of action. But two cetanãs do not coexist.
363. When preparatory action or consecutive action are themselves deeds (above p. 644), it is by
virtue of their characteristics, and not through their connection with another action.
364. The roots of good cannot be cut off in a definitive manner (ii.36c-d, trans. p. 210).
365. Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 925a12; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 182b22.
366. Paramārtha: “the good (śubha) of Kāmadhātu obtained at birth."
367. Vyākhyā: Anāsravālambanā visabhāgadhātvālambanā ca yā mithyādṛṣṭiḥ sā saṁprayo-
gamatrena dharmeşv anušete nālambanataḥ / tasmād asau durbalā.
368. Vyākhyā: Evaṁ tu varṇayanti vaibhāṣikāḥ. By using the word evam, the author indicates that
he approves of this.
369. Paramārtha: Pi-p'o-she chia-lan-t'a EDM. Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 925a18;
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, P. 182a16.
370. The MSS of the Vyākhyā reads aṇusahagata which the Lotsava translates literally: phra mo dan
lhan tu gyur ba; Hsüan-tsang: wei-chü-hsing, and Paramārtha: ts’ui hsi heng sui;
but aṇusahagata is explained by the Vyākhyā as mṛdu-mṛdu "weak-weak." In his discussion of the
pratyayas (ii61c), Sambhabhadra (TD 29, p. 440b3) criticizes the Sthaviras' doctrine of
anusabagatakufalamüla (sui-chü-shan-ken); this is the Pāli term, Samyutta, iii.130,
Kathāvatthu, p. 215. Kośa, ii. trans. p. 255.
371. See elsewhere ii.36c-d, p. 210.
372. On the expression vyutthana, ii.44a-b, p. 227.373. The person who has undertaken the precepts with a weak-weak mind loses the precepts when
he loses (tyāga) or breaks (samuccheda) this weak-weak mind which is associated (samprayukta)
with a weak-weak root of good (Vyākhyā andHsüan-tsang).
Footnotes 743
374. Vyākhyā: Aciropapannasya devaputrasya trīņi cittāni samudācaranți kuto'ham kutropapannah
kena karmaṇā.
375. See iv.80d. According to Vibhanga, 340, āśaya does not mean intention in general, but an
attitude with respect to philosophical problems: to believe that the world is eternal... to believe in
the survival of the Tathagata... to grasp the Middle Way between bhavadiṭṭhi and vibhavadiṭṭhi.
376. The Bhadanta Ghoşaka (gloss of Saeki). Vyākhyā: Tatra višeṣeṇa tārkikatvāt.
377.Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 997a20, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 767b28. The minimum number of eight
organs (five organs of sense, plus kāya, jīvita, and manas) shows that the faculties of faith, etc., can
exist in Pūrvavideha.
378. The term is explained in the Vyākhyā ad iv.100: Satkāyadṛṣṭyādiṣu pañcașu caritaḥ pravṛtto
dṛṣṭicaritaḥ dṛṣṭir vā caritam asyeti dṛṣṭicaritaḥ / sa hy ūhāpohasāmathyād anyaṁ śāstāraṁ
mārgāntaraṁ ca grāhayituṁ samartho na tṛṣṇācaritaḥ. Nettippakaraṇa, pp. 7, 109.
379. Gūḍha = pracchanna (Vyākhyā). Hsüan-tsang translates: profound (shen).
380. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, 1
.P. 183a4.
381. Vyākhyā: Pratisaṁdhitāni pratisaṁdhikṛtāni pratisaṁdhitāni / prātipādikadhātuḥ / pra-
tisambitänity apare pathanti.
382. Hsüan-tsang: It happens that, relative to cause and result, there either arises doubt: "Perhaps
cause and result exist," or a right view: "Cause and result certainly exists, it is false that they do not
exist." At this moment the roots of good arise again. When the possession (prāpti) of good is
produced, one says that this person has again taken up the roots of good. Certain masters say that
the nine categories successively arise again. But the [Vaibhāşikas] say that one again takes up at one
and the same time all the roots of good: it is however later, and little by little, that they manifest
themselves, in the same way that one gets rid of illness at one stroke, but one only gradually regains
his powers.
383. The Aştasahasrikā, p. 336, explains why: anantaryakārī ānantaryacittenāvirahito bhavati yāvan
maraṇāvasthāyāṁ na tac cittaṁ śaknoti prativinodayitum . . . Kathāvatthu, xiii.3.
384. Madhyama, 37.
385. Hetubalena signifies sabhāgahetubalena (ii.52a). This is the case where one spontaneously
(svayam) adheres to false views. Pratyayabalena, that is to say, through the force of the words of
another (parato ghoșa); svabalena = svatarkabalena, through the force of personal reasoning.
Parabalena = parataḥ śrutabalena.
386. See above note 375.
387. The Samyutta, v.206, distinguishes a micchādiṭṭhika from a micchādiṭṭhikammasamādāna. See
iv.96.
388. See Puggalapaññatti, p. 21, the definition of silavipanna (sabbaṁ dussilyam = sīlavipattı) and
diṭṭhivipanna (sabbā micchādiṭṭhi = dițțhivipatti). In the Samādhirāja quoted in the Bodhi-
caryāvatāra viii.10, dṛṣṭivipanna = kumārgaprapanna.
389. The six masters (fästar), examples of bad teachers (ayathārtha) (Vyākhyā, i. p. 8.7), are Pūraṇa
Kāśyapa, Maskarin Gośālīputra, Saṁjayin Varațīputra, Ajita Keśakambalaka, Kakuda Kätyāyana
and Nirgrantha Jñätiputra.
Mahävyutpatti, 179 (see the numerous Tibetan and Chinese equivalents in the editions of
Wogihara and Sasaki); Divyāvadāna, p. 143 (Vairaṭṭāputra, Keśakambalaka), Burnouf, Intro-
duction, 162, Lotus, 450.744 Chapter Four
390. Absent in the two Chinese versions. See iv.99c.
391. One should exclude illicit sexuality always accomplished in person with a defiled mind.
392. One can criticize this redaction. Does it refer to actions committed in person? Then it is useless
to specify that the murderer is of mistaken thought, that the robber is in the prey of desire,
according to the principle vyabhicäre hi višeṣaṇam isyate. Does it refer to actions that one has
committed by another? Then greed, wickedness, or false views can coexist with killing, stealing, etc.
Response: It refers to actions committed in person, and if we specify it, this is not to specify in the
true sense of the word, but only to explain what the two paths are. So be it, but there are also two
paths in the hypothesis of the person who has a murder committed with a mind of greed.
Response: Yes; this case should be mentioned; but the authors only intend to give an example.
393. Vyakhyā: Yatra māraṇenaivāpaharaṇaṁ sidhyati / tatra hi vyāpādaprāṇivadhādattādāna-
karmapatha yugapad bhavanti.
394. Vyākhyā: Anyacittasya tu māraṇacittasya nāyaṁ niyamaḥ: the restriction is not justified when
it refers to a person who steals with a view to killing.
395. We have: lying, which is paiśunya (maligning words) since the liar has the intention of
dividing, and which are inconsiderate words since all defiled words are inconsiderate words
(iv.76c-d). The same for injury. For lying, the mental path can be greed or wickedness; for injury,
the mental path is wickedness.
It is the same words which are lying, maligning words, and inconsiderate words: the distinction
of the three vocal paths is thus purely verbal, and not real. According to another opinion, the
distinction is real, for one must distinguish three vijnaptis. [The questioners are deluded, divided,
etc.]
396. Volition cannot be found with a single path: this single path cannot be a mental path, since a
good mind is always accompanied by non-abhidhyā and non-vyāpāda; it cannot be a material path
included within the precepts, for the precepts include at the very least the renouncing of killing,
stealing, illicit sexuality, and lying.
Volition cannot be found with five paths: this would suppose the four paths of the fewest
precepts (Upăsaka, etc.), plus a good mental path; now non-abhidhyā and non-vyāpāda are
inseparable.
Volition cannot be found with eight paths. In fact, the Bhikṣu with a bad mind or with a neutral
mind possesses only seven good paths, and, when his mind is good, he possesses at least nine.
397. Kṣayajñāna and anutpādajñāna are not dṛșți (vii.1); thus the volition of this person is not
accompanied by samyagdrti. There is no ripa in the absorptions of Arūpyadhātu, and, as a
consequence, so too the precepts with the seven good bodily and vocal paths.
398. Hsüan-tsang clearly distinguishes the three cases: "When one undertakes the Bhikṣu precepts
the five consciousnesses are good..." Saeki: right view is lacking because one has the five bad dṛşti.
399. This is by way of example. There are also five paths when-with a defiled or neutral
mind-one renounces the five transgressions.
400. "In fact," sammukhībhāvatas (mnon sum du 'gyur ba), svayam (dňos su); "through
possession," samanvāgamāt, samanvayāt, prāptitaḥ, läbhatas (ldan pa'i sgo nas, Idan pas, brňed pas;
ch'eng-chiu).
Beings in hell do not have any greed, for greed does not exist in hell; but they have not cut off the
prapti (ii.36b) of greed: they possess, in the past, the greed that they had in a past existence.
401. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 584b19.
=
Naraka: nara = man, ka = bad, naraka = a place where the wicked are born; or rather, raka:
agreeable (compare Dhätupatha, 10.197), naraka = a place where nothing is agreeable (Vibhāṣā,
TD 27, p. 865b27).Footnotes 745
402. Nigraha; Hsüan-tsang, ma, to curse, injure; Vyutpatti, 255.4, brgyad gag; Udānavarga, xx.9.
403. Vibhäşā, TD 27, p. 865c13: In Samjiva hell (iii.99, Lokaprajnapti, in Cosmologie bouddhique, p.
324, Mahāvastu, i.10) the cold wind that "revives" the damned excites greed (abhidhyā); but there is
not, for that, the path of action (=a deed) called greed.
404. There is no marriage in Uttarakuru, Mahābhārata, i.122.7.
405. We should say rather: devo devaṁ na mārayati, “a god does not kill a god," which implies the
conclusion: gods cannot be killed (avadhya). In fact when their major and minor limbs are cut off,
they regenerate themselves. But their heads, and their waists do not regenerate themselves when
they are cut off: thus gods can be killed.
406. Utpădita signifies vartamānam adhvānaṁ gamitam; nirodhita, atītam adhvānaṁ gamitam.
Problem discussed in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 685a14.
407. The explanations of Vasubandhu reproduce, with only minute variations, the Vibhāṣā, TD 27,
p. 588c8.
These three results have been defined ii.56 and following. How action, being past, can bear a
result, see the "Refutation of the Pudgala" at the end of the Kofa and the important discussion in
Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 316 and following.
Everything that a person experiences does not have former action for its cause (Majjhima,
ii.214). According to the Sūtra of Kaśyapa the Nude (same beginning as Samyutta, ii.18) which
constitutes a chapter of the Karmaprajñāpti (Mdo. 62, 241a), suffering is produced by oneself
(when one cuts his hair, his hand, etc.), by another (when another cuts his hand), by oneself and by
another (when, with another, one cuts his hand), not by oneself or by another, but by causes and
conditions: "when, for example, wind arises, rain falls, lightning flashes, or houses crash down, or
trees are broken to pieces, or the tops of crags cast down: some have their feet cut...: suffering in
this case is produced by causes and conditions. Oh Kāśyapa, all pleasure and all suffering are
produced by oneself, by another, by self and another, by the seasons (tu):... in winter great cold, in
the season of rains great heat, and in winter cold and heat produce pleasure and suffering." But the
problem is not resolved by these definitions: we know in fact that mental trouble (which is a painful
sensation) arises from the trouble of the elements and is not from retribution, but that the trouble of
the elements is retribution (iv.58). The same holds for sickness, etc. On utuja compare Milinda, p.
271, Visuddhimagga, 451, Compendium, p. 161 (which does not concern itself with the origin of
suffering); utuparināmaja figures among the eight types of suffering, Milinda, 134-135. Dīgha,
iii. 139.
408. According to the commentary, the Sūtra indicates, by these three terms, preparatory action
(prayoga), the action itself (maula), and the consecutive action (prstha). This interpretation is not
admitted by all the schools as we shall see below p. 670.
409. Rebirth in hell is given as an example of retribution; animal rebirth, rebirth in the state of
preta, etc., are also retribution.
410. Karmaprajñāpti (Mdo. 72, fol. 206a): “... by strong killing, one is reborn among beings in hell;
by medium killing, among animals; by weak killing, among the Pretas." Same doctrine in
Dafabhūmaka, ii (quoted in Madhyamakāvatāra, ii.7, translated Muséon, 1907, p. 290). Compare
Anguttara, iv.247: pānātipāto bbikkbave asevito bbāvito babulskato nirayasamvattaniko tiraccha
nayonisamvattaniko pittivisayasamvattaniko / yo sabbalahuso pāṇātipātassa vipāko manussabhū-
tassa appäyukasaṁvattaniko hoti; Jātaka, i. p. 275: pāṇātipātakammaṁ nāma niraye tiracchāna-
yoniyaṁ pettivisaye asurakâye ca nibbatteti, manussesu nibbattaṭṭhāne appāyukasaṁvattanikaṁ
hoti.
Feer, Fragments du Kandjour (Karmavibhanga); Saddharmasmṛtyupasthāna (Lévi, Pour
l'histoire du Rāmāyaṇa, J.As., 1918, i9) quoted in Sikṣāsamuccaya, 69 and following; Chavannes,
Cinq cents contes, i.198; etc.746
Chapter Four
On the quasi-impossibility of a human rebirth for a fool (bāla) "once he has been reborn in hell,"
the vexatious characteristics of this rebirth (caste, etc.) and the new transgressions that the former
being in hell commits, see Majjhima, i.169 (Balapanditasutta; see J. Przyluski, Légende d'Açoka, p.
120).
411. That transgressions reduce the length of human life and provoke the deterioration of plants,
Cakkavattisīhanādasutta (Dīgha, iii.70-71), Lokaprajñāpti, xi (translated in Cosmologie boud-
dhique, p. 309 and following).
412. Vyākhyā: Aśaniḥ šīlāvṛṣṭiḥ / rajo dhūlivṛṣṭiḥ kṣāravṛṣṭir vā.
413. Compare Yogasütra, ii.34.
414. Vigor resides in the heart: ojo hṛdayapradeśe bhavati.
415. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 201a15; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 604c3. These are three of the mithyāngas,
Digba, iii.254.
Ajiva, according to the opinion refuted iv.86c-d, is solely the means of existence, the manner of
procuring a livelihood, clothing, etc.
416. See the ajivapärisuddhi, Visuddhimagga, p. 22. Dhammapada, 244-245: sujīvam abirikena...
Mithyajiva is described in Aṣṭasāhasrikā, p. 334.
417. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 605c14.
The superstitions of the laity are enumerated in the Vyākhyā: Kautukamangalatithimuḥūrta-
nakṣatrādidṛṣṭi. Dict. of St. Petersbourg, kautukamangala. On the mangalas, see Childers; Ninth
Rock Edict (Senart, L203); Suttanipäta, 258; Jätaka, 87; Huber, Sútrālamkāra, 302. Mahāvyutpatti,
266.19 mangalapoşadha. Waddell, Lamaism, 392, Grunwedel, Mythologie, 47; Lalita, 378.9,
mangalapürna kumbha.
The monk, who depends on others for food, etc., is obliged to cultivate kuhanā lapanā
naimittikatā naiṣpeși[ka]tā and lābhena lābhaniścikītṣā which are also mithājīvas. See iv.77b-c.
418. Jivitopakaraṇa, Mahāvyutpatti, 239.32.
419. Vyākhyā: Šīlaskandhikāyām iti fīlaskandhikānāaṁ saṁnipăte: we should correct: filas-
kandhänām... The Silaskandhikā is a collection of the filaskandhas. According to the Tibetan and
Hsüan-tsang: the Silaskandhasūtra; Paramartha: chieh-chi-ching: Šīlasaṁnipātasūtra.
Saeki refers to the Samyukta, TD 2, p. 131c23, which corresponds to Samyutta, iii.228 (the
person who eats with his mouth down, etc.); but the text referred to here by Vasubandhu is a
Sanskrit redaction of the filas of the Brahmajālas and the Samaññaphala suttas (Digha, i.6, 65;
Lotus de la Bonne Loi, 465; Rhys Davids, Dialogues, i. 17; 0. Franke, Dīgha in Auswahl, p.5). The
text furnished by the Vyākhyā departs from the Pāļi as do the Chinese versions of the Digha. Here it
is at length:
yathā Tridaṇḍinnª eke śramaṇabrāhmaṇāḥ śraddhādeyaṁ paribhujya vividhadarfanasamā-
rambhānuyogam anuyuktā viharanti / tadyathā hastiyuddhe'svayuddhe rathayuddhe pattiyuddhe
yaş iyuddhe muştiyuddhe sărasayuddhe vrşabhayuddhe mahişayuddhe ajayuddhe meşayuddhe
kukkuṭayuddhe vartakayuddhe läbakayuddhe striyuddhe puruṣayuddhe kumārayuddhe kumārikā-
yuddhe udgürane udyüthikāyām dhvajāre balāgre senävyähe anīkasaṁdarfane mahāsamājaṁ vā
pratyanubhavanty eke /ity evamrūpāc chramaṇo vividhadarſanasamārambhānuyogāt prativirato
bhavati // yatha Tridandinn eke framaṇabrāmaṇāḥ śraddhādeyaṁ paribhujya vividhafabdaśrava-
ṇasāmarambhānuyukta viharanti / tadyathā rathaśabde pattifabde fańkhāśabde bherīšabde
adambaraśabde nṛttaśabde gītāśabde geyafabdeº acchaṭāśabde pāṇisvare kumbhatūņire
citrākṣare citrapadavyañjane lokāyatapratisamyukted akhyāyikā vā śrotum icchanty eke / ity
evamrūpāc chramaṇo vividhafabdaśravaṇasāmarambhānuyogāt prativirato bhavati //
a. On the Tridandins (tedaṇḍika, traidandika) see the list of heterodox comrades and ascetics in
Anguttara, iii.276, Majjhima, 57, Milinda, 191, Mahāniddesa, 89, 310, 416; the notes of Rhys
Davids, Dialogues, i.22, Bendall, Sikşāsanuccaya, 331; Foucher, Gandhāra, ii.262.Footnotes 747
b. MSS. udgālavaše utsatikāyām (reading of the Cambridge MSS according to a communication
of E. J. Thomas). Correction according to Mahāvyutpatti, 261.51 and 53. Compare Prātimokṣa, Pac.
48 - 50 = Patayantikā, Finot, J.As. 1913, ü.512.
c. MSS. fayyāśabde . . . kacite citrākṣa. Dīgha, iii.183: nacca gīta vādita akkhāna pāṇissara
kumbhaṭhūna (Jātaka, v. p. 506, vi. p. 276: kumbhathūna, thūnika; Mahāvastu, ii.150, iii.113:
kumbhatūņi, tuna, tūņika, thūnika; cakrikavaitālikanaṭanartakaṛllamallapāṇisvarik$ DA21 fobhikā
langhakā kumbhatūṇikā . . . ).
d. Read pratisamyuktā (?).
420. Parallel to action, that is to say, which are neither pure, nor neutral. Paramārtha and
Hsüan-tsang, according to the definition of ii.52, translate: “Later dharmas, parallel, equal or
superior."
421. Vyākhyā: That is to say the dharmas associated with the mind and the dharmas disassociated
from the mind (jati, etc.); see ii.35. According to Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 43c25) the sahabhūs are
concomitant (anuvartin) rūpas and viprayuktas.
422. Prahāṇa is thus both the result of disconnection and the result of virile activity.
423. There should be a resemblance between the sabhägahetu and its result, which is nisyandaphala.
But a bad dharma differs from a neutral dharma (in the class of defiled-neutral, nivṛtāvyākṛta,
dharmas), since it includes retribution. But both are defiled (klişța), and this constitutes their
resemblance.
424. Or a past action. Past dharmas, arisen after this action, and which are its retribution, are its
retributive results; the dharmas which it draws forth (ākṛṣṭa), whether these dharmas have arisen
at the same time as it or immediately after it, are its result of virile activity; all the dharmas which
have risen with it or which, arisen afterwards, are now past, are its results of predominating
influence: all the parallel dharmas, arisen after it and now past, are its outflowing results. In this
same way past and future dharmas constitute four results of past
action.
425. Disconnection is neither faikṣa nor aśaikṣa. See vi.45, ii.38a.
426. The result of virile activity to be abandoned by bhāvanā: some good dharmas which are
produced upon leaving (vyuthäne) the Pure Path.
427. Paramartha: ayogavihita = fei-li-tso
F; Hsüan-tsang: pu-ying-tso F.
428. According to the Vyakhya, ayonifomanaskāra = ayonyā anyāyena klefayogena yaḥ pravṛtto
manaskāraḥ.
429. According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 98a11 and following. Same doctrine in Yogasutra.
430. Paramārtha. "Through the retribution of a single gift of food in a past time, I attained rebirth
seven times among the Thirty-three Gods; seven times I was a Cakravartin king and now I have
been born into a rich family of the Sakyans.” Hsüan-tsang, whose text is more developed, also has
seven heavenly rebirths and seven human rebirths as a Cakravartin.
According to the Vyākhyā, Aniruddha's gift was made to the Pratyekabuddha Tagaraśikhin
(one of the Pratyekabuddhas of Majjhima, iii.69, Jätaka, 390, Dhp. 355); according to Theragatha,
910 (see trans. p. 329), it was made to Upariṭṭha who receives the epithet of Yasassin: Upariṭṭha
and Yasassin figure elsewhere as distinct Pratyekabuddhas in the list of the Majjhima.
431. Hsüan-tsang: "Furthermore, certain ones say . . .'
432. Paramartha: As a painter designs, by means of a rūpa, the image of a person and fills it up by
means of numerous rupas.
433. Vyākhyā: If a person possesses all the organs (sakalendriya), and if another person does not
take into consideration the diversity of actions which "fills" (paripūraka karman), for the eye and
the other organs are the result of an action "which projects existence" (ākṣeapakakarmaphaka):748 Chapter Four
"The six organs (saḍāyatana) are projected (akṣiayate)." But color (varna), shape, etc., are the result
of the action of re-filling.
434. Hsüan-tsang: "It is not only action which projects and fills an existence, but also all the
dharmas which embrace retribution. But, by reason of the capital importance of action, one only
speaks of action. However these dharmas, when they do not coexist (saha) with action, are capable
of filling but not of projecting, because their force is small. Two categories: Not projecting either of
the two absorptions ….. “ Sensation and the other mental states associated with cetană, volition,
which is action, are projected along with it.
435. Vyakhya: Tadākṣepakena karmaṇā sahabhavantya'pi praptayo na tenaiva saphalāḥ. See
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 97b3, the opinion of Ghosaka: the praptis are not capable of drawing out the
sabhāgată, etc.
Hsüan-tsang adds: “The other dharmas embracing retribution project and fill."
436. Same doctrine in Bodhisattvabhūmi, i. para. 4, 6, etc. In the Paļi sources, as here, dvaraṇa is
what hinders entry into the Path, which makes a person be abhavya. The three āvaraṇas are named
in Anguttara, iii.436, Vibhanga, 341, but associated with three other dharmas (asaddho ca hoti
acchandiko ca dupañño ca). [The avaraṇas of Samyutta, v.77, Dīgha, i.246, are some of the obstacles
in the Vinaya, the nivaranas (see Kofa, v.99).]
By klefa and jñeyāvaraṇa, the Mahāyāna does not designate the obstacles to bhavyatā, the
quality of being able to enter into the Path, but the obstacles to deliverance to the mind. The same in
Kośa, vi.77, where the mind is "covered" by an avyti, except the mind of the Arhat; Yogasútra, iv.30.
The karmavaraṇa of the Sikṣāsamuccaya, 280, etc. is the karmāvaraṇa of the Abhidharma; the
akṣaṇas, to which the four paths are opposed, partially correspond to vipākāvaraṇa. (Mahāvyut-
patti, 120.83; TD 17, number 756 and other sources, Religieux Eminents, 70, Cinq cents contes, i32,
231, etc.).
437. Compare the defilements of Visuddhimagga, 177.
438. This is the order of the Vibhanga, p. 378; in Mahāvyutpatti, 122, the killing of an Arhat
proceeds patricide; in Dharmasaṁgraha, 60, the wounding of the Tathagata proceeds schism.
i. Suttanipāta, 231 (Khuddakapātha, vi.): six abhiṭhānas; Anguttara, i27: six things impossible
to the Aryan, namely: 1. mātughāta, 2. pitughāta, 3. arahantaghāta, 4. lohituppāda, 5. saṁghabheda,
and 6. aññasatthu-uddesa [which doubtless signifies "to recognize a master other than the
Buddha"].
ii. Anguttara, iii.436, enumerates six things which make a person abhavya, incapable of entering
into the Path ... Namely 1 - 5 of the preceding list, plus duppañño hoti jaļo eļamūgo.
iii. Cullavagga, vii.3.9: idam devadattena pathamam anantarikakammam upacitam yam
duṭṭhacittena vadhakacittena tathāgatassa rudhiram uppāditām; vi.17.3, the five anantaryas of the
classic list enumerated together with the rape of a Bhikṣuṇī, the quality of animal, etc.
iv. Dhammasangaṇi, 1028 (Atthasālinā, p. 358) defines the six dharmas which necessarily cause
a bad rebirth (micchattaniyata, see Koșa, iii.44c-d): pañca kammāni anantarakāni yā ca micchādiṭṭhi
niyatā "the five anantarya actions and false niyata view." The Puggalapaññatti defines as bound for
hell (niyata): pañca puggalā ānantarikā ye ca micchādiṭṭhikā = "the five guilty of änantarya and
persons with false views."
What does "false niyata view" mean?
The Atthasalini explains: micchādiṭṭhi niyatā ti aḥetuvāda-akiriyavāda-natthikavādesu añña-
tară: "one or other of the assuredly wrong views of those who do not believe in cause, deny the
efficacy of action, are nihilists" (Maung Tin and Rhys Davids). Let us translate rather: "False niyata
view is one of the views of the negation of cause, negation of action, negation.” (See Majjhima,
iii.78). This refers to the false view (above p. 657) which, to the exclusion of other false views,
constitutes the action called false view. Atthasālini, p. 101: natthikähetuakiriyadiṭṭhīhi eva
kammapathabhedo hotina aññadiṭṭhīhi. [Among the other false views, for example satkāyadrşti.]Footnotes 749
Thus false view properly so-called is niyata, which, in the Kofa, uproots the roots of good
(năstidṛṣṭi, iv.79). "False niyata view" signifies "false view which embraces niyama, certitude, that is
to say micchattaniyama, certainty of perdition," for him who adopts it: according to the
Abhidhamma this disbeliever is bound to fall away, but we have seen (iv.80d) that the doctrine of
the Abhidharma differs.
v. Vibhanga, p. 378, enumerates the five kammāni ānantarikāni. 439. “Bad realms of rebirth,
etc." Et cetera refers to the actions which produce the state of non-consciousness (ii.41b-c), a birth as
Brahmā (iv.44b-d, vi.38a-b), a birth as a eunuch or an androgyne. All persons who enter the Path
obtain deliverance after at most seven more births (vi.34a-b); thus a person who has done an action
producing an eighth existence (aștama bhava) cannot enter the Path (See Suttanipāta, 230).
440. We can understand: "... the realm of rebirth where these are produced is the human realm of
rebirth...; the guilty one is a male or a female, not a eunuch, nor an androgyne."
441. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 619a15. Why the name "anantarya?" For two reasons (pratyaya): (1) these
five transgressions are so called because they are not retributed either in this life, or in later life, but
only in the next existence; and (2) because they are retributed only in hell and not in any other realm
of rebirth. There are two reasons by which an action is ānantarya: (1) because it does harm to
benefactors, and (2) because it harms the field of merit. Two conditions are required in order that
there be mortal transgression: (1) preparatory action and (2) consummation of the result; even
though one may have done a preparatory action, if the result is not consummated, there is no mortal
transgression; and even if the result is consummated, if there was no preparatory action, there is no
mortal transgression ... (Compare Kathāvatthu, xiii.3).
442. Compare Atthasālini, p. 358. Certain persons guilty of anantarya transgression immediately
fall into Avici Hell, Kofa, iii. 12d (Māra); Devadatta and four others, Milinda, p. 101, Kern, Manual,
p. 36.
443. Not in Uttarakuru: niyatāyuṣkatvāt prakṛtišīlatvāt tatra śāsanābhavāc ca.
444. See above note 441. The body (atmabhāva) of someone blind from birth is incomplete (vikala);
but what is referred to here is the vaikalya which renders a person incapable of salvation.
Furthermore, someone blind from birth is loved by his parents.
445. Vyākhyā: Śrūyate yathā kaścid eva višiṣṭāśva ājāneyo mātaraṁ na gacchatīti vāsasā mukhaṁ
pracchādya mātaraṁ gamitaḥ / tena paścāj jñatvā svam angajātam utpāṭitam ity evam ājāneyo'svaḥ
paṭubuddhiḥ / asyānantaryaṁ syād ity abhiprāyaḥ / The Vibhāṣā recounts this story in different
words. It translates ājāneya by tsʼung-hui-lung (a nāga). Parmārtha and Hsüan-tsang have
only ts'ung-hui. See Mahavyutpatti, 213 (liang = good).
446. Hsüan-tsang puts these definitions in the Kärikā.
447. Anupakramadharmāṇo hi tathāgataḥ (Compare the phraseology of the Cullavagga, vii.3.10).
Vyākhyā: aparopakramamaraṇadharmāṇa ity arthaḥ.
448. According to Vibhāsā, p. 313bl.
449. Itivuttaka, 18: āpāyiko nerayiko kappaṭ saṁghabhedako ... saṁghaṁ samaggaṁ bhitvāna
kappaṁ paccati. Anguttara, iii. 402... apko Devadatto nerayiko kappatttho atekiccho... and v.75
(=Cullavagga, viii.5.4) . . . samghaṁ bhetvā . . . kappaṭṭhiyaṁ kibbisaṁ pasavati / kim pana
kappaṭṭhiyaṁ kibbisan ti / kappam Ananda nirayaṁhi paccatīti āpāyiko nerayiko . . . saṁghaṁ
samaggam bhetvāna kappaṁ nirayambi paccatīti.
This stanza of the Itivuttaka is discussed in Kathāvatthu, xiii.1. The Rājagirikas believe that it
refers to one entire [great] kalpa (sakalaṁ kappam); Buddhaghosa understands it as referring to a
twentieth part of a [great] kalpa [an antarakalpa, which is the normal duration of a lifetime,
äyukappa, in Avici Hell, see Kofa iii.83b].750
Chapter Four
The Vibhāṣā (TD 28, p. 183c16, p. 601c6) mentions numerous opinions. Some believe that, by
kalpa, the Blessed One means to speak of forty small kalpas (antarakalpa), which make up one
kalpa of dissolution (vivarta) plus an empty kalpa, or a kalpa of creation (samvarta) plus a kalpa of
duration (Kofa, iii.90b); others understood it as a "great kalpa" (eighty small kalpas); others as a
"small kalpa." Furthermore, there is a Vinaya text predicting that Devadatta will be reborn among
human beings when human life is 40,000 years in length. Kalpa can thus be understood as referring
to the period of increase or decrease of human life: that is one half of a small kalpa (see iii.92a-b).
According to the Milinda, 111, Devadatta committed the crime of schism at the end of the first of
the six parts of the present kalpa; he will spend the other five in hell, and after he is delivered from
hell, he will become a Pratyekabuddha.
The sources of the Mahāyāna, quoted by Saeki, also merit study.
450. The Vyakhya commenting on the Bhasya gives the words: bhikṣur bhinatti...drşțicaritaḥ...
Paramärtha reads bhikṣur dṛṣṭi-su-caritaḥ (chien-hao-hsing
) bhinatty anyasmin defe
bālān, and his version of the Bhasya opposes a monk of bad practice (mithyācarita) to a monk of
right (samyak) conduct.
451. Only the Bhikṣu, for the Buddha is a Bhikṣu and the schismatic sets himself up as his rival.
452. Tṛṣṇācarita, see above P. 167.
453. Hsüan-tsang: "He only divides the Prṛthagjanas, not the Aryans because these directly see the
Dharma. According to certain masters, the possessors of kṣānti can no longer be divided. In order to
unite these two opinions, the author says: "the fools."
"Dharma" refers to the āgamadharma and the adhigamadharma (viii.39a-b), Scripture, and the
bodhipäkşikadharmas.
Ksanti is the second of the nirvedhabhāgīyas, or preparations for entry into Seeing the Truths,
vi.18b. The possessor of kṣäänti, even though a "fool" (pṛthagjana), is considered to be "similar to
one who has seen the Truths" (drst
454. The subject of the preceding phrase (100a-b) is the schismatic: “It is a Bhikṣu, a heretic, who is
moral, who divides, in a place where the Buddha is not to be found, fools." The author continues:
"Accepting another master, another path, it is divided; it does not pass the night [in this state of
division]." "It" refers to the Sangha, a Sangha composed of fools.
Paramartha: "By whom (kiyatā) is the Sangha divided? At the time when it admits another
master-path, it is already divided (i-p'o¯)…
On schism, see the references in the article "Councils," in Hastings' ERE, iv. p. 180b. The Pāli
definition of schism, of different types of schisms, Cullavagga, vii.5, Mahāvagga, x.1.6; 5.4,
Anguttara, i.19. Prātimokṣa, Finot, J.As. 1913, p. 22. Traditions relative to the council of Vaiśālī
(āvāsakappa), Muséon, 1905, p. 277, 318. The episode of Devadatta, Rockhill, Life. Edict of Sārnāth,
ed. Oertel, Ep.Indica, viii. p. 166.
455. Vyākhyā: Na vivasaty asau na tāṁ rātriṁ parivasatīty arthaḥ.
456. This schism receives the name of "breaking the Wheel" because it is the cause of the breaking
of the Wheel.
457. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
458. See Mahāvyutpatti, 276.14-15 (karmabhedavastu).
602c12.Footnotes
459. See Divya, 150, among the works that the Buddha should accomplish: ...tribhāga āyuşa utsṛsto
bhavati / sīmābandhaḥ kṛto bhavati / śrāvakayugam agratāyāṁ nirdiṣṭaṁ bhavati.
460. Joy at the beginning, fear and anguish at the end.
461. Hsüan-tsang translates p'ao pustule, blister. The Tibetan translates doșa as skyon. In
Samyutta, i.43, brigands are the arbuda of the world. Samantapāsādikā, pp. 294, 295, 307: . . .
sāsaṇassa abbudaṁ ca malaṁ ca... (References of Morris, JPRS. 1886).
"
751
462. Vyākhyā: Sīmāyām abaddhāyām iti maṇḍalasīmāyām / ekasyāṁ hi sīmāyāṁ pṛthakkar-
makaraṇāt saṁghadvaidhaṁ bhavati / nanu ca prakṛtisīmāsti grāmanagarādi / satyam asti /
tu satyām sā prakṛtisīmā vyavasthāpyata iti/ tasya api bandho vyavasthäpyata eveti veditavyam.
110.
463. Šakyamuni, when he was a Bodhisattva, once divided the followers (parsadbheda) of a Ṛși, who
possessed the five abhijñās (Vyākhyā; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 603b28). This is in direct contradiction to
Milinda, 161, according to which it was not a past action of the Bodhisattva which provoked the
schism of Devadatta. There exists an old formula: tathāgato abhejjapariso.
The Buddha has not "escaped" the retribution of his former actions, Divya, 416: "Have you not
learned these words of the Muni that the Jinas themselves are not freed from their actions?" The
Blessed One, on his alms round, was wounded in the foot by a thorn, and declared: ita ekanavate
kalpe faktyā me puruṣo hataḥ/ tatkarmaṇo vipākena pāde viddho'smi bhikṣavaḥ (Saḍdarśana-
saṁgraha, ed. Suali, p. 26). On the rock that wounded the Blessed One on the foot, see Chavannes,
Religieux Eminents, 155; Fa-hien, Legge, 83. The Blessed One suffered in the back because he has
once broken the backbone of a dishonest wrestler, Vinaya of the Sarvästivādins, in Chavannes, Cinq
cents contes, ii.424. Compare Milinda, 134, 179.
According to Majjhima, ii.227, the Tathāgata has only pure and agreeable sensations (anāsavā
sukhā vedanā): “If beings experience pleasure and pain by reason of their former actions, then the
Tathāgata has formerly accomplished good actions since he now experiences such pure and
agreeable sensations. If beings experience pleasure and pain by reason of the creative action of God
(issaranimmānahetu), then the Tathāgata has been created by a benevolent God..."
464. According to the Vyākhyā, one should understand upakārikṣetrasya nirākṛteḥ.
465. Nirākṛti = parityāga (see above p. 650). How fathers and mothers are benefactors, Divya, 51,
Avadānaśśataka, i.194, 204 (āpyāyikau poṣakau saṁvardhakau stanyasya dātārau … ); Itivuttaka, p.
466. They are "fields of meritorious qualities" either because they are the support of meritorious
qualities (guṇānām āśrayatvāt), or because, by reason of their qualities (gunaiḥ), they are a field: all
seeds of merit (puṇyabīja) sown in this field bear a great fruit.
467. The Sthavira does not admit this case: "If the embryo is alive, it does not fall; if it falls, it is
because it is dead; for a living being cannot pass through all the filth..." But it is reported in the
Sūtra that Kumārakāśyapa (t'ung-tzu chia-yeh 7** ) was born in this manner. Since
the second woman placed the embryo into the gate-of-birth and breathes (hsi ") it up to the womb,
one cannot say that the embryo passes through filth. Or rather she drinks it . . . (Saṁghabhadra).
468. Vyākhyā: Sarvamātṛyogyeşu kāryesu drastavyety abhiprāyo mātṛkalpatvät. Hsüan-tsang: "One
verifies that all the offices [proper to a mother] are in the second mother."
An āpyāyikā is a kadāvāhikā, the one who guides the pregnancy to its conclusion; a poșikā
(gso-bar byed-pa) is a stanyadāyikā, the one who gives the milk; a saṁvardhikā (skyed-par byed-pa)
is an audārikāhārakalpikā, the one who regulates the assimilable food (trans. of P. Cordier). Or752 Chapter Four
rather, according to another interpretation, äpyāyikā = stanyadhātrikā, nourishment; poșikā,
because she gives solid food; and samvardhikā, because she bathes the child and removes harmful
foods (visamaparihāra). (Vyākhyā; above note 465).
Divya, 303, has äpyāyitaḥ poșitaḥ saṁvardhitaḥ.
Apyāyikā= nu zholdud and nu zho ma blud (Mélanges Asiatiques, viii. 149); āpyāyana = yons su
rgyas bya, Mahāvyutpatti, 197.130.
469. This problem is discussed in the Kathāvatthu, xx.1, and in the Karmaprajñāpti. The
Uttarapathakas believe that a person becomes an änantarika (or anantarika) by the non-intentional
(asamcicca) killing of his mother, etc., given the gravity of the anantariyavatthus. Compare
Sätrakṛtānga, i.1.2, ii6.26 (Jacobi, Jaina Sūtras, ii.242.414).
470. See Chavannes, Cinq cents contes, no. 399 (taken from the Shih sung Lä, the Sarvāstivādin
Vinaya Pitaka, TD 23, number 1435). Let us translate "laundryman"; Chavannes reads "dyer." The
text has dhāvaka which the Vyākhyā explains as a rajaka.
=
471. Paramartha: If this is the case, how does the Avadāna say: "Go away! Say to Sikhaṇḍin…“
Hsüan-tsang: If this is the case, how does one explain why the Yü (-Pi-yu-ching the
Avadana) say: The Buddha said to Sikhaṇḍin: "You have committed two mortal transgressions…...
The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 619c26 also attributes this declaration to the Buddha and continues: "How
can Sikhaṇḍin, by destroying a single life, commit two mortal transgressions? He commits only one
mortal transgression, since the benefactor or father and the field of meritorious qualities or Arhat
exist in one person. The text should say: "You have committed a mortal transgression by reason of
two causes, patricide, and the murder of an Arhat," and it says "two transgressions," in order to
blame Sikhaṇndin by reason of the two transgressions. According to other masters, even though
there is only one mortal transgression, the retribution of suffering is double.”
Vyākhyā: Rauruke nagare Rudrāyaṇo nāma rājā Šikhaṇḍinaṁ nāma putram abhişicya
pravrajitaḥ / pravrajyārhattvaṁ adhigatavān / sa Raurukābhyāsam āgatavān / punā rājyam
akankṣatīty amatyaprakrāmitena tena Sikhaṇḍinā rājñā svapitā māritaḥ / tena tu maryama-
ṇāvasthāyāṁ sa mārako manuşya ukto gaccha Sikhaṇḍinaṁ brūhi.
In Divya, 567 (compare the Vinaya of the Mülasarvästivādins, TD 23, p. 874b27 and following,
and especially p. 879c1 and following: quoted by Lévi, T'oung Pao, (series 2) viii (1907), p. 109, and
Huber, BEFEO, 1906, p. 14), there are many such assassins. In TD 4, number 203, King Udasena
(?), an Arhat, was killed by a Caṇḍāla on the order of his son Räjasena (Chavannes, Cinq cents
contes, iii1.131). The Jains have analogous stories (Māhārāṣṭrī Erzahlungen, p. 33).
472. Paramärtha and Hsüan-tsang have ta , to strike.
473. Hsüan-tsang differs:
Can he who does the preparatory actions of a mortal transgression, a preparatory action not
susceptible of being arrested (ch'uan , nivart), become "detached" and obtain a result?
104c-d. There is no detachment, no obtaining of a result, for one who does a determinant
(ting) preparatory action of a mortal transgression.
If this should necessarily be accomplished, there is certainly detachment in the course of the
preparatory action of a mortal transgression. In the course of the preparatory action of other bad
actions...
474. This point of doctrine is discussed in Kathāvatthu, xiii.3. The Uttarāpathakas deny that an
instigator of patricide can enter the Path.
475. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 621b15: "In the murder of some living beings is it possible, in the course of
the preparatory action (prayogāvasthāyām), to enter into the Path? Some say: yes, in the case of theFootnotes 753
murder of animals, but not in the murder of humans. Some say: also in the murder of humans,
excluding only those who have done the preparatory action for a mortal transgression.
Consequently they say: one can do preparatory action for murder and in the meantime obtain
Seeing of the Dharma...
The Vyākhyā quotes the Chekāvadāna as an example. Through fear of Virüūḍhaka (=Viḍūḍabha,
Kern, Manual, 40) a certain Śäkyan named Cheka took refuge in the forest and lived off meat along
with his children. The Blessed One, who was then living for three months among the Thirty-three
Gods, descended in order to convert him and make him obtain the state of Srotaäpanna. From that
time onward Cheka was no longer "touched" by the killing of the animals who continued to die in
his traps and nets.
476. A mother is one hundred times more venerable than a father (Roth and Böhtlinck, s. voc.
fataguna).
477. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 601a10. Majjhima, i.372 (in the language of the Nirgranthas, danda is the
equivalent of karman).
478. In the case of the Dandaka Forest, which was made empty through the anger of the Rşis; see
above note 346.
479. Compare Majjhima, ii.265.
480. Vyākhyā: Narake'vasyam utpattyā tāni tatsādṛśyāt tatsabhāgāṇy ucyante / na tu tatrăn-
antarotpattyā / anyathā hy ānantaryāṇy eva syurity apareṣām abhiprāyaḥ / anantarabhāvitve'pina
täny anantaryany eva sambhavanty atulyakālavipäkatvād iti prathamapākṣikāṇāṁ parihāraḥ.
481. Compare Mahāvyutpatti, 123. Conjecture of Wogihara: upānantarya "an almost mortal
transgression," "a minor mortal transgression" (mthsams med pas dañ ñe ba = hsiao wu-chien
tsui).
The MSS of the Vyākhyā have arhantyä; Minayev-Mironov, arhatyā; Wogihara, arhantyä. In
Cullavagga, vi.17, bhikkhunīdūsaka.
Mahavyat patti: niyatabhūmisthitasya bodhisattvasya māraṇam (nes pa'i sa la gnas pa);
Vyākhyā: niyatipatitabodhisattvarāraṇa. The nes gnas of our Karika is glossed by nes par rtogs pa.
Mahävyut patti: samghāyadvāraharaṇa. Bhāṣya: saṁghāyadvärahārika "steal the Samgha's gate
of revenue," explained in Vyākhyā: akṣayanīvyapaḥāra “to steal mortemain goods” (akṣayanīvī is
known through inscriptions); one of the Chinese versions of the Mahävyutpatti: to steal the ch'ang
chu or perpetual property. Takakusu, Itsing, p. 193. Vasumitra explains: mukhāyadvārakhāri-
keti yan mukhopabhogikaṁ yena saṁgho jīvikāṁ kalpayati tasyāpahāra iti (Vyākhyā).
On stūpabhedaka, see Mahāvastu, i.101, Nettippakaraṇa, p. 92 and the remarks of Hardy, p.
XXV.
482. Quoted in Vyākhyā, vi.36a-c. See above p.623.
483. This line is quoted in the Vyākhyā ad iii.41a-d (p. 197 of Cosmologie Bouddhique), in order to
explain the expression samnikṛṣṭabodhisattva, “the near Bodhisattva," that is to say "near to
Bodhi," asannābhisambodhi. “Predestined" = nes par rtogs pa (niyatipatita?).
On the Bodhisattva and his career, see Kofa, ii.44a-b; iii.14, 21, 28, 41, 53c-d, 85, 94, 96d,
vi.23c-d. 24a-b), vii.34.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 886c22. As long as the first asamkhyeya kalpa has not been completed, the
Bodhisattva, even though he accomplishes diverse difficult and painful tasks, is not capable of
knowing with certainty that he will become a Buddha. When the second asaṁkhyeya kalpa has been
completed, the Bodhisattva knows with certainty that he will become a Buddha, but he does not yet754 Chapter Four
dare to proclain without fear (vaiśāradya) the words: "I will become a Buddha." When the third
asamkhyeya kalpa is completed, when the Bodhisattva has cultivated the actions which produce the
marks, he knows with certainty that he will become a Buddha, and he proclaims without fear the
roar of the Son of the Master ... When he cultivates the actions which produce the marks, he
abandons five bad things and obtains five good things: 1. he abandons the bad realms of rebirth and
is always reborn in good realms of rebirth; 2. he abandons humble families and is always reborn in
wealthy families; 3. he abandons non-male bodies and always obtains a male body ….
The marks are explained in the Abhisamayālaṁkāra, viii, in Bodhisattvabhūmi, Camb, Add.
1702, 138b-141b (lakṣaṇānuvyañjanapatala). After fuddhādhyāśayabhūmi (see Hastings, ERE, art.
"Bodhisattva," and S. Lévi, Sūtrālaṁkāra, Introduction), all the preparations for Bodhi (bodhi-
sambhāra) produce (nirvartaka) the major and minor marks. This preparation is of two natures:
distant, as long as the major and minor marks are not obtained (yo'pratilabdheși vipākato
lakṣaṇānuvyanjaneșu); and near, from the instant when, for the first time, the marks are obtained
and as long as they more and more purify and perfect themselves... The marks are the results of
diverse good actions (vicitrakarmabhisaṁṁskāraphala), as is explained in the Lakṣaṇasutra:
because he is solidly installed (established?) (pratisthita) in morality, patience, and generosity, the
Bodhisattva obtains the supratiṣṭhitapādatva mark ….. (According to Lakṣaṇasūtra, Dīgha, iii.146,
the mark appears only in the Bodhisattva's last rebirth.)
484. Vyākhyā: Mahāsālakulaja iti mahāprakārakulaja ity arthaḥ kṣatriyamahāsālakulajo yāvad
grhapatimahäsälakulaja iti mahāgrhapatikulaja ity arthaḥ. Mahävyutpatti, 187.6. kṣatriyama-
hāsālakulam . . . 9. uccakulam . . . 11. nīcakulam. See Childers and the Dict. of St. Petersbourg.
Paramārtha translates simply: "great family"; Hsüan-tsang transcribes the word sāla; the Chinese
and Tibetan versions of the Mahävyutpatti and the Tibetan translation of the Kofa have: "a family
similar to the great Sāla Tree."
485. Mahāvyutpatti, 245,957-969: na kunḍo bhavati . . . na vikalendriyo bhavati.
486. Vyakhya: Kadarthanā mahāparibhavapūrvikā vihethanā / yayoḥ käyavācoḥ pravṛttyā parasya
duḥkhadaurmanasye bhavataḥ / tadapekṣayā tannigraho yantranety ucyate (?).
487. The Bodhisattva is a sattvadāsa in five ways. Sūtrālaṁkāra, xix.19: kşamo bhavati
paribhāṣaṇatāḍanadīnām / nipuņo bhavati sarvakāryakaraṇāt. Compare Sikṣāsamuccaya, p. 143.
488. Comparison of the Bodhisattva and a dog, Sikṣāsamuccaya, p. 35.
489. Paramārtha, in the second pāda, repeats the word Buddha: tui-fo fo-ku-i ¥##&* =
buddhapratyakṣaṁ buddhacetanaḥ; and translates the Bhāṣya: “In what period does he cultivate
these actions? In the period when the great Masters are present (mahāśāstṛsaṁmukhībhāvakāle),
because the volition [in these actions] has the Buddha for its object."
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 887c5. Are the actions which mature in the marks śrutamaya, cintāmaya, or
bhāvanāmaya, i.e., do they come from out of the teaching, out of reflection, or out of absorption?
They are solely cintāmaya. Why? By reason of the special importance (prādhänya) of this type of
action (of action arisen from reflection): the action that issues from out of the teaching exists only in
Kāmadhātu ... Some say that the action that matures in the marks issues from out of both the
teaching and reflection, but not from absorption. In what place is there produced an action which
matures in marks? Only in Kāmadhātu, only in the human realm of rebirth, only in Jambudvīpa,
only with a male and not a female body, etc. In what time period? In the period when the Buddhas
appear (utpāda); and not in a period empty of Buddhas, for the special volition (cetanā) and
resolution-vow (praṇidhāna) [which create this action] do not bear on any other object.
490. Aṣṭasāhasrikā, p. 336: the Bodhisattva is reborn in Jambudvipa and generally in Madhyadeśa.Footnotes
755
491. This refers to the kalpas (great kalpas, mahākalpas, Kofa, iii.84a) which a Bodhisattva should
normally endure beyond the three kalpäsaṁkhyeyas which form the bulk of his career: in the course
of these one hundred kalpas, he truly merits the name of Bodhisattva and realizes Bodhi
(Mahāvastu, iii.249: te bodhim kalpaśatena samudānenti narottamā). Often these hundred kalpas
are neglected and it is said Buddhahood is obtained in three kalpāsaṁkhyeyas (iii.94b-c), that is to
say, in the course of three asamkhyeyas (or asaṁkhyas) of mahākalpas. Asaṁkhyeya, "incalculable,"
is a set number, calculable, but enormous, the value of which varies according to the mode of
computation (the fifty-ninth value of a series 1, 10, 100... or of a series: 1, 10, 100, 10,000, 10,000 x
10,000,... Kośa, iii.94).
It is believed that this theory replaced that of the asaṁkhyeyakalpas, incalculable kalpas, an
expression that remains along with the new computation kalpäsamkhyeya, Religieux Eminents, p.
150, etc. Any kalpa is without measure (aparimita) and yet the kalpas are numerous (Mahāvastu,
i.78, compare Samyutta, ii.181 and following). In the Abhidharma, asaṁkhyeyakalpa signifies one
quarter of a "great kalpa," the period of creation, duration, destruction, and chaos.
In the Pali sources, the career of the Bodhisattva is four asamkheyeas and one hundred thousand
kalpas long (Childers, sub voc. asamkhyeya; Cariyapitaka, i.1; Jātaka, i. p. 2; Anguttara, commentary
in PTS. 1883, p. 98; Nettippakarana, p. 161; Visuddhimagga, 302). The Sarasamgaha (first chapter,
ed. Neumann, 1891, p. 12) distinguishes Bodhisattvas in which wisdom, faith, or energy
predominate: their careers are of four, and sixteen asamkhyeyas (plus 100,000 kalpas) respectively.
To the classical references given in Cosmologie bouddhique, p. 264, we should add that of the
Abhisamayālamkārāloka, viii, where two theories are presented; the second, according to this work,
is the theory of Vasubandhu: 1. The career of the Bodhisattva lasts three asamkhyeyas of kalpas
(kalpāsaṁkhyeya, not asamkhyeyakalpa). The first includes the career of the Bodhisattva from the
preparatory stage (saṁskārabhūmi) up to the first stage properly so-called; the second, from the
second stage up to the seventh; the third, from the eighth stage up to entry into the stage of the
Buddhas (buddhabhūmi = samantaprabhā). 2. But, in fact, we have a kalpāsaṁkhyeya for the
saṁskārabhūmi; two for the abhimukticaryābhūmi, three for the first stage properly so-called
(pramuditā) and three for each of the ten stages. Having carried out his career for thirty-three
kalpāsaṁkhyeyas, the Bodhisattva arrives at the stage of the Buddhas: . . . samantaprabhāṁ
buddhabhūmim āsādayatīty evaṁ trayastrimśatā kalpāsaṁkhyeyair buddhatvaṁ prāptyata ity
āryavasubandhupādāḥ.
492. The future Śākyamuni, by purifying his energy as explained in iv.112a, in other words, by a
great effort of energy (viryarāmbha), obtained the completion of his perfection (pāramitä) of
energy and of his other perfections in ninety-one kalpas.
The Mahāvastu (iii.249) is in agreement: vīryakāyena saṁpanno . . . nava kalpāni sthāyesi
vīryeņa puruṣottamaḥ/ The same for TD 15, number 643 translated by Przyluski, J.As. 1914, ii. p.
566 (very interesting).
According to certain Mahāyāna authorities (quoted by Saeki and which should be studied), the
future Śākyamuni skipped over forty kalpas: eleven by feeding the tigress, eight by extending his
hair into filth (Divya, p. 252), nine by praising Pușya, and twelve by searching out a half stanza in
peril of his life.
493. Compare Samyutta iv.324. The Vyākhyā summarizes the Sūtra: Ašibandhakena grāmaṇyā
nirgranthaśrāvakeṇa bhagavān uktaḥ / kim anarthāyāsi bho Gautama kulānāṁ pratipanno yas
tvam īdṛše durbhikṣa iyatā bhikṣusaṁghena sārdham aśanivad utsādayan bhikṣām aṭasi / sa
bhagavatābhihitaḥ / ito'haṁ grāmaṇi ekanavataṁ kalpam upādāya samanusmarāmi . . .
One should explain: ekanavateḥ pūraṇaṁ kalpa ekanavataḥ.
There are numerous passages where the Blessed One appears to limit his experience in the
world to ninety-one kalpas, for example Majjhima i.483; in this period Vipaśyin reigned, Digha,
ii.2, Divya, 282, whose advent marked the end of the third asamkhyeya in the career of Sakyamuni
(above iv.110b-c).756 Chapter Four
494. The former Masters, pūrvācāryas. According to Saeki, add: “among the Sauträntikas."
The four defects (doșa) are: a bad realm of rebirth (durgatidoșa), mediocrity of family
(akulīnatādoșa), incomplete organs (vikalendriyatādoşa), female sex (strībhāvadoșa). The two
qualities (guna) are: remembrance of past existences (jātismaratāguṇa), and the quality of not
regressing or of ceasing (anivartakatāguņa).
Paramartha and Hsüan-tsang specify that the first cosmic age (kalpa) signifies the first
asamkhyeya.
On the animal rebirths of the Bodhisattvas and his transgressions, see vi.23.
495. How should one understand these one hundred merits? The Vyākhyā furnishes three
explanations.
a. Fifty volitions (cetanā) are produced when the Bodhisattva produces an act of attention
having the Buddha for its object (buddhālambana); fifty other volitions when the Bodhisattva
thinks: "May I too become a Buddha! (aham apitthaṁ syām)."
b. The Bodhisattva has thoughts of compassion (karundcitta) with regard to the forty-eight
parts of the world (twenty places in Kāmadhātu, sixteen in Rūpadhātu, four in Arūpyadhātu, plus
the eight cold hells): the same number of volitions are associated with these thoughts: plus a
forty-ninth volition which has the Buddha for its object: “In the manner in which he liberates
beings"; plus a fiftieth thought: “May I liberate them in the same way!" By repeating these fifty
volitions, the Bodhisattva has one hundred merits.
c. The renouncing of killing is undertaken in a fivefold mode (see below iv.123a-b): purification
of the principal action; purification of the preparatory and the consecutive actions (samantaka,
iv.68a); vitarkānupaghāta, the renouncing is not troubled by the [three bad] vitarkas; smṛtyanu-
parigrhātatva, the renouncing is maintained by the memory of the Buddha, the Dharma and the
Sangha; and nirvāṇapariņāmitatra, the merit of the renouncing is applied to the obtaining of
Nirvāṇa. These make five volitions when the Bodhisattva renounces killing, fifty volitions for all of
the ten renouncings, and one hundred volitions by repeating the first fifty volitions (Vyākhyā).
Saṁghabhadra (TD 29, p. 591a6): One hundred merits, that is to say, one hundred volitions
(cetana). At the moment when he is going to produce an action producing a mark, the Bodhisattva
first produces fifty volitions which purify the receptacle of the body; then he produces the action
which brings forth the mark; later, he produces fifty good volitions which strengthen and perfect
the action so that it obtains fullness (paripūts). The fifty volitions have the ten pathways of action
for their object: there are five volitions for each one of them: 1. prāṇātipātaviraticetanā; 2.
samādāpanacetanā (Mahāvyutpatti, 245, 428); 3. samuttejanacetană (tsan-mei ¤, compare
245, 429); 4. anumodanācetanā; and 5. pariņāmanācetană: the volition to renounce killing, to make
others undertake this renouncing, to praise them and to preach to them, to rejoice that this is
accepted, and to apply the merit acquired to the acquisition of Nirvāṇa. According to other masters,
there are, for each pathway of this action, five good volitions, weak, etc., corresponding to the five
dhyānas (?). According to other masters, each of the pathways of this action has: 1.
prayogapariśuddhi, 2. maulakarmapathaparifuddhi, 3. prşthapariśuddhi, 4. vitarkānupaghāta, and
5. smṛtyanuparigrhitatva. According to still other masters, all the actions which mature in marks
are from new, extraordinary (wei-ts'eng-hsi) volitions, having the Buddha for their object:
when one hundred such volitions are realized together, the Bodhisattva is adorned [with the mark]
(upafobhita?).
496. See ii.56b. Paramartha attributes this second opinion to the Vaibhāşikas. Saṁghabhadra (TD
29, p. 591a18) presents five opinions; the Vibhāṣā, (TD 27, p. 889c25) presents eleven.
497. These are the numbers in the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 892c5. In the Mahāvastu, “Śākyamuni
remembered having honored and served eight thousand Buddhas by the name of Dipaṁkara...
three hundred thousand Säkyamunis, and thus following throughout these pages (1.57 and
following)." Barth, Journal des Savants, August 1899.Footnotes 75.7
498. Paramārtha: mo-shih-shih= lokāntakāle; Hsüan-tsang: mo-chieh★= kalpänte, that
is, apakarşakalpa: in a period when lifespan diminishes in length (iii.92).
At this period, the future Säkyamuni was a kumbhakārakakumāra by the name of Prabhāsa
(Vyākhyā).
The Mahavastu knows of a Säkyamuni who lived an infinite number of incalculable
(asamkhyeya) kalpas (147), also from Kapilavastu, and who received alms from our Säkyamuni,
then a merchant (prathamā praṇidhi tadā āsī).
499. Example: Sibi.
500. Example: the Bhikṣu Kṣānti who was tortured by King Kali [=Kalābu] (Ta-chih-tu lun, TD 25,
p. 89b13); this is the Rşi Kṣānti [Kṣāntivādin] of the Sutrālaṁkāra (Huber, p. 325, 383), the hero of
Jātaka, 313 (Visuddhimagga, 302), Jātakamālā, 28, Avadānakalpalatā 38, Chavannes, Cinq cents
contes, i.161, Przyluski, Açoka, 358, Watters, i.227.
According to Mahavastu, i.170, the future Säkyamuni was free from desire (vitarāga) after the
time of Dipaṁkara.
501. This story is related in Avadānaśataka, 97 (ii.176) and in Romatic Legend, p. 14 (with some
variants), where the Buddha was named Puşya. Paramärtha and Hsüüan-tsang give Tişya in
transcription; our Tibetan version has skar rgyal which Dr. P. Cordier, (according to Astāngahṛdaya
2.1.38) translates as Puṣya. In Mahāvyutpatti we have rgyal - Puşya (the Nakşatra) (165.6) = Tişya
(the Cakravartin), (180.54); 47.17, Tişya (the Śrävaka) = 'od Idan with the gloss pu fa (sus) dan
(ma) 'dom na skar rgyal du gdags: "being exhorted by Puşya (?), he is called skar-rgyal' (?). In the
Mahāvastu, iii.240.6, Puşya received a prophesy from Tişya. According to Romantic Legend, Tişya
came four kalpas before Puşya, ninety-five kalpas before Säkyamuni.
502. Paramārtha and Hsüan-tsang translate: "Having entered into the absorption of tejodhātu"
(huo-chieh-ting: this is the expression from which Eitel derives agnidhātusamadhi). The
Chinese interpreters most often employ the formula huo kuang ting ★*É, “fire light samadhi"
(Chavannes, Cinq cents contes, iii.155, 264), which would correspond to jyotisprabhasamādhi.
This refers to that manifestation of ṛddhi by which a saint makes his body incandescent,
emitting flames and smoke, Mahāvyutpatti, 15.14: dhūmayati prajvalayaty api adyathāpi nāma
mahān agniskandhaḥ (See Dīgha, iii.27; Kofa, vii.48 and following on yddhi). The power of the
ascetic over the elements, the water element and the fire element, is acquired by a meditation in
which he considers this element. This is how the explanation of Childers (sub voc. tejo) explains
tejodhātum samāpajjitvā = “having entered into jhāna by tejokasina” (on the kṛtsnāyatanas, Kośa,
viii.36) which Senart (Mahāvastu, i.556) compares to that of Beal: "causing their bodies to ascend
into space and emit all sorts of brilliant appearances." This person, having entered into dhyāna
through the contemplation of fire (tejokasina), is able, in the course of the dhyana, to create flames,
etc. In Dīvya, p. 186, we have the fight of Svägata-proclaimed by the Buddha as "the best in the
practice of the fire absorption," tejodhātuṁ samāpadyamānānām agraḥ (Anguttara, i.25)—with a
Nāga "enflamed" by anger. In a great number of sources the "samadhi of fire" or tejojjhāna
accompanies Nirvāṇa (Udana, viii.9; Przyluski, Légende d'Açoka, p. 26, Mahāvaṁsa, v.200,
Mahāvastu, i. 556, etc.).
503. Paramārtha: “in the Ratnagiri cave”; Avadānaśataka: himavantaṁ parvatam abhiruhya
ratnaguhāṁ pravića...
504. The MSS of the Avadānaśataka gives: Puruşavṛṣabha stutulo nyo mahāśamaṇaḥ kutuvīḥ //
which Speyer corrects to: puruşavṛṣabhāsty anyas tulyo mahāśramaṇas tava.
Paramārtha: ho jen teng tsun yu san (erh) teh J^#$=(¯). The Tibetan version
finishes with ga la yod, which gives kutaḥ.758 Chapter Four
finishes with ga la yod, which gives kutaḥ.
Vyakhyā: Na divi bhuvi ceti vistaraḥ/ divi bhuvi cety uddefapadanyayenoktam // nasmin loke
na vaiśravaṇālaye na marubhavane divye sthāna iti tadvyaktyartham nirdesapadhāni / asmin loka
iti manuşyaloke / vaiśravaṇālaya iti cāturmahārājikasthāne / marubhavana iti marudbhavane
trayastrimfabhavana ity arthaḥ/ divye sthäne yāmädhisthāne // lokadhātvantareṣv api tatsadṛśa-
syābhāva-jñāpanārtham āha na dikṣu vidikṣu ceti // atha na śraddhiyate / caratu kaścid vasudhām
imāṁ kṛtsnāṁ sphītāṁ bahusattvādhyāsitām . . . svayaṁ pratyavekṣatām ity abhiprāyaḥ /
505. It is through samādhi and prajññā (=dhî) that the results or fruits are acquired. In the
Abhidharma, the Bodhisattva remains a Pṛthagjana up to the moment when he sits down under the
Tree (iii.41). The various schools are not in agreement with respect to this as one can see in the
treatises of Vasumitra and Bhavya. According to the Madhyamakāvatāra, the Bodhisattva, from the
first stage on, abandons erroneous views (satkāyadṛșți, fīlavrata, and vicikitsā).
506. Vajropamasamādhi (vi.44d) is an absorption through which the candidate for the state of
Arhat breaks his last bonds and obtains Bodhi, which consists of kşayajñāna and anut pādajñāna (the
knowledge that the defilements are destroyed, and the knowledge that they will not arise again).
Vajropamasamadhi confers the quality of Buddhahood on a Bodhisattva: for a Bodhisattva only
acquires the state of Arhat after having fulfilled the pāramitās (see vi.24 and ii.44a-b, trans. p. 227).
Hsüan-tsang adds: “taking place on the vajrāsana,” or bodhimaṇḍa (Minayev, Recherches,
177), as described in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 156a3. The Kośa speaks of it iii.53b.
507. On the Chinese traslations of the word päramită, see Chavannes, Cinq cents contes, i. p. 2.
Etymology, Candrakīrti in Madhyamakāvatāra, i.16a-b (trans. Muséon, 1907, p. 29), F. W. Thomas
JRAS, 1904, 546.
508. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 496c26; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 656c20, p. 581c5; Mahāvyutpatti, 93. Dīgha,
ii.218; Anguttara, iv.241: dānamâyám pinnakiriyavattbu, silamayam, bhavanamayam
Rhys Davids, in Dialogues, ii.347-348, examines the place of dana in Scripture; the Anguttara,
"which contains a good deal more of the milk for babes that the other three of the great Nikāyas,"
devotes a Vagga to charity, which does not figure among the "wings of Bodhi," and which is ignored
in Dhammapada. But the teaching of dāna, by definition, is addressed to the Upāsakas; see above p.
598 and p. 697; nevertheless däna is useful for Nirvāṇa, iv.117d.
Praise of a gift of rice, Mahāvagga, vi.24.5, of a gift of a vihāra, Cullavagga, vi.1.5.
509. Hsüan-tsang: Or rather punyakriyā signifies “to make punya,” that is, "the preparatory action
of punya" (punyaprayoga). The word vastu signifies support (āffraya, adhiṣṭhāna): giving, the
precepts, and meditation are the vastu, the support of the preparatory action of punya with a view
to the realization of giving, the precepts and meditation.
510. In Kathāvatthu, vii.4, the Theravādins maintain that dāna is solely that which is given.
511. By giving one renders homage to the Caityas, and to beings in Nirvāṇa (parinirvṛta).
512. The Chinese translators have: "the good skandhas of this moment give..." The bodily and
vocal action of giving is rūpa; the mind and mental states are the four non-material skandhas.
513. Mahābhoga and elsewhere udārabhoga: "great joy from food, from clothing, etc.," or "joy from
great objects of joy (kāmaguna)." See Anguttara, iv.393.
514. The house is only non-modified (nirvikāra) grasses; it is not a transformation of the grasses.
Maya has a different value in frutamayī prajñā (vi.5c).Footnotes 759
515. Kathāvatthu, xvii.11, the Uttarāpathakas maintain that the giver (dāyaka), not the field,
"purifies" the gift.
Karmaprajñāpti (Mdo 62, fol. 246b): "There are four gifts: that which is pure from the fact of
the giver, impure from the fact of the recipient, and the rest as in the Samgītiprayāya.” This is the
text quoted by the author of the Kathāvatthu (Dīgha, iii.231; Anguttara, ii.80; Majjhima, iii.256
[dakkhināvibhangasutta]).
See iv.121c-d.
516. Dīgha, ii.357: sakkaccaṁ dānam, sahatthā, cittikatam, anapaviddhaṁ dānam.
On the "treatises on giving, on the precepts and on heaven," see above p. 598. An example of
dānakathā, Anguttara, iv.393; the Vimänavatthu belongs to this literature (Minayev, Recherches,
165). Divyāvadāna xxxiv is Mahāyāna (thirty-seven qualities of the gift: käle... satkṛtya...).
517. That it is the intention that is important, and not the object given, see for example Huber,
Sūtrālamkāra, p. 122, Minayev, p. 167 at the bottom: "The poor, who have faith ...
518. Anguttara, iii50: manāpadays labbate manapam.
519. This is the Sūtra quoted in Kofa iii.41 at the end. Compare Majjhima, iii. 255: tiracchānagate
dānaṁ dattvā sataguṇā dakkhiṇā pātikankitabbā, puthujjanadussīle . . . sahassaguṇā . . .
520. Here Vasubandhu mentions the sixth and the seventh "material meritorious work" (see above
p. 561 ). We have: 5. āgantukāya gamikāya vā dānaṁ dadāti / idaṁ pañcamam . . . 6. . . . glānāya
glānopasthāpakāya vā dānaṁ dadāti . . . 7. . . . yās tā bhavanti ŝītakilā vā vātalikā vā varṣalikā vā
tadrūpāsu šītakilāsu yāvad varṣalikāsu bhaktāni vā tarpyāni (tarpaṇāni) vā yavāgūpānāni vā tāni
saṁghāyābhinirhṛtya anuprayacchat anuprayacchati / idam āryā asmākam anārdyagātrā ana-
bhivṛṣṭacīvarāḥ paribhujya sukhaṁ sparſaṁ viharantu / idam Cunda saptamam aupadhikaṁ
puṇyakriyāvastu. According to Saeki, Madhyama, TD 1, p. 428al differs slightly.
Hsüan-tsang has: "In the seven aupadhikapuṇyakriyāvastus, it says that one should give to the
āgantuka, the gamika, the glāna, the glānopasthāyaka, and to the upadhivārika (yuan-lin-ch'ang
); that he should warm him who is cold." Hsüan-tsang thus enumerates the five
beneficiaries of the ātyayikapiṇḍapātas (Divya, 50, Burnouf, 269; Sixth Edict, Buhler, Beitrage 269):
the monk who arrives, who departs, who is sick and the infirmary attendant (list of the Mahāvagga,
viii. 15.7, compare Anguttara, iii.41) and the upadhivärika, the "verger, the guardian of the Vihāra,"
concerning which we have insufficient information. (Maḥāvyutpatti, 273,12, ch'ang-t'ang-shih
# ); Divya, 54, 542; Śarad Chandra Das, dge skyos; S. Lévi, "Quelques titres enigmatiques...."
J.As. 1915, ii.193).
Our texts concern themselves very little with the poor. We can mention the Avadana of the
Nirvāṇa of Mahākāśyapa: “ . . . In the streets of the village, the unfortunate were afflicted and
enfeebled. He always had compassion on the poor and helped them. Now this multitude of
miserable ones have lost their protector .. (Przyluski, Légende d’Açoka, p. 232).
22
521. An allusion is made to the bear, Huber, Sütrālaṁkāra, p. 383. The Vyākhyā explains that the
bear saved a person guhāṁ praviśya gātroṣmaśītāpanayena; according to the Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p.
592b3): "It is told that a person searching the woods became lost in the snow . . . Mrga is the
animal who had a person who was annoying him cross a river, uhyamānanadyuttāraṇena . . .
upakārin.
"
522. Majjhima, iii.253, or Gautamīsüütra (Saṁghabhadra, xxiii.4, fol. 86), is difficult to interpret.
Mahāprajapati offers a set of robes to the Buddha who refuses: “Gautami, give to the Sangha; by
giving to the Sangha you will honor me and you will honor the Sangha." From this text and the
passage where the Sangha (the four pairs of eight "persons," Arhat . . . Srotaäpanna-760
Chapter Four
phalapratipannaka) is defined as the field of merit par excellence (Dīgha, iii.255, Suttanipāta, 569,
etc.), certain masters conclude that a gift to the Sangha is meritorious, but not a gift to the Buddha.
Samghabhadra refutes this theory. [The Buddha is the best field, Majjhima, iii.254; Kośa, vii.34;
Divya, 71, Chavannes, Cinq cents contes, i. 394. But see in Vasumitra-Bhavya-Vinītadeva
(Wassilieff, 251, 283) the opinion of the Mahīśākas (a gift to the Sangha is very fruitful, but not a
gift to the Buddha; the cult of Stüpas is only a little fruitful), and the opinion of the Dharmaguptakas
(a gift to the Buddha is very fruitful, but not a gift to the Sangha). A related problem: does the
Buddha form part of the Sangha?]
When one takes Refuge in the Buddha and the Sangha one takes Refuge in the faikṣa and
aśaikṣa dharmas which form the Buddha and the Sangha (see Kofa, iv.32). Now one cannot give to
śaikṣa and aśaikṣa dharmas, but only to "persons" (pudgala): thus a gift to the Buddhas and the
Sangha do not bear any results. A thesis discussed in Kathāvatthu, xvii.6-10, and Samahabhadra loc.
cit. [The Sangha in the proper sense of the word, paramärthasaṁgha, is the dharmas of the Saints
and the eight persons which serve as their receptacle: one takes Refuge in the dharmas, but one
gives to "persons”.]
523. According to Madhyama, TD 1, p. 723a4. See the meager presents that makes novices Arhats
in Divya.
Majjhima, iii.257: yo vītarāgo vītarāgesu dadāti . . . taṁ ve dānaṁ āmisadānaṁ vipulaṁ ti
brūāmi.
524. A Bodhisattva's gift has perfect Bodhi and the good of all beings for its purpose.
525. Dīgha, iii.268, eight dānavatthus: 1-4 are formulated as in our text: 5 and 6 differ (sāhu dānaṁ
ti dānaṁ deti / ahaṁ pacāmi ime na pacanti . . . ); 7. idaṁ me dānaṁ dadato kalyāṇo kittisaddo
abbhuggacchati; 8. cittālamkāracittaparikkhāratthaṁ dānaṁ deti.
The list of the dänavatthus of Anguttara, iv.236, gives us numbers 5 and 6 of our list:
dinnapubbaṁ katapubbaṁ pitupitāmahebi na arahāmi porāṇaṁ kulavaṁsaṁ häpetum ti dānam
deti /... datvā... saggalokam upapajjissāmi …..
526. Paramartha: yü i chih chỉ ch’in chin jen ħ^"... gifts to the asanna and to those
near." Hsüan-tsang: sui chin i chih, fang neng shih yü ħ "accordingly as one
approaches, one gives.” āsajja = upagantvā (Jātaka, v. p. 342). Commentary of the Anguttara, iv.236-
(Siamese edition): āsajja dānaṁ detīti patvā dānaṁ deti āgataṁ disvāva tam muhuttam yeva
nisīdāpetvā sakkāraṁ katvā dānaṁ deti.
527. Commentary on the Anguttara: bhayāti ayam adāyako akārako ti garahābhayā apāyabhayā
vā.
528. This second list is quoted Vyakhyā, ad. iii.41, at the end.
529. According to Saeki: sama signifies that which produces a heavenly rebirth; visama, that which
produces a bad realm of rebirth.
530. Hsüan-tsang translates: "He makes beings produce the pure dharmakāya.” Paramārtha: “He
produces the dharmakāya.” See above P.
601.
531. Hsüan-tsang: All the mental projections: "I should do this and that; I shall do this and that."
Note of the editor: "This is distant preparatory action."
532. Compare Milinda, 193, on lying which is serious or light by reason of its object (vatthuvasena);
in this same way killing is unimportant when the animal is small, Atthasālinī, p. 97.Footnotes
761
533. According to Paramārtha and Hsüan-tsang: "The Sūtra says that there are two types of actions,
krta action and spacita action." According to Saeki, this Sūtra is the Karmavipākavibhangasūtra (?)
(yeh-pao ch'a-pieh ching). See Kofa, v.1.
Majjhima, iii.207: saṁcetanikaṁ . . . kammaṁ katvā . . . kiṁ so vediyati. Aññguttara, v.202:
nāhaṁ saṁcetanikānāṁ kammānaṁ katānaṁ upacitānam appațisaṁviditvā vyantibhāvaṁ
vadāmi. Divya, passim: na karmāni kṛtāny upacitāni pṛthivīdhātau vipacyante; Kathavatthu, xv.11;
Madhyamakavrtii, p. 303.
For the Vedāntic theory, see the sources given in G. A. Jacob, Vedāntasāra, Bombay, 1911, p. 160
(samcitakarman = upacitao, kriyamāṇāni karmāṇi ārabdhaphalāni karmāṇs).
534. See above, p. 625.
535. Samcintya = saṁcicca, Mahāvyutpatti, 245.68. Manu, xi.90, prescribes penitences for the
involuntary murder (akāmatas), which greatly resembles asamcintya, of a Brahmin. Voluntary
murder is inexpiatable.
536. Vyākhyā: Nābuddhipūrvaṁ na sahasākṛtam iti / atha vā nābuddhipūrvaṁ kṛtam idaṁ kuryām
ity asamcintya kṛtam / tan nopacitam / avyākṛtaṁ ni tat karma į na sahasā kṛtam iti buddhipūrvam
api na sabasa kṛtam/yad abhyasena bhāṣyākṣepān mṛṣāvādādyanuṣṭhānaṁ kṛtam tad akuśalam na
punar upacitam: "Or rather one should understand: abuddhipūrva action,—the action that one does
without deciding 'I shall do that,'-is not accumulated, for this action is morally neutral. Action done
in haste, if preceded by a decision, is not accumulated, for example, lies uttered by verbal habit in the
enthusiasm of discourse. It is though bhāṣyākṣepa that the author of a treatise repeats, in a
stereotyped enumeration, words which are not justified in such a place. (See ii. trans. p. 263).
The Vyakhya, presenting the characteristics of good action which is accumulated, says: evaṁ
kuśalam api yojyam iti / katham samcetanātaḥ / saṁcintya kṛtaṁ bhavati / nābuddhipūrvakṛtam
bhavati / tadyathā āvyākṛtacittena pāsāṇaṁ dadāmīti suvarṇapiṇḍaṁ dadyāt kṛtaṁ tan na punar
upacitam/avyākṛtaṁ hi tat karma / na sahasā kṛtam / yathā bhāṣyākṣepāt satyavacanam / kṛtam
tat kuśalaṁ na punar upacitam.
537. Compare Anguttara, i.249; above note ad iv.50.
538. There is papassa kammassa samatikkamo, "passing beyond transgression," through
abstention (virati = the undertaking of the precepts), and through meditation on compassion
(maitri), Samyutta, iv.317.
Prātimoksa (Finot, J.As. 1913, ii.16): “He who remembers a fault should disclose it; being
disclosed, he will become tranquil..:āviṣkṛtvāsya phāṣaṁ bhavati… (see above iv.39, note 174,
and on lying through silence, iv. note 347). Päātimokkha, in Vinaya Texts, i.2 and Cullavagga, ix.1.4
(Vinaya Texts, iii.305, note 1). Confession in the Mahāyāna, Bodhisattvabhūmi, 1.x.
Divya, passim: "Recognize your transgression (atyayam atyayato defaya); this action will be
reduced, destroyed, annihilated (apy evaitat karma tanutvaṁ parikṣayaṁ paryādānaṁ gaccheta)
[Majjhima, iii.247: yato . . . accayam accayato disvā yathādhammaṁ pațikarosi tan te mayam
patigaṇhāma; Digha, 185; Anguttara, i.238, Burnouf, Introduction, p. 299; Bodhicaryavatāra, ii.66,
etc.]. By recognizing his transgression (having insulted an Arhat whose qualities he ignored) the
vaiyāvṛtyakāra of Divya, 54-55, avoids hell, but nevertheless is reborn fifty times as the son of a
slave.
Sikṣāsamuccaya, 160 and Bodhicaryavatāra, v.98 quoting the Caturdharmakasitra, the four
dharmas by which the Bodhisattva triumphs over transgressions done and transgressions
accumulated: vidūṣaṇāsamudācāra (repentance), pratipakṣasamudācāra (the practice of good),
pratyapattibala (undertaking the precepts or virati), afrayabala (taking Refuge in the Buddha, etc.).
Analogous doctrines, Subhāṣitasaṁgraha, ed. Bendall (Muséon, 1900) at the end.
Theragatha 872 = Dhammapada 173: papaṁ kataṁ kusalena pithiyati.762 Chapter Four
Only tathāgataprasāda can wash away "the bad dharmas which Māra has planted in the
Buddha" (read with the MSS buddhāvaropitānām akuśalānāṁ dharmānāṁ ... prakṣālaṇam); the
faith (fraddhā) and devotion (bhakti) of Māra with respect to the Buddha washes away all of his
perfidies (vrjina), Divya, 359, Przyluski, Légende d'Açoka, p. 358.
539. See above pp. 561 and 563.
540. We have seen (iv.73) that the Buddha accepted beforehand all gifts made to Caityas.
The merit of gifts made to the Buddha and the Sangha is contested by many sects, see above
note 522.
On the cult of the deceased Buddha, Milinda, p. 100-101, Bodhicaryāvatāra, ix.36.
The place where the Prajñāpāramitā is taught becomes like a Caitya (castyabhūtaḥ kṛtaḥ),
because the worship that one renders to it is a cause of the accumulation of merit (vandanādinā
punyopacayahetutvāt) (Abhisamayālaṁkārāloka ad Aṣṭasāhasrikā, p. 57).
541. Vyākhyā: Satrur ayaṁ na tāvan mriyata ity anayā saṁjñayā.
542. The Nirgranthas think that a gift made to thieves, etc., bears bad results. But we do not admit
that the quality of the field renders the result agreeable (isța): it makes the result important,
eminent (višişța) in its type (Vyākhyā). In Majjhima i.379, the Buddha counsels Upăli to continue
his generosities to the Nirgranthas; but he refrains from planting his gifts in a bad field. According
to Milinda, 258 (which quotes Majjhima, iii.257), even a monk (samaṇa) who has "totally fallen"
(suvipanna) and who is of bad morals (dussīla) purifies the gift: for one can wash himself in dirty
water.
543. Hsüan-tsang: mo-tu-chia chu, ★ Paramārtha: p'u-t'ao = grape.
544. Bad rūpa: actions of the body and voice.
545. The text describing the one hundred merits which produce the marks (above p:692) are given
in the Vyākhyā; the interpretation (which we place within parentheses) is according to TD 28, p.
933b16, Dharmatrãta's treatise, quoted by Saeki. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 889c22: prayogapariśuddhi,
maulaparifuddhi, prsthapariſuddhi, vitarkānupaghāta, and smṛtyanuparigrhitatva.
546. The enumerations of the bhayas are numerous; we obtain our text by combining Anguttara,
ii.121 and iv.364 (Dharmasaṁgraha, 71).
547. "Good absorption" signifies the mental (caitta) dharma called absorption and the five
skandhas which coexist with this caitta. It is called "absorbed," because the mind which is good, but
not associated with the caitta called absorption, is not bhāvanā, impregnation or meditation:
without doubt this mind impregnates the mental series, but not to the same degree as does
absorption. It is called "good," because the absorption of defiled dhyānas, associated with enjoyment
(āsvādanā) (viii.6), does not constitute puṇyakriyāvastu bhāvanāmaya. Bhāvanā is equivalent to
vāsanā.
548. See Samyutta, iv.312, on the inefficacy of funeral rituals; Anguttara, v.271, the realm of rebirth
of an assassin who gives alms.
549. Ekottara TD 2, p. 656a7; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 825c13. Catvāraḥ pudgalā brāhmaṁ punyaṁ
prasavanti / apratișthite pṛthivipradeśe tathāgatasya śārīraṁ stūpaṁ pratiṣṭhāpayati / ayaṁ
prathamaḥ pudgalo brāhmaṁ punyaṁ prasavati / căturdiśe bhikṣusaṁghe ārāmaṁ niryātayati /Footnotes 763
ayam dvitīyaḥ…../ bhinnaṁ tathāgata[sya] śrāvakasaṁghaṁ pratisaṁdadhāti / ayaṁ tṛtīyaḥ…./
maitrisahagatena cittenāvaireņa asapatnena (MSS. samprannena) avyābādhena vipulena mahad-
gatenāpramāṇėna subhāvitenaikāṁ difam adhimucya spharitvopasaṁpadya viharati . . . ayam
caturthaḥ. See Mahävyutpatti, 69, (editions of Wogihara and Sasaki), and the Daśabhūmaka quoted
in the Madhyamakāvatāra, 55, 391, trans. Museon, 1907, p. 53; same variants.
Anguttara, v.76: bhinnaṁ pana bhante saṁgham samaggaṁ katvā kim so pasavatīti /
brahmaṁ Ananda puññaṁ pasavatīti / kiṁ pana bhante brahmaṁ puññan ti / kappam Ananda
saggamhi modatīti. There then follows the six pädas of Itivuttaka, 19: sukḥā saṁghassa sāmaggi...
samaggaṁ katvāna kappa saggamhi modati.
550. Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 549c9) attributes this opinion to other masters.
551. According to a gloss of Saeki, the Sautrântikas or the Mahāsāṁghikas. Saṁghabhadra (TD 29,
p. 549c21): "There are other masters who say...”
552. In Suttanipāta, 502, a gift to an Arhat produces rebirth in heaven with Brahmä.
Pa
ārt corresponds, in the main, to the Tibetan. He translates 124c-d: "Four action are
called Brahmin merits, because, for one kalpa, they produce the happiness of heaven." He also
enumerates the four actions (TD 29, p. 252a8).
Hsüan-tsang reverses the text of Vasubandhu. After having enumerated the four actions of the
Sūtra, he continues: What is the measure of this merit? The Kārikā (124c-d)ṣays: "To produce birth
in heaven for one kalpa, etc., is the measure of Brahmin merit." The Bhāṣya says, "The former
masters say: The merit that makes one dwell in heaven for a kalpa..."
...
… In another school, there is a gāthā: “A person of faith, of right views, who cultivates the ten
excellent practices (carita), who engenders Brahmin merit dwells happily in the heavens for a
kalpa.” The Vaibhāṣikas say that the measure of this merit is that indicated for the action that ripens
in marks. The Kārikā has the word "etcetera" in order to indicate the variety of opinions.
553. Vyākhyā: This merit is called brāhma, Brahmin, because it is the merit of Brahmās
(brahmaṇām): the word Brahmā signifies, in this expression, the Brahmapurohitas, since the
Brahmapurohitas live a kalpa; since, in another Canon, we read these two pādas: brāhmań punyam
prasavati kalpam svargeșu modate. This merit is thus called Brahmin because [for its duration], it is
like (sadharma) that of the Purohitas.
In Majjhima, ii.207, mettā is brahmānaṁ sahavyatāya maggo.
How should one understand the retribution of Brahmin merit which lasts a kalpa?
Samghabhadra explains (TD 29, p. 594c14): a person detached from Kāmadhātu (vītarāga, virakta)
who practices the four Immeasurable Meditations is reborn among the gods of a higher sphere and
experiences a happiness which lasts one life of a kalpa. A person not detached from Kāmadhātu
who builds a stūpa, who constructs an ārāma, who reestablishes concord within the Samgha, and
who, on many occasions, cultivates the preparatory action of compassion and the other
Immeasurable Meditations we say preparatory action, for in order to practice the Immeasurable
Meditations themselves, one must enter into Dhyāna, which supposes detachment from
Kāmadhātu-,this person also, as if he were to practice the fundamental (maula) Immeasurable
Meditations, produces a heavenly (svärgika) happiness lasting for one kalpa (kalparamāṇa). But is
it not said above that, in Kāmadhātu, there is no retribution for a good action which lasts a kalpa?
There is no good action which lasts only an instant, which could, as is the case for certain bad actions,
produce a life one kalpa in length: this is why we do not express ourselves in this way. But when
many volitions are produced which bear on the same object (construction of a stūpa, etc,), they
produce in succession a heavenly result which lasts one kalpa: one dies in heaven in order to
immediately take up a birth there again. There is thus no contradiction in speaking of a happiness
lasting a kalpa.
The Vyākhyā summarizes this doctrine without naming Samṁghabhadra and ends with the
words: bṛhat puṇyam ity apare.764 Chapter Four
554. Aigsttara, i91; Itivuttaka, 98 and 100: dvemani bbikkhave dân an amissada nam ca
dhammadānaṁ ca. Dharmasaṁgraha, 105, adds maitrīdāna. Spence Hardy, Eastern Monachism,
196. Dīgha, iii.191, āmisānuppadāna.
555. Vyākhyā: Akilistadeśanā = akliştacittasamutthāpitā deśanā.
556. Compare nirāmiṣadharmadeśaka, Mahävyutpatti, 30.37.
557. In Mahāvastu, i. 34, puṇyabhāgīya sattva = a being susceptible of acquiring merit; in the same
way phalabhāgiya = a being susceptible of acquiring the results. (Compare Nettippakarana, 48).
Here punyabhagiya kuśala = puṇyabhāgiya hitam. Or rather punyam bhajata iti punyabhāk /
punyabhāg eva puṇyabhāgīyam / svärthe kapratyayaḥḥ.
558. Mokṣabhāga is opposed to saṁsārabhāga; or rather mokṣabhāga mokşaprapti; thus
mokṣabhāgiya = mokşapräptyanuküla.
On mokṣabhāgiya, see Kofa, iii.44c-d, vi.24, vii.30; Divya, 50.7, 360.1 (devotion, even though
small, has Nirvāṇa for its result), 363.28; mokṣabīja, Karuṇāpuṇḍarikā, 78.14.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 34c28: “In what period are the mokşabhāgiya roots planted? In a period
when the Buddhas appear: it happens, in fact, that the Buddhadharma exists in order that one be
able to plant these roots. According to other masters, even when the Buddhadharma is absent, if
one encounters a Pratyekabuddha, one can plant them. What body must one have in order to plant
these roots? A male or a female body. On what occasion or by what cause does one plant these roots?
By reason of giving, by reason of the precepts, by reason of hearing: but the cause is not required.
Why? By reason of the variety of "intentions” (afaya). There are some persons who, by giving a
mouthful of food or a toothpick, plant these roots, for example, Candra, etc. These persons, after
having given, say: "I desire (pranidhi) that by reason of this I may obtain deliverance." There are
some persons who even though they have given without reserve (wu-che) to a great Sangha
(compare Takakusu, I-tsing, p. 40), do not plant these roots, like Wu-pao-o (Acanda,
Araudra?), etc.; these, after having given, desire riches, etc., in a future life, not deliverance. In the
same way there are certain persons who after having undertaken the Upavāsa for a day and a night,
after having recited one stanza of four verses, plant these roots; whereas there are others who
undertake the Prātimokṣa for the whole of their life, who recite the Tripitaka, but who do not plant
them. It all depends on the ardor of their inclination for Nirvāṇa and on their disgust with
existence.
559. Hsüan-tsang: Good mokṣabhāgiya is the good which certainly produces Nirvāṇa as its result.
The person in whom it has arisen is said to have within himself a dharma of Nirvāṇa.
560. The same idea in the Mahāyāna, for example Madhyamakāvatāra, vi.4-5: prthagjanatve'pi
nifamya fünyatām... tanüruhotphullatanns ca jayate / yat tasya sambuddhadiyo'sti bijam.
561. The khalabila is a hole hollowed out in order that grain be deposited in it. Khala is the area for
thrashing grain: Amarakośa, 3.3.42. Paramãrtha: ti-k'an-ch'e a hole or a crack in the earth,
a fissure.
562. Dīgha, iii.251 (cha nibbedhabhāgiyasaññā), 277 (nibbedhabhāgiyo samadhi, compare Kośa,
viii.17). In the same sense nibbedhika is frequently encountered in the Anguttara; in the
Visuddhimagga, there are eighty-eight nibbedhabhäginī paññā, and fifteen nibbedhabhāgiyam
silam. Nettippakarana, in passim. In the Divya four nirvedhabhāgiyas are distinguished (compare
50.8 and 166.15).Footnotes 765
563. In the Sastra "writings" or "scripture" do not signify writings in the worldly sense of the word
(akşaracihnaṁ puṣṭakādau), but the action by which writings are written. In the same way, mudrā
does not signify the seal having a mark, letter or other sign on it (akṣarānakṣaracihma), but the
action by which the seal is carved (khanyate). (Vyākhyā). The Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 660b23) gives
calculation as an example.
564. Mahävyutpatti, 218.2-4: lipi mudrā (shou-suan =‡ hastagaṇanā, the "handrechnen" of
Schiefner) samkhyā (shu-muĦ) gaṇanā (shu-mu Ħand suan). Divya (3.18, 26.12, etc.): lipi
saṁkhyā gaṇanā mudrā uddhārā nyāsa nikṣepa, and then the eight parīkṣās. Mahāvastu, ii.423:
lekhā lipi saṁkhyā gaṇanā mudrā dhāraṇṇā … ..
The list of the Brahmajāla: muddā gaṇanā saṁkhāna kāveyyo... is explained by Buddhaghosa,
Rhys Davids (Dialogues, i.22), O. Franke (Dīgha in Auswahl, 18-19). On käveyya, also see Mrs.
Rhys Davids, Theragāthā, 1253.
565. Compare Vibhanga, hīna majjhima paņīta, p. 17 et passim.
566. Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 716a5: “What are the sa-uttara dharmas? Conditioned dharmas, space,
and apratisaṁkhyānirodha.” Same terminology in the Abhidhamma, Vibhanga, p. 19 et passim.ABI DHARMA
KOSA
BHASYAM
15
NA
J
VASUBANDHU
TRANSLATED INTO FRENCH BY LOUIS DE LA VALLÉE POUSSIN
ENGLISH VERSION BY LEO M. PRUDENMITJANTIKA
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam
Volume IIIAbhidharmakośabhāṣyam
of Vasubandhu
Volume III
Translated into French by Louis de La Vallée Poussin
English Version by Leo M. Pruden
ASIAN HUMANITIES PRESS
[An imprint of Jain Publishing Company]
Web Site - www.jainpub.comASIAN HUMANITIES PRESS
Asian Humanities Press offers to the specialist and the general reader alike the best in
new translations of major works and significant original contributions to enhance our
understanding of Asian religions, cultures and thought.
Vasubandhu.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
[Abhidharmakośabhāṣya. English]
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam / [translated] by Louis de La Vallée Poussin; English
translation by Leo M. Pruden. Berkeley, Calif.: Asian Humanities Press, 1988-
1990.
4 v.; 23 cm.
Translation of: Abhidharmakośabhāṣya.
Includes bibliographies.
ISBN 0-89581-913-9 (set).
1. Vasubandhu. Abhidharmakośa. 2. Abhidharma. I. La Vallée Poussin,
Louis de, 1869-1938. II. Title.
BQ2682.E5P78 1988
294.3'824-dc19
87-71231
AACR 2 MARC
Copyright 1991 by Asian Humanities Press. All rights reserved. No part of this book may
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the written
permission of Asian Humanities Press except for brief passages quoted in a review.Translator's Introduction
This volume is the third in the projected four volume translation of
Louis de La Vallée Poussin's translation of Vasubandhu's Abhidhar-
makośabhāṣyam. This present volume contains the translation of
Chapter V (anuśaya-nirdeśa, “The Latent Defilements") and Chapter
VI (mārga-pudgala-nirdeśa, “The Path and the Saints"), together with
their footnotes.
Chapter V contains some interesting sections: a refutation of the
idea of the creation of the world through the work of a deity, together
with a refutation of non-Buddhist ascetical practices (kärikā 8 and
bhāṣyam); an analysis of pride (10 and 11); a discussion of morally
neutral error (20); a long discussion of the "undefined points", that is,
the different types of responses that the Buddha made to different
questions, and the significance of these responses (22); an interesting
discussion on the question, Do past and future defilements actually
exist? (25a); a definition of the word sarvāstivāda, and a discussion of
how the dharmas exist especially in the past and the future, leading in
turn into a long discussion of "past" and "future", leading again to a
discussion of whether something that does not absolutely exist can be
an object of consciousness (25c-d to 27d). This Chapter concludes with
a discussion of the order in which the defilements are produced (32c),
and of the minor defilements (46). A number of the footnotes to this
Chapter are of interest: footnote 22 gives an account of the abandoning
of the defilements in Pāļi sources, footnote 27 gives the Sautrāntika
explanation of the upādānaskandhas from the Chinese sources of
Hsüan-tsang, and footnotes 26 and 28 give a good analysis of satkāya
and satkāyadṛṣṭi .
Chapter VI details the Path leading to perfect knowledge, a
knowledge that cuts off the defilements. Sections of note in this
Chapter are: a discussion of the Four Noble Truths, and the
significance of their order (kārikā 2 and bhāṣyam); the question is
asked and discussed: is all sensation painful?, and this leads to a
discussion of the different types of suffering (3); a discussion of thetwo levels of truth, relative truth and absolute truth (4; see also
footnote 43); the preliminary practice of meditation (5); a
visualization of loathsome things (aśubhabhāvanā, 9) and the
cultivation of mindfulness of breathing (ānāpānasmṛti, 12),
-practices leading to stilling (famatha), followed by the cultiva-
tion of the foundations of mindfulness, - a practice leading to
insight (vipaśyana); there is a presentation of the various states of
attainments, Heat (17a),the Summits (or "Heads", 17c-d),
Patience (18c), and the Supreme Worldly Dharmas (19c); the
persons (pudgala) in whom the path arises (29a-b); the methods
of obtaining Nirvāṇa (37a-c); the religious life (54a-b); the
Dharmacakra as the Path of Seeing(darśanamārga, 54c); a
discussion of "occasional" (sāmayiki) deliverance (56c and
following); the concept of gotra (57b and 58c); a discussion as to
whether the defilements have a non-existent thing for their object
(58b); a discussion as to whether an Arhat can fall away from the
state of Arhat; the thirty-seven adjutants of Bodhi (the bodhipă-
ksikas, 67a-b); the four types of faith which accompany intelli-
gence (73c); deliverance (vimukti, 75d); and the difference
between right knowledge and right views (76d).
The Path to holiness was a subject of special interest to Louis
de La Vallée Poussin, and he wrote a long introductory note on the
topic, and this "Summary Note on the Path" serves as an
introduction to this volume.
Leo M. PrudenForeword
Chapter Five: The Latent Defilements
I. The Anusayas
A.
B.
CONTENT S
Function of the Defilements
The Six, and Seven Defilements
1. The meaning of Kamarāgānuśaya
a. A Sarvāstivādin Response
2. Attachments to Existence
C. The Ten Defilements
D.
Ninety-eight Defilements
E. Their Abandoning
1. The non-Buddhists
F. The Five Views
1. The Esteeming of Morality and Ascetic Practices
G. The Four Errors
1. Their Nature
2. Errors with Regard to the Self
3. The Three Characteristics of Error
4. Discussion: The Definition of Error
5. Twelve Errors
H. Pride
1. The Seven Types of Pride
2. The Nine Types of Pride
3. Their Abandoning
II. The Ninety-eight Anusayas
A. The Universal Anusayas
B. Their Object
C. Anusayas Through Being an Object
Anusayas Through Association
1. A Variant Definition of Anuśaya
D. Their Moral Tone
E. Good, Bad, and Neutral Roots
xiii
767
767
767
768
770
771
772
772
773
776
776
777
780
781
781
782
782
783
784
784
785
786
788
788
789
794
796
797
797F. The Fourteen Undefined Points and
the Four Types of Questions
G. The Bonds of the Anusayas
1. Sautrāntika Criticism
2. Vaibhāṣika Rejoinder
H. Discussion: Do the Dharmas Exist in the
Three Time Periods
1. The Four Types of Sarvästivādins
2. Vasubandhu's Refutation
3. A Sautrāntika Criticism
4. Discussion: Can Non-Existent
Things be Cognized?
Disconnection versus Abandoning
I.
★
J. The Object of Each Anusaya
K. A Defiled Mind
L.
The Order in which the Ten
Anusayas are Produced
M. Causes of the Defilements
III. Miscellaneous Discussions on the Defilements
A. Definition of the Cankers
1. The Floods and the Yokes
2. The Five Clingings
3. Definitions
B. The Five Categories of Defilements
1. The Nine Connections
a. Connections and Views
b. Connections and Wrappings
c. The Five Inferior Connections
d. The Four Higher Connections
2. The Three Bonds
3. The Minor Defilements
4. The Wrappings
a. Their Origin
b. "Filth of the Defilements"
c. Their Abandoning
800
804
806
806
806
808
810
810
816
820
821
825
826
828
829
829
831
832
833
835
835
836
837
838
840
840
841
841
843
843
844IV. The Abandoning of the Defilements
A. Four Abandonings
B. Fourfold Opposition
d. Their Moral Tone
e. The Dhātus
5. The Five Hinderances
I.
II.
C. Separation
Footnotes
1. The Four Types of Separation
D. The Sequence of Abandoning
E. Perfect Knowledge
1. The Nine Perfect Knowledges
2. The Stages of Absorption
3. Is Abandoning a Perfect Knowledge
4. How Many Perfect Knowledges
Can One Possess?
5. The Anāgāmin and the Arhat
Chapter Six: The Path and the Saints
The Nature of the Path
The Four Noble Truths
A. Their Order
1. The Meaning of abhisamaya
2. The Meaning of āryasatya
B. The Truth of Suffering
1. The Three Types of Suffering
a. Discussion: Is the Path Suffering?
Argument from Scripture
Argument from Reason
898
899
899
901
b. Discussion: Is there any Agreeable Sensation? 901
903
845
847
851
C. The Truth of Origin
D. The Two Truths
854
854
III. The Path of Seeing: Preliminary Practices
A. The Three Wisdoms
855
856
857
858
859
860
862
864
866
867
869
895
896
897
897
907
908
910
911
912
a. Discussion: The Meaning of the Suffix -maya 913B. The Two Separations
C. The Four Aryavamsas
D.
Visualization of the Loathsome
E. Mindfulness of Breathing
F. The Foundations of Mindfulness
F. Heat (Usmagata)
H. The Summits (Mürdhan)
I. Patience (Ksānti)
J. The Supreme Worldly Dharmas
K. The Four Roots of Good
1. Their Acquisition
L. The Four Nirvedhabhāgiyas
M. Loss versus Falling Away
N. The Three Gotras
O. The Moksabhāgiyas
P. The Arising of the Patience of Dharma Knowledge
1. The Definition of niyama, niyāma, and samyaktva
Q. The Consecutive Knowledge of Suffering
IV. The Path of Seeing
E. The Srotaäpanna
F. Śraddhādhimukta and Dṛṣṭiprāpta
945
A. The Sixteen Mental States
946
B. The Three Comprehensions
947
1. Discussion: Is Comprehension Single or Gradual? 947
C. The Irresistible Path
949
1. Disconnection
D. The Saints: Śraddhānusārin and Dharmānusārin
1. Discussion: The Meaning of śraddhānusārin
2. Discussion: The Meaning of dharmānusārin
G. The Nine Categories of Defilements
H. The Saptakṛtparamaḥ
1. The Vaibhāṣika Objection
913
915
916
921
925
930
930
931
933
933
934
935
938
2. Response
I. Why the Srotaäpanna is Incapable of Falling
J. A Kulamkula
K. The Sakṛdāgāmin
940
942
943
944
945
950
952
952
952
953
954
958
958
959
959
961
962
9641. The Ekavicika
L. The Anāgāmin
1. The Five Types of Anägāmin in Rūpadhātu
2. The Three types of Akaniṣṭhaga
3. The Bhavägraga
4. The Four Types of Anāgāmin in Ārūpyadhātu
5. The Seven Types of Anāgāmin
6. The Nine Types of Anagamin
M. The Seven Realms of Rebirth for Good Persons
1. Discussion: Do the Five Types of Anāgāmin
Exist in Kämadhātu?
2. The Saint and His Repeated Births
N. Combining the Dhyānas
1. Why are the Dhyānas Combined?
O. The Śuddhāvāsas
P. Kāyasākṣins
1. The Three Learnings
Q. The Antaräparinirvāyin
VI. The Aśaikṣa Path
A. Vajropamasāmadhi
B. The Knowledge of Destruction
C. Definition of the Word saikṣa
D. The Eight Saints
E. Detachment and the Path
1. The Spheres of Detachment
F. The Consciousness of Non-Arising
G.
Śramāṇya and the Four Śramāṇyaphalas
1. The Eighty-nine Śramāṇyaphalas
2. The Five Stages of the Path of Abandoning
Discussion: Śramāṇya and the Two Results
1. Synonyms of Śramāṇya
a. The Wheel of the Dharma
964
965
966
968
969
969
970
970
971
973
973
975
976
977
977
978
979
980
981
983
983
985
985
988
991
992
992
993
994
995
995
Discussion: Why is the Path of Seeing a Wheel? 995
b. Threefold Revolution and the Twelve Aspects 996
2. Śramāṇyaphala and the Spheres
998H. The Six Types of Arhats
1. Occasional Deliverance
2. Can Arhat Fall Away?
Discussion: Do Defilements Have Non-Existent
Things for Their Objects?
3. The Sauträntika Argument: Arhats
Cannot Fall Away
a. Arguments from Scripture
b. Arguments from Reason
c. The Vaibhāṣika Position
The Six Gotras of Saikṣas and Prthagjanas
I.
J. The Three Types of Falling Away
K. Perfecting the Moral Faculties
L. The Seven Āryans
VIII. The Various Paths
A. The Four Paths
M. The Ubhayatobhāgavimukta and the Prajñāvimukta 1018
N. The Perfect or Complete Saikṣa and Aśaikṣa
1019
1. The Meaning of the Word mārga
2. The Meaning of the Word pratipad
B. The Four Routes
C. The Thirty-seven Adjutants of Bodhi
1. Their Natures
2. Energy versus Exertion
3. Their Order
4. Their Purity or Impurity
5. Their Spheres
D. The Four Avetyaprasādas
1. Definition of the Term avetyaprasādas
E. Perfect Deliverance and the
Knowledge of Perfect Deliverance
1. Right Knowledge versus Right Views
F. The Relationship between Disgust
and Detachment
Footnotes
999
1000
1003
1004
1006
1006
1009
1010
1010
1011
1013
1016
1020
1020
1020
1021
1021
1022
1023
1025
1026
1029
1029
1031
1033
1034
1036
1038
1041Foreword
1. I am grateful for the generosity of the Foundation Universitaire
which continues its indispensable goodwill towards Vasubandhu and
his unworthy interpreter. My friend J.-B. Istas also deserves my thanks.
Owing to his asaṁmușța attention the errors of orthography are, I
hope, very few.
2. With this volume, I have finished the translation of two-thirds
of the Kośa. There remain Chapters VII and VIII (the jñānas and the
"qualities" which consist of jñānas, and the absorptions and the
"qualities" which consist of absorption), and the short "Treatise on the
Refutation of the Pudgala" which is customarily regarded as the Ninth
Chapter: this will be the contents of a volume which will appear in
1925. Finally we must take up again the Third Chapter whose
translation in "Cosmologie bouddhique" (Kegan Paul, Trench, etc.,
1918) leaves much to be desired. And finally I shall have to fill this
long work with introductions, notes, and indices which will facilitate
their use.
3. In 1913-1914 I translated the Fifth Chapter from the Tibetan
and J.-B. Istas has partially printed my translation. Here it is taken up
again and improved.
The Sixth Chapter has benefited from favorable circumstances. I
made use of the Cambridge MSS-which Miss Ridding and myself
copied in 1915-and from the xylograph in the India Office. Close
collaboration with Miss Ridding and with E. J. Thomas led to the
appearance of an English version very carefully researched from the
point of view of English equivalents. A study of Paramartha,
Hsüan-tsang, and the notes by Kyokuga Saeki, much though it may
have enriched the commentary, has not notably changed the work that
we did in Cambridge.
I considered that, without the aid of an outline which would
elucidate uncertain points, the Sixth Chapter would be truly awkward.
xiv Foreword
to read. A note on the Path will therefore be found here.
***
A Summary Note on the Path.
1. There is acquisition of the "roots of good which produce
deliverance" (mokṣabhāgiya kuśalamula, iii.44c, iv. 124, vi.24c,
vii.30, 34)--which are thoughts or actions inspired by the desire for
deliverance (Nirvāṇa)—in an existence preceding the immediate
preparation of the Path (vi.24d).
2. There is acquisition of the aryavamsas, vi.5-8), moral
qualities which make a perfect monk. In principle, it is considered
that entry to the Path presupposes the quality of a monk, certainly
the Prātimokṣasaṁvara, the quality of Upāsaka (iv, English
translation p. 598, 680).
3. There is then the cultivation of the contemplation or
visualization of loathsome things (aśubhābhāvanā) and the
application of the mindfulness of breathing (ānāpānasmṛti)
(vi.9-13), through which one triumphs over desire and distraction,
and through which one becomes capable of entering into bhāvanā
or samādhi, absorption.
4. There is "application of mindfulness" or "application of the
prajñā, the speculative consciousness, due to mindfulness"
(smṛtyupasthāna, vi. 14-16). The ascetic understands, in a still
imperfect manner, the specific and general characteristics of the
body, of sensation, of the mind, and of dharmas in general.
5. Then there takes place the acquisition of the four "roots of
good" (kusalamula) which are called "leading to penetration,"
nirvedhabhāgiya (vi.17-25). These are smṛtyupasthānas of a
higher nature, the highest of which, the laukikāgradharmas, "the
Supreme Worldly Dharmas," or meditation, leads directly to the
pure seeing of the truths, to abhisamaya.
The nirvedhabhāgiyas are the preparatory path (prayogamarga)Foreword XV
par excellence; all of the exercises which precede it are the distant
preparatory path. There now comes the Path properly so-called,
the path of the abandoning of the klesas or defilements (the
prahāṇamārga).
6. There is abhisamaya (vi. English translation p. 897, 946) or
satyābhisamaya, "comprehension of the Truths." This is a pure or
anāsrava prajñā, that is to say a prajñā free from any error
(viparyāsa, v.9) and any defilement (rāga, etc.), which grasps the
general characteristics (sāmānyalakṣaṇa, ii, English translation p.
240) of the Truths. The Truths are defined, vi.2, 3; each one is
made up of four "aspects" (ākāras) vii.13; "comprehension" is
therefore gradual (anupūrva), vi.27.
Abhisamaya is made up of sixteen thoughts, or sixteen
moments of thought.
The ascetic first sees the Truth of Suffering relating to
Kāmadhātu. This seeing consists of two moments. In the first,
duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti (vi.26a), the ascetic destroys any doubt
that may remain relating to the suffering of Kāmadhātu: this first
moment is a "patience" (ksanti), which expels a certain category of
klesa; this is a path of abandoning (prahāṇamārga) or an
"irresistible" path (ānantaryamārga), v.61, vi.28, 65. This first
moment is samayktvaniyāmāvakrānti (vi. English translation p.
896) and makes the ascetic an Aryan, a candidate for the first
result.
The second moment, all doubt having disappeared relating to
suffering of Kāmadhātu, is called duḥkhe dharmajñāna: this is a
perfect "knowledge." The difference between a "patience", kṣānti,
and “knowledge,” jñāna, is explained vii.1. In the second moment,
the ascetic who, in the first moment, cut off the "possession"
(prāpti, ii.36c) of a certain category or group of klesas, takes
possession of the "destruction" relating to these klesas (destruc-
tion = nirodha, pratisamkhyanirodha, nirvāṇa, ii. English transla-
tion p. 207, 280). The ascetic is therefore delivered from these
klesas: the second moment is thus a path of deliverance (vimukti-
mārga) (vi.28, 61, 65).xvi Foreword
In the third and fourth moments, the ascetic sees the Truth of
Suffering relating to the suffering of the two higher spheres.
There are the same four moments for each Truth: in all sixteen
moments, eight moments of ksanti, eight moments of jñāna. The
four moments of jñāna relating to Kāmadhātu are dharmajñāna;
the four moments relating to the higher spheres are anvayajñāna
(vii.3, 6, 8).
7. The first fifteen moments of abhisamaya make: up the "path
of seeing," satyadarśanamārga or darśanamārga, because they are
the first (pure) seeing of the Truths (vi.28c). This is the
dharmacakra (vi.54), very rapid, of such a type that it is difficult for
a saint capable of reading the thoughts of others to follow the
progress of an ascetic who has entered darśanamārga (vii.6b).
The eight ksantis or "paths of abandoning" (prahāṇamārga)
which are found here bring about the abandoning (v. English
translation p. 775, 854, 861), in a definitive manner, of a certain
category of klesa--the klesa which is "wrong seeing" (drsti) by its
nature (satkāyadṛṣṭi, etc., i.40c, iv.11, v.4, vi.58, vii.36), the
so-called avastuka kleśa--plus a certain attachment, rāga, the rāga
which is in direct relationship with the drsti (v.33).
In the sixteenth moment, which is the first moment of the
path of meditation (bhāvanāmārga), the ascetic acquires the first
result, the result of Srotaapanna (on the results or "fruits," see
v.70, vi.51), and of the sixth parijñā (v.54). His deliverance is
assured and rapid: he will obtain Nirvāṇa after seven (or after
fourteen) rebirths at the most, vi.34a. Nevertheless, if the ascetic,
before having entered the path of darśana, has not got rid of,
through a worldly path of meditation (laukika bhāvanāmārga) (see
Para. 8 below), the kleśas which can only be abandoned by the path
of meditation (bhāvanāmārga), he will remain, upon leaving the
path of seeing, bound by innumerable kleśas: the path of darsana,
in sum, cuts off only the dṛṣṭis, the idea of self, etc.; it does not cut
off the rāga or attachment which one experiences through
agreeable sensations, which, as opposed to the idea of self, are real;
it also leaves intact hatred (dveșa), etc. (v.5a, i.40), which only theForeword xvii
path of meditation can cut off.
8. The path of meditation, bhāvanā, is by nature punaḥ
punarāmukhīkaraṇa, abhyāsa, repeated contemplation, or “medita-
tion" (On the different definitions of bhāvanā, bhāvayati, see ii.59,
iv.123c, v.29, 60d, vi.5a, 70, vii. 11, 20, 27).
This path is pure or impure; as pure, it can only be cultivate by
an ascetic who has trodden the path of darśana.
Let us now consider the ascetic who, although bound by all of
the bonds to be abandoned through meditation (bhāvanāheyak-
leśa), leaves the path of seeing and enters the pure path of
meditation.
This path consists of the repeated contemplation of the Truths.
Through this contemplation, the ascetic will abandon, in sequence,
the nine categories (strong-strong, strong-medium, strong-weak,
medium-strong.
vi.33) of the kleśas relating to Kāmadhātu,
relating to each of the Four Dhyānas (stages or heavens of
Rūpadhātu), and relating to each of the four states or four
existences (upapatti) of the so-called "formless" or nonmaterial
absorptions which make up Ārūpyadhātu (on the distinction
between samāpattidhyāna and upapattidhyāna, see viii. 1); for
example, he abandons all rāga (attachment or craving) first with
respect to the sense pleasures, and then with respect to the delight
or satisfaction that he experiences in the First Dhyana.
The abandoning of each of these categories (nine for each of
the nine spheres) makes up a "moment" of abandoning or of
relinquishment (prahāṇa or ānantaryamārga) and a moment of
deliverance (vimuktimārga): in which moment the ascetic takes
possession of the destruction of this category. In distinction to the
path of seeing, these two moments are moments of "knowledge,"
jñāna; there are no "patiences," kṣānti, in the path of meditation
(v.65d).
The ascetic who obtains the abandoning of the sixteenth
category of the kleśas of Kāmadhātu (avarabhāgīya, v.43) becomes
a Sakṛdāgāmin (vii.35c); he will be reborn no more than once inxviii Foreword
Kāmadhātu; he who has obtained the abandoning of the nine
categories of the same defilements becomes an Anāgāmin (vi.34);
he will not be reborn again in Kāmadhātu.
The path of abandoning through which the ascetic abandons
the ninth category (weak-weak) of the kleśas which are attached to
the highest sphere of existence--the fourth Ārūpya, naivasaṁjñānā-
saṁjñāyatana, or simply Bhavagra--bears the name of Vajropama-
samādhi (vi.44d). It is followed by a "path of deliverance” in which
the ascetic takes possession of the destruction of all the klesas or
asravas. The ascetic, endowed with the highest of the parijñās
(v.69c), is henceforth an Arhat, an Aśaikṣa. He possesses
kṣayajñāna (vi.44d) and, since he is "immovable," anutpādajñāna
(vi.50) [On the different types of Arhat, the falling away of an
Arhat, see vi.56-60].
9. The name višeșamārga, the path of excellence or the
excellent path, or the path of the progress, is given to the "paths"
(that is to say to the moments of thought) which are better
(visista) than the result already obtained (v.61, vi.32, 65).
The theory of the four paths, prayoga, ānantarya, vimukti, and
viseșa, is applied to many spiritual processes, for example to the
acquisition of the višeșas (that is to say of the spiritual qualities,
guna, whose acquisition depends on the Dhyānas): acquisition of
the divine eye and of the abhijñās (vii.42), acquisition of the
abhibhvāyatanas (viii.35), etc. One process particularly worthy of
notice is indriyasaṁcāra (vi.41c, 57c, 58b, 60), through which the
ascetic "transforms" or "perfects" the moral faculties (indriya) of
faith, etc., making them sharp (tikṣṇa). The classification of the
Saints (Śraddhānusārin, etc., vi.29, 63) rests on the distinction
between sharp and blunt or weak (mṛdu) faculties.
10. Nevertheless, without having "seen" the Truths through a
pure prajñā, without having "uprooted" the "wrong views"
(satkāyadṛṣṭi, the idea of a self, etc.), in other words, by completely
remaining a Prthagjana (vi.26a, p. 944), an ascetic can become
detached (vairāgya) from Kāmadhātu, from Rūpadhātu, and from
the first three stages of Ārūpyadhātu.VETTA MATK
Foreword xix
In addition to the pure (anasrava) or transworldly (lokottara)
or Āryan path--which is "seeing the Truths," darśanamārga, or
"repeated seeing, meditating on the Truths,” bhāvanāmārga--there
is an impure (sāsrava, samala) or worldly (laukika) path which is
called a "worldly path of meditation," laukika bhāvanāmārga. In
this path the ascetic does not progress through "attention bearing
on the true nature of things" (tattvamanasikāra) or by grasping
their common characteristics (sāmānyalakṣaṇa, impermanence,
etc.); he will not think of "suffering" in and of itself, an abstraction
created from the "self" or of "another" who suffers; etc. The
ascetic becomes disgusted with Kāmadhātu, he "detests" (vidū-
ṣaṇā) Kāmadhātu, which is coarse, painful, an obstacle; he
considers the First Dhyāna as excellent, etc. (vi.49, 61). In this way
he obtains, in two successive moments (a moment of abandoning
and a moment of deliverance), the abandoning of each of the nine
categories of kleśa which attach themselves to Kāmadhātu. And
the same for the successive stages.
a. It is evident that a person born in Kāmadhātu, and
consequently defiled through birth by all the kleśas proper to this
sphere of existence, cannot uproot these same kleśas by means of
thoughts pertaining to the sphere of Kāmadhātu. The ascetic
should therefore raise himself above his natural state (prakṛtyavas-
tha) in order to become disgusted (vairāgya) with Kāmadhātu. As
long as he is not disgusted with it, he cannot enter into the First
Dhyāna, since it is this very same disgust which causes him to
enter the First Dhyana. The ascetic should therefore enter a state
of absorption which is called anāgamya (v.66, vi.44d, 61c, viii.22c)
and which is the "threshold", the frontier (sāmantaka) of the First
Dhyāna: it is in this state that he is delivered from the klesas of
Kāmadhātu. He rises above the First Dhyāna in order to free
himself from the klesas of the First Dhyāna, and into the
"threshold" of the Second Dhyāna and so on (viii.21d). In order to
deliver himself, by means of the worldly path of meditation, from
the klesas of a certain sphere, he should, on the one hand, aspire to
a higher sphere, and on the other hand, enter into the threshold of
the higher sphere. Consequently the ascetic cannot, by means ofXX Foreword
the worldly path, free himself from the highest stage of existence,
or Bhavagra.
b. The worldly path, if it puts the ascetic in possession of the
destruction (nirodha) of the klesas, or of "disconnection from the
kleśas" (visamyoga), only gives him a worldly possession (laukikī
prāpti) of this “disconnection” (vi.46a). This possession is not
definitive. The gods of the world of Brahmã are Pṛthagjanas who
are provisionally liberated from the activation of the klesas of
Kāmadhātu.
It is normal for an ascetic to have cultivated the worldly path of
meditation before entering the path of the pure seeing of the
Truths. Who of us, in the course of the infinite number of rebirths,
has not obtained the Dhyānas by the worldly path? All beings, in
certain periods of chaos, are reborn in the heavens of the Dhyānaš
(viii.38).
One should therefore distinguish, on the one nand, the ascetic
who obtains all the results in the sequence in which they nave been
explained above (Para. 8), Srotaāpanna, Sakṛdāgāmin, Anāgāmin;
and on the other hand, the ascetic who, before entering the path of
seeing, is already liberated by the worldly path from the lower
categories of the klesas of Kamadhātu or of all of the categories of
klesas of Kāmadhātu (bhūyovītarāga, vītarāga or kāmavītarāga).
Such an ascetic, when he has trodden the Path of Seeing, does not
become a Srotaāpanna; he becomes a Sakṛdāgāmin or an Anā-
gāmin according to the case. And he possesses, thanks to the Path
of Seeing, the transworldly and worldly possession of the
destruction of the kleśas previously abandoned by the worldly path
(vi.29c, 55).
The Buddha gave a memorable example of this method: he was
a Pṛthagjana when he came to the Bodhi Tree (iii.41a), but a
Prthagjana who had cultivated the worldly path to its extreme
limit, who had no more attachment except to Bhavāgra, the fourth
state of Arūpyadhātu. He thus obtained the quality of Arhat--
which for him was the quality of Samyaksambuddha--in thirty-two
moments of thought (ii.44a, vi.24a): sixteen moments of "com-Foreword xxi
prehension of the Truths" (abhisamaya, see above Para. 6), which
made him an Anāgāmin freed from all existence with the
exception of Bhavāgra; and eighteen moments (nine paths of
abandoning, and nine of deliverance) of the path of meditation on
the Truths, which destroy the kleśas relating to Bhavagra.
11. It is normal for the ascetic, after having achieved the path
of the Seeing of the Truths, to cultivate the worldly path of
meditation.
Once he is a Srotaāpanna, he frees himself from Kāmadhātu
through the worldly path: nevertheless his possession of the
destruction of the kleśas of Kāmadhātu is a transworldly posses-
sion (vi.46, 53c). The worldly path immediately places him in
possession of results superior to those of a Srotaāpanna.
a. The ascetic who is detached from Kāmadhātu through the
worldly path can cultivate the "Path of Seeing" by entering into
Dhyāna; nothing is easier for him, since he "possesses" the
Dhyānas and can “manifest" or actualize them (saṁmukhikartum)
at will.
b. The ascetic who is not detached from Kāmadhātu through
the worldly path, will enter anāgamya in order to cultivate the
Path of Seeing.¹ And he will be able, in this same anāgamya, to
cultivate to the end, as far as the acquisition of the result of Arhat,
the pure path of the meditation of the Truths [Whereas the
impure path of meditation is made up of the successive acquisition
of the Dhyānas and Ārūpyas]. Nevertheless, it is in the Dhyānas,
and notably in the Fourth Dhyāna, that the path is most easily
cultivated (v.66a, vi.24a, 47c).
c. The pure path is absent from Kāmadhātu (ii.12, viii.5).
d. Every pure path of meditation is also absent from the Fourth
Ārūpya; it is therefore in a lower sphere (notably, the Third
Ārūpya) that the ascetic--when the ascetic is a god of a certain
class--will be delivered from the klesas of the Fourth Ārūpya
(viii.20a).xxii
Foreword
e. The
(vi.55).
types of beings who are capable of cultivating the path
12. One can obtain the quality of Arhat without having
cultivated the Dhyānas. Even more so the "absorption of the
destruction of ideas and sensations” (saṁjñāveditanirodhasamão
patti) (ii.43, iv.54, 56, vi.43, 63, 64, viii.27c, 33a) is not indispensa-
ble. However, it possesses great advantages, as do all the Dhyānas.
The "qualities" (guna) consisting of knowledge (jñānamaya) and
of absorption (samādhimaya), such as araṇā, praṇidhijñāna, the
vimokṣas, sūnyatāsamādhi, śünyatāśūnyatāsamādhi, etc. (Chapter
VII and VIII), are accessories of the path.
13. Vasubandhu does not forget to refer his model of the path
to the old mystical chart of Buddhism: the bodhipākṣikas, the
mārgāngas, the bodhyangas, the three skandhas, etc. (vi.67).
***
note 1. The first two results are obtained only by an anāgamya. The
third can be obtained in the six spheres (vi. English translation
note 397).CHAPTER FIVE
Footnotes 869
1. For an etymology and explanation of the word anuśaya, see v.39; on the role of the
anufayas and their anufayanas, v.17.
Pali sources: Seven anuśayas, Añguttara, iv.9; Vibhanga, 340, 383; Visuddhimagga, 197;
Compendium, 179, note 2; JPTS, 1910-12, p. 86 (Yamaka). For their nature as disassociated
from the mind, morally neutral, not grasping an object, and distinct from the pariyutthānas,
see Kathāvatthu, ix.4, xi.1, xiv.5; problems discussed page 768 and following.
Theory of klefa-anuśaya and of its abandoning in classical Yoga, see Yogasutra, ii.7 and
following (which often reminds us of the Kofa).
Pali sources on the abandoning of the defilements, below note 22.
2. upacayaṁ gacchanti.Ipso facto "to accumulate” means to gain force and fruitfulness
(results?), "to necessarily produce a retribution”: vipākadānāya niyatībhavanti.See iv.50 and
120.
3. Bhava can be understood in the sense of punarbhava, rebirth or new existence; or, as in
the formula for Pratītyasamutpāda, in the sense of karmabhava (iii.12, 13, 24, 36), that is,
action, for action only accumulates by reason of the anuśayas (Vyākhyā).
The author explains below (vi.3, end) the roles of desire (or defilement), action and
ignorance in the production of a new existence.
4. As we see in the Bhāṣya, kleśa is the equivalent of anusaya for the Sarvāstivādins; the
same for paryavasthāna (paryutthāna). For the Sarvāstivādins, the anuśaya of a kleśa, for
example kāmarāga or sensual desire, is the kleśa itself; for the Vätsiputrīyas, it is the prāpti
or possession of this klesa: a person who is not presently bound by the defilement,
"possesses" the defilement that he has had and which he will have; for the Sauträntikas, it is
the seed of the kleśa, the dormant klefa.See below note 16.
5. yaḥ kleso yaddhātukaḥ sa taṁ dhātuṁ nātikrāmayati.
Samghabhadra adds: 11. it puts one in a bad state, it makes one unfit (āśrayadauṣṭṭhu-
lyam janayaty akarmaṇyatāpādanāt) (ii.26a-c); 12. it is hostile to spiritual qualties (guṇān
dveșți); 13. it provokes shameful actions and makes someone the object of blame; 14. it
makes one leave the good path, for its disposes one to follow erroneous masters; 15. it
plants the seeds of all sufferings of transmigration; and 16. it causes the physical universe to
deteriorate (iii.99, iv.85).
6. See below v.20, note 69.
7. Attachment to the objects of the five material sense organs, visible things, sounds, etc.
(the pañca kāmaguṇāḥ).
8. The order differs in Dīgha, iii.254, 282; Anguttara, iv.9; Samyutta, v.60, Vibhanga, p. 383:
kāmarāga, patigha, diṭṭṭhi, vicikicchā, māna, bhavarāga, and avijjā.
9. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 236a2, 253a9. uttaraniḥsaraṇa = paścăn niḥsaraṇa (Vyākhyā).
Compare Anguttara iii.233= v.323: na kāmarāgapariyuṭṭhitena cetasă viharati na
kamarāgaparetena uppannassa ca kamarāgassa nissaraṇaṁ yathābhūtaṁ prajānāti . . . ;
v.188: uttarim nissaraṇaṁ yathābhūtam . . .
The most likely explanation is the following. A raga; rāgaparyavasthana is an explosion
of rāga, rāga in action. We can understand Vibhanga, p. 383 as refering to rāga in a subtle
state, as potential = rāganuśaya; the manifested rāga = rāgapariyuṭṭhāna; and rāga as a bond
= rāgasamyojana.
According to the Kośa, v.47, paryavasthāna is a synonym for kleśa, defilement (but the
Sūtra quoted can be understood: rāgaparyavasthāna = an explosion of desire). Ibidem
paryavāsthāna is understood, rightly, as shamelessness, etc. (eight or ten paryavasthānas).
Paryavasthāna, paryavasthita, “anger," "in the prey of anger, outside of oneself," in many
places in the Divyāvadāna (references in Speyer, Avadānaśataka, Index) we have tīvreņa
paryavasthänena paryavasthitaḥ, krodhaparyavasthitaḥ; in p. 520.9 paryavasthāna is used to870 Chapter Five
describe all the defilements in an active state: "his paryavasthāna of affection disappears in
order to make room for the paryavasthāna of hatred." Childers: Māreņa pariyuṭṭhitacitto:
having a mind possessed by Māra.
The distinction between paryavasthāna and paryutthāna appears to be chiefly verbal:
there is paryutthāna when a defilement rises (kun nas Idań ba: to arise, to expand, to
explode); there is paryavasthāna when a defilment surrounds (kun nas dkris pa). We have
seen that rāgapariyuṭṭhita = rāgapateta (Anguttara, iii.233). Some expressions of equivocal
meaning are brought together in Anguttara, i.66; kāmarāga-vinivesa-vinibandha-paligedha-
pariyuṭṭhāna-ajjhosāna.
10. According to Vasumitra (172a, Wassilief, p. 265), the Mahāsāṁghikas say: "The
anuśayas are neither mind (citta) nor mental states (caitta). They do not have an object
(anālambana, comp. Kośa, i.34, ii.34b). The anusayas are different from the paryavasthānas
(kun nas dkris pa): the first are disassociated from the mind (viprayukta), whereas the
second are associated with the mind (saṁprayukta).” The Sarvăstivādins (173b, Wassilieff,
p. 274) say: "The anuśayas are mental states, and are associated with the mind. All the
anuśayas are paryavasthāna, but all paryavasthānas are not anuśaya.”
According to Bhavya (180a, Rockhill, p. 188), the Ekavyavahārikas say: "Since the mind
is pure in nature, one cannot say that the anuśayas are associated with the mind or
disassociated from the mind. The anuśayas are different from paryutthānas (kun nas Idań
ba).” [See Mahāvyutpatti, 30.9.55; 109.59.57]. On the mind which is pure by nature,
Anguttara, i.10, Kośa, vi.77, Wassilieff, 265.
According to Nettippakaraṇa, p. 79: "Former avidyā is the cause of later avidyā: former
avidyā is anuśaya of avidyā; later avidyā is the paryutthāna of avidyā."
The Andhakas maintain: "Anuśaya is different from pariyuttṭṭhāna"; an ordinary
person's mind is good, but he does not however cease from being "endowed with anuśaya”
(sānusaya); but one cannot say that he is pariyuṭṭhita, enveloped [by the defilements].
(Kathāvatthu, xiv.5). The same Andhakas maintain that pariyuṭṭhāna is disassociated from
the mind (xiv.6).
The Andhakas and certain Uttarāpathakas say that the anuśayas do not have an object
(anāramaṇa) (ix.4); the Mahāsāmghikas and the Sammitiyas say that the anusayas are
morally neutral, without causes, and disassociated from the mind (xi.1). Anuśaya as distinct
from pariyutthāna, Vibhanga, p. 383.
11. The objectors, according to the Vyākhyā, are the Vātsīputrīyas; according to the Japanese
editor (=Kyokuga Saeki), the Mahāsāṁghikas (See Vasumitra quoted note 10).
12. The anubandha of one defilement is the fact that it is favorable to the production of
other defilements. We can also undestand anuśaya in the sense of anuvṛtti: “One abandons
kāmarāga together with its continuation."
13. By metaphor, anuśaya = anuśayaprāpti, a cause being designated by the name of its effect
(upacāra); in its correct sense (mukhyavṛtti), anuśaya = paryavasthāna.
14. This is the argumentation of Dharmottara, the author of Taishō no 1550 (Note of the
Japanese editor).
eittakleśakaratvād āvaraṇatvāc chubhair viruddharvāt // kuśalasya copalambhād
aviprayuktā ihānuśayaḥ //
15. If an anuśaya is disassociated from the mind, the anuśaya is the "possession" of the
defilement; now as long as a person is not definitively detached from the defilement, he
keeps the "possession" of the defilement; thus he can never have a good mind.Footnotes 871
16. On the theory of the seed (bija) and of its capacity (fakti), see ii.36d (trans. pp. 211,
274); Chapter IX, trans. Stcherbatski, p. 947, Hsüan-tsang, xxx.13b. On memory, Chapter
IX, Stcherbatski, p. 852; xxx.7a.
17. The Vätsiputrīyas (Vyākhyā) or the Mahāsāṁghikas (Japanese editor).
18. Reading of the Vyākhyā; according to the Tibetan version: rāgānuśayo'nuśete. Majjhima,
iii.285: so sukhāya vedanāya puṭṭo samāno abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāyatiṭṭhati / tassa
rāgānusayo anuseti.
19. Quoted in the Vyākhyā below ad 36a-b with the reading kṛtaḥ.
20. Paramārtha: “... these also make ten."
21. The anusayas are ten on the basis of their natures. By taking into consideration the
sphere to which they belong and their mode of expulsion (Seeing each of the Four Truths
and Meditation), one obtains the number of ninety-eight. According to the Yogācāras, one
hundred and eight, see v.8; and below note 35.
Vasubandhu, faithful to his task, presents the system of the Abhidharma. Here is a
summary of the Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 702a8 - p. 711b5:
How many of the twenty-eight anuśayas belong to Kāmadhātu? . . . How many are
abandoned though Seeing? ….. How many of the thirty-eight anuśayas of Kāmadhātu are
abandoned through Seeing?... How many through the Seeing of Suffering?
What is the meaning of the word anufaya? It signifies aṇu, anuśayana, anusanga,
anubandha (Kośa, v.39). The anuśaya which is not abandoned, not perfectly known
(parijñā) "becomes active and grows" (anufete, glossed in the Kofa by pratiṣṭhām labhate,
puştim labhate) by reason of two things: its object (ālambana), and the dharmas associated
(samprayoga) with it. It "becomes active" in the Dhātu to which it belongs, not in another
(v.18).
There are twelve anuśayas: kāmarāgānuśaya, pratigha, rūparāga, ārūpyarāga, māna,
avidyā, satkāyadṛṣṭi, antagrāhadṛṣṭi, mithyādṛṣṭi, dṛṣṭiparāmarśa, śīlvarataparāmarśa, and
vicikit sānufaya.
How does kamarāgānuśaya “become active?" By reason of the agreeable, of the pleasant
... How so pratigha? By reason of the disagreeable ... How so rüparāga? By reason of the
agreeable... How so māna? . . .
Why is kamarāgānuśaya produced? For three reasons: 1. Kāmarāgānuśaya is not
abandoned or completely known; 2. some dharmas favorable to an explosion (paryavas-
thāna) of the kāmarāga present themselves; and 3. there is incorrect judgment
(ayoniśomanasikāra) . . . (v.34).
These twelve anuśayas make seven (by counting rûparāga and ārūpyarāga under the
name of bhavarāga; by counting the five dṛṣṭis under the name of dṛṣṭyanuśaya) ..
These seven anuśayas make ninety-eight (by counting all of the categories of kāmarāga
as categories of kāmarāgānuśayas to be expelled through the Seeing of Suffering, etc.)
How many of the ninety-eight are universal (sarvatraga), how many are non-universal
(v.17)? [Twenty-seven are universal; sixty-five are non-universal; and six are both. . . ] (p.
702c7). How many have impure things for their object (sāsravālambana) (v.18) (p. 703a16),
how many have conditioned things (saṁskṛtālambana) (p. 703b5) for their object?
How many "become active and grow" (anuśete, see v.17) from their object? from
associated dharmas? from their object and from associated dharmas? from neither the one
or the other? [The examination of this problem fills many pages, 702b22-711b5: How many
"become active and grow" from the fact of the object; etc., from the dharmas abandoned
through the Seeing of Suffering? . . . from thoughts abandoned through the Seeing of
Suffering?... from thoughts associated with a false view abandoned through the Seeing of
Extinction?... from an avidyā abandoned by the Seeing of Extinction? . . . from an avidyā
with a false view abandoned by the Seeing of Extinction? … . . ]872 Chapter Five
22. Some notes on the abandoning (prahāṇa) of the defilements according to the Pali
sources (see vi.1):
1) Majjhima, i.7, distinguishes the āsavas abandoned through dassana, samvara,
pațisevana, adhivāsana, parivajjana, vinodana and bhāvanā.
2) According to the Dhammasangani the three errors of satkāyadṛṣṭi, vicikitsā and
śīlvrataparāmarśa, along with the defilements (rāga, etc.) which reside in these three errors,
are abandoned through Seeing, along with the sensations, ideas, etc., which are associated
with them, and with the actions which they produce (1002-1-6); all of the rest of the rāgas,
dveşas, mohas, with their associated defilements, sensations, and actions, are abandoned
through cultivation or Meditation (1007). The causes (hetu) of the first group are
abandoned through Seeing, whereas the causes of the second are abandoned through
Meditation (1010-1011). Good (kusala) things, physical matter (rūpa) and unconditioned
things (asamkhatā dhātu) cannot be abandoned. Compare Kośa, i.40.
3) Kathāvatthu, i.4, presents the thesis of a gradual abandoning of the defilements
through the successive Seeing of the Truths of Suffering, etc.
4) Atthasălini, p. 234, anusayapajahana through the path of Sotaäpanna and Arhat; p.
376, the abandoning of the samyojanas through the four Paths (See the table set up by Mrs
Rhys Davids, Psychology, p. 303).
5) Visuddhimagga, p. 570 (Warren, p. 193), the order of the abandoning (pahānak-
kama) of the upadanas: the last three are abandoned by the Sotaäpanna; the first
(kāmupādāna) by the Arhat; p. 684-6, by which the ñāṇa (of Sotaāpanna, etc.) are the
different samyojanas, kilesas to be killed (vajjha = vadhya of the Kośa, v.6) . . . upādānas,
(seven) anuśayas, malas, kammapathas, etc.; diṭṭhivicikitsā by the ñāṇa of the Sotaāpanna,
kāmarāga and paṭigha by the ñāṇa of the Anāgāmin, and māna, bhavarāga, and avidyā by
the ñana of the Arhat.
6) Many types of prahāṇa are named and defined in the Atthasālinī p. 351, and in the
Sumangalavilāsinī, p. 20, which are not totally in agreement.
The Sumangalavilāsinī says that, through Vinaya, one obtains morality (sīla), thus
vītikkamappahāṇa, the abandoning of the outflowing of the defilements, that is, the
abandoning of transgressions: for morality is opposed (patipakkha) to the vitikkama of the
kilesas; it is opposed to the outflowing of the defilements and their manifestation through
actions. This abandoning is also called tadangappahāṇa, “partial abandoning." For the
Atthasālinī, tadangappahāṇa is the abandoning of a certain defilement or error (belief in an
ātman, belief in a bad path, in eternity, in annihilation; to not see as dangerous that which is
dangerous, etc.) through the Seeing of the composite character of the self, through the
Seeing of the Path, etc. Maung Tin translates: "elimination of the factor in question."
Through Sutra, one obtains absorption and, as a consequence, pariyutthānapahāṇa or
vikkhambhanapahāṇa, the (temporary) abandoning of the explosion or the manifestation
of the defilements; an abandoning which consists of the fact of hindering, of conquering the
defilements (Mahāvyutpatti, 130.5).
Through Abhidharma, one obtains paññā, and, as a consequence anusayapahāṇa or
samucchedappahāṇa, the abandoning of the seeds of the defilements, an abandoning which
consists of the definitive destruction (samuccheda) of the defilements.
23. The two Paths, the Path of Seeing, and Path of Meditation, are explained in Kośa, vi.1,
26, 49.
24. For example, the view of negation (năstidṛṣṭi) or mithyadṛṣṭi, when it consists of
negating the Truth of Suffering, constitutes an anuśaya abandoned through the Seeing of
Suffering.
25. See vi.28, note.
26. Burnouf (Introduction, 263) explains: "the opinion that the body is what exists, that is,
that it is the self which solely exists." Childers, according to his correspondent Subhūti,
the winteFootnotes 873
explains sakkāya = sakāya = svakāya (as we have anuddayā = anudayā, etc., Muller, Simplified
Grammar, p. 19). We thus have: sakkāyadṛṣṭi = the theory of one's body, the theory that the
body is personal (Mrs Rhys Davids, Psychology, p. 257, quotes the Suttanipāta, 950, 951
with respect to this). See Vibhāṣā quoted note 28. E. Senart holds to satkārya (Mélanges
Harlez, p. 292). Walleser, ZDMG. 64, 581, gives svat-kāya.
Atthasālinī, p. 348: sakkāyadiṭṭhīti vijjamānaṭṭhena sati khandhapañcakasaṁkhāte kāye
sayaṁ vā sati tasmin kāye diṭṭhīti. Expositor, p. 450: a view arising with respect to the body
in the sense of existing, and called the five aggregates, or, itself appearing as the view
arising with respect to the body (??).
Madhyamakāvatāra, vi.120, 144 (p. 282 and 311 of the translation, Musé on, 1911):
Dhammasangani, 1003.
=
Sakkaya Dân capadanakkbandbà, Majjbima, i.299.
Satkāyadṛṣṣṭi is not “bad,” Kośa, iv.12d, v.19.
27. As is shown by Hsüan-tsang's version and by other sources, Vasubandhu here presents
the explanation of the Sauträntikas. It is on this etymology that the Tibetan version rests:
'jig tshogs la lta ba = "a view of the collection of that which perishes." We shall see below
how sat = 'jig = huai = to perish, to deteriorate = mieh (Paramartha).
Hsüan-tsang: "To believe in the self and in things pertaining to a self is the sat-kā-ya
view. We have sat because it perishes (huai); collection is what is called kā-ya: that is,
"collection of impermanent things.” Kā-ya is sat, from whence sat-kāya.This sat-
t-kaya is the
five upādānaskandhas. This expression is used in order to avoid the idea of permanence and
of unity, for it is by reason of these two ideas that there is a belief in a self. The Vaibhāṣikas
explain: because it exists (yu), it is sat; the sense of "body” (kāya) is as above. One says
that this view rests on the "existing body" in order to avoid the idea that the idea of self and
of things pertaining to a self does not have an object [gloss of the Japanese editor: a
refutation of the Sautrāntikas]. This view is called sat-kāya because it is produced by reason
of sat-kaya."
Commentary of the Vijñaptimātra School: "The Sautrāntikas say that sat signifies "false,
deceiving" (wei); ka-ya = "body;" ta-li-se-chih = "view;" "body" signifies
"accumulation," and is a metaphoric expression for accumulation; the view produced by
reason of body-accumulation is the "false-body-view." The Buddha refutes the future
Sarvāstivādin doctrine that the name is "existent-body-view;" consequently he says the
word sat, "to deceive" (sa wei ). This same word sat signifies "existent;" but here
it signifies "false" according to the etymology sidantīti sad iti [Reading of S. Lé'vi].
Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 605c15)explains: "By the force of cause (hetu, doubtless
sabhāgahetu, see ii.52a trans. page 262) and the teachings, some fools recognize a "self" and
"things pertaining to a self" in the five upādānaskandhas. This view is called satkāyadṛṣṭi.
Sat because it exists; collection (chü = rāśi, etc.) is called kāya: the sense is samavāya
(ho-ho ), or ācaya (chi-chü
). Kaya is sat, thus satkāya. The sense is that
of real existence and of multiplicity. This view admits the existence of a "self": now the self
does not exist. One designates the object of this view by the word sat in order to avoid the
idea that this view arises having a non-existent thing for its object; and in the fear that, as a
consequence, there would be a belief in the reality of the "self," this object is designated by
the word kaya. That is: Those who believe in a “self” as a unique entity, a “self” either in a
series (=the series of minds, cittasaṁtati), or in many series (=series of minds and mental
states, series of mental elements): now these series are not a "self," because the kāya is a
multiplicity. As this view of "self" has satkāya for its object, it is called satkāyadṛṣṭi; the
meaning is that this view has for its object the five upādānaskandhas. In fact the
ūtra says,
"What all the Brahmins and monks who believe in a self, really have in view are the five
upādānaskandhas."The Blessed One gives the name of satkāyadṛṣṭi to one single view of
"self" and of "things pertaining to a self", so that one will not believe that the consciousness
has a non-existent thing for its object (since the "self" does not exist), nor that the "self"
exists (since the consciousness had for its object an existent thing and not a non-existent874 Chapter Five
thing). The Sautrāntika (that is, Vasubandhu) gives the following explanation: “We have
sat because it perishes; collection (chü) is what is termed kāya, that is, 'a collection of
impermanent things.' Kaya is sat, thus satkāya.This satkaya is the five upādānaskandhas.-
This expression is used in order to avoid the idea of permanence and unity, for it is by
reason of these two ideas that there is a belief in self." But what good is there in adding the
word sat (with the meaning of "perishable")? The word kāya suffices to avoid the idea of
permanence. If sat signifies perishable, one should simply say käyadṛṣṭi: there is no dharma
which is eternal and susceptible of forming a collection. Thus what value is there in
qualifying kaya by a word signifying perishable?
28. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 255a21:This view, having satkāya (yu-shen . ) for its
sphere (satkāye pravartata iti), is called satkāyadṛṣṭi.
Question: Are there other views that have satkāya for their spheres, not asatkāya, and
which are called satkāyadṛṣṭi?
Other views have svakāya for their sphere, or parakāya, or satkāya, or asatkāya; thus
they are not called satkāyadṛṣṭi.They have the svakäya for their sphere, that is, their own
sphere (dhātu) and stage (bhūmi) for their object; or they have parakaya for their sphere,
that is, another sphere, another stage. They have satkāya for their sphere, that is, the
impure . . . This view, which has satkāya for its sphere, believes in a "self" and in "things
pertaining to a self”: thus it is called satkāyadṛṣṭi.Even though they have satkāya for their
sphere, the others do not believe in a "self" or in "things pertaining to a self": thus they are
not called satkāyadṛṣṭi … … . Vasumitra says: This view is called satkāyadṛṣṭi because it has only
svakaya for its sphere; the five upādānaskandhas are called svakāya.
29. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 151a22; Madhyama, TD 1, p. 788a19; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 38a14;
Kośa, trans. by Hsüan-tsang, TD 29, p. 154c; Samyutta, iii.46: ye keci bhikkhave samaṇā vā
anekavidham attānaṁ samanupassamānā samanupassanti sabbe te pañcūpādānakkhandhe
samanupassanti etesaṁ vā aññataram.
30. See Kośa, iv.66a, 78b, 79c, 96; Dhammasangaṇi, Para. 381, etc.
31. How is the view of annihilation, ucchedadṛssți, a view of affirmation? Here the author
speaks in general (Vyakhyā).
32. Omitted by Hsüan-tsang. Samghabhadra explains: dṛṣṭyādīnām upādānaskandhānāṁ
paratvena pradhānatvenāmarfo dṛṣṭiparāmarfa iti / paraśabdaprayogeṇa cayam atiśayārtho
labhyata iti.
33. Šīlavrata is included in rūpaskandha; one should add ādi in order to mention the other
skandhas. On śīlavrata, see iv.64c, v.38a-c; Suttanipāta, p. 108; Mahāniddesa, 66-68, 88-90,
310, 416; Dhammasangaṇi, 1006; Atthasālinī, 355; Huber, Sūtrālaṁkāra, p. 125, 127, 130.
34. On the Lord, the creator of the world, see ii.64d (trans. page 306), Anguttara, i.173,
Majjbima, ii.227, Digba, i.18 (Brahmã).
35. Vyākhyā: tad idam ācāryeṇa saṁśayāvasthaṁ kṛtaṁ na svamataṁ darśitam / anye
yogācāramatim apekṣyaivaṁ kṛtam. Yaśomitra reproduces the explanation of someone
(kaścit) who refutes the objection of atiprasanga (p. 780, line 1) and that of Samghabhadra;
he presents the system of the Yogācārins: according to the Yogācārins, there are one
hundred and twenty-eight klesas or anuśayas. In Kāmadhātu forty are expelled through the
Seeing of the Truths (each of the ten is expelled by each Truth); six are expelled through
Meditation, namely akalpikā satkāyadṛṣṭi (spontaneous, not philosophical, belief in a self),
ucchedadṛṣṭi, sahaja rāga (innate lust), pratigha, māna and avidyā; the same, with the
exception of the five pratighas, in each of the two higher Dhātus.
The Abhisamayālaṁkārāloka (fol. 120 of my MSS) gives the same total: expelled
through Seeing, one hundred and twelve (forty, thirty-six and thirty-six according to
Dhātu); expelled through Meditation, six, five and five: rāga, dveṣa, māna, avidyā,
satkāyadṛṣṭi and antagrāhadṛṣṭi (dveşa is absent in the higher Dhātus). See vi.1.Footnotes 875
I know of the one hundred and eight kleśas only through the note of Przyluski, Açoka,
page 323.
36. On the viparyāsas, Anguttara, ii.52; Nettippakaraṇa, passim (vipallāsa), Vibhaṁga, 376
(viparyesa); compare Samyutta, i. 188, Dhammasangaṇi, vipariyesagāha and the note of
Atthasālini, page 253; Sikṣāsamuccaya, 198.11; Friendly Epistle, 48, Yogasūtra, ii.5
(definition of avidyā).
37. Mahasamgitidharmaparyayā; Anguttara, ii.52 (vipallāsa); Vibhanga, 376 (saññā, citta,
dittivipariyesa); Visuddbimagga, 683.
38. Nikāyāntarīyāḥ.According to Vibhāṣā, below, the Vibhajyavādins. Hsüan-tsang: "Some
other masters.
""
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 536c8: “Some others say that, among the twelve errors (viparyāsa),
eight are solely abandoned through the Seeing of the Truths, and four, also through
Meditation. These masters are the Vibhajyavādins.” On the Vibhajyavādins, see P'u-kuang,
TD 41, p. 310b23: "They say that there is no formal opinion which is completely correct (fei
chin li
# ), that [the past and the future] exist in part, do not exist in part, and
that one should distinguish the two: thus they are called 'the school of those who speak after
having distinguished' (fen pieh shou pu), in Sanskrit: Vibhajyavādins."
According to the Vijñaptimātravṛtti (wei shih shu
), iv.35.10: "Those
who are called Vibhajyavādins are now the Prajñaptivādins (shuo chia pu)."
According to the Samayabhedoparacanacakra (tsung lun ): "Two hundred years
later there emerged a school from out of the Mahāsāṁghikas called the Prajñaptivādins"
(see Wassiliev page 251, and the note where we see that, in this version of the
Samayabheda, one of the two Chinese translators here reads Vibhajyavādins). A
commentator remarks: "According to these two explanations, the Vibhajyavādins form but
a single school [with the Prajñaptivādins]. But the Vibhāṣā, 23.5 says: "The Mahāsāṁghi-
kas, etc., are called Vibhajyavādins.” So too the Arthapradīpa (? i-teng): "Either the
Vibhajyavādins are certain masters of the Great Vehicle, or all the schools of the Small
Vehicle are called Vibhajyavādins: these latter are not a definite school. Also, in the
Samgraha (? she-lun ), the Vibhajyavādins are strictly defined as being the
Mahīśāsakas: in the Vibhāṣā, they are strictly defined as being the Sāṁmitīyas” (Note of
Saeki ad xix.9a9).
Note the classic references to the Vibhajyavādins, Commentary on the Kathāvatthu,
Vasumitra, etc., in Kern, Wassilief, Waters, etc. See v.25.
39. "Seeing" (paśyati) designates the consciousness obtained through ānantaryamārga;
"knowing" (jānāti), the consciousness obtained through vimuktimārga (vi.28).
40. The Blessed One said: . . . śrutavata āryaśrāvakasya smṛtisaṁpramoṣā utpadyante / atha
ca punaḥ kṣipram evästaṁ parikṣyam paryādānaṁ ca gacchanti.
41. According to the Tibetan: "Others say: . . . “According to the the Japanese editor: "Here
the author criticizes the Vaibhāṣikas . . .
42. The Tibetan only gives the first line of the stanza, but quoted completely by
Hsüan-tsang. This is Samyutta, i.188; Theragāthā, 1223; Visuddhimagga, page 37-38. Cf.
Suttanipāta, 340. According to the Vyākhyā: kāmarāgābhibhūtatvāc cittam me paridahyate/
anga me gautama bhūmi śāntiṁ (?) tvam anukampayā // viparyāsena saṁjñānāṁ cittaṁ te
paridahyate / nimittaṁ varjyatāṁ tasmāc chubham rāgopasaṁhitam // Vāgīśa was a
Srotaapanna, and consequently freed from all the anusayas that one abandons through the
Seeing of the Truths.
43. According to the Vyākhyā: “As the doctrine of the other school, nikāpāntarīīya, (note 38
above) is contradicted by the Vaibhāṣikas by means of a text of Scripture, and as the doctrine
of the Vaibhāṣikas is similarly contradicted by the other school, as a consequence some other876 Chapter Five
masters, constituting a third party, took the words and resolved the problem of the
contradiction of the Sūtras."
According to Hsüan-tsang: "Other masters say... "The Japanese editor believes that the
author is now presenting the opinion of the Sautrāntikas.
44. One can also explain that the expression of this Sūtra: "to see and to know the Truth:
this is Suffering," does not refer to only darśanamārga, the Path of Seeing the Truths, which
Vāgīśa possesses, but also to bhāvanāmārga, the Path of Meditation [which, when it is pure
(anāsrava) bears on the Truths, vi.1]: and Vāgīśa does not possess this second Path.
45. Mänasamyojana, Prakaraṇapāda, TD 26, p. 693a29; Vibhanga, 353; Dhammasangani,
1116, trans. 298; Comm. page 372 (Expositor, page 478); Anguttara, ii.430. Ahiṁkārama-
miṁkāramāna in Majjhima, i486 and elsewhere.
46. The Ãryan is a person who has seen the Truths and who has expelled the anuśayas,
satkāyadṛṣṭi, etc., which are expelled through Seeing (darśana); but he has not necessarily
expelled the anusayas whose expulsion requires bhāvanā (Meditation, or repeated seeing of
the Truths, etc.). However these non-expelled anuśayas do not become active within him.
47. Tathā is translated as et cetera, according to the commentary; the simplest meaning is
"in the same manner;” see Kośa v.lb. for an interpretation of the same word.
48. According to the rule: ye yaddarśanaheyālambanās te taddarśanaheyāḥ / avaśiṣṭā
bhāvanāheyāḥ.See above page and v.60-61.
49. Dīgha iii.216 distinguishes kāmataṇhā, bhavataṇhā, vibhavataṇhā and rūpataṇhā,
arūpataṇhā, nirodhataṇhā.
On vibhavatṛṣṇā, see Visuddhimagga, 568, 594, and Madhyamakavṛtti, 530 note 4.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p138b9: There are three tṛṣṇās, kāmatṛṣṇā, bhavatṛṣṇā, vibhavatṛṣṇā …….
There are some masters, namely the Vibhajyavādins, who say that vibhavatṛṣṇā that the
Sūtra mentions is abandoned by Seeing and by Meditation. It was in order to refute this
opinion and to show that the vibhavatṛṣṇā mentioned in the Sūtra is abandoned by Seeing
alone, that this treatise was composed (tso ssu lun F): Should we say that
vibhavatṛṣṇā is abandoned through Seeing or Meditation? Answer: We should say that it is
abandoned through Meditation. Vibhava is the anityatā (impermanence = non-existence,
destruction) of the nikāyasabhāba (ii.41); the tṛṣṇā which has this anityatā for its object is
called vibhavatṛṣṇā; thus it is solely abandoned through Meditation, for nikāyasabhāga is
abandoned through Meditation. There are some masters who say that vibhavatṛṣṇā is
abandoned either through Seeing or through Meditation. When is it abandoned through
Seeing? When it is attachment (rāga) to the vibhava of the dharmas abandoned through
Seeing. When is it abandoned through Meditation? When it is attachment to the vibhava of
the dharmas abandoned through Meditation.
Question: Who maintains this opinion? Answer: The Vibhajyavādins. They say that
vibhava is the anityatā of the Three Dhātus, that vibhavatṛṣṇā is the tṛṣṇā relative to this
anityatā, that, anityatā being abandoned through Seeing and Meditation, the same holds true
for the tṛṣṇā relative to it . . . Certain masters say: If one follows the Sūtra (sūtrārtha),
vibhavatṛṣṇā is abandoned solely through Meditation; but according to the Truth
(tattvārtha) it is abandoned through both Seeing and Meditation. How is this? The Sūtra
says: "It is as if someone overwhelmed by fear and by suffering thinks: May I, after death, be
annihilated, disappear, no longer exist!" In this Sūtra one should understand vibhava as the
anityată subsequent to nikāyasabhāga: this vibhava is abandoned through Meditation, and so
vibhavatṛṣṇā is not abandoned through Seeing. Here the Master (lun-chu) presents the
meaning of the Sūtra. . . When one is attached to the truth, one should say as the
Vibhajyavādins above: "Vibhava is the name of the anityata of the Three Dhātus...
""
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 138c26: Why does the Srotaāpanna not produce vibhavatṛṣṇā?
Answer: Because he sees the nature of things (dharmatā); that is, seeing that the nature of
things is a series of causes and effect, he ,does not desire annihilation (uccheda). In theFootnots 877
second place, because he believes in the result of action; that is, believing that action and its
effect are the successive parts of one series, he does not desire annihilation. Again, because
he understands emptiness, the Srotaāpanna obtains šūnyatāvimokṣamukha (viii.24); he
knows that there is no present existence, nor subsequent non-existence of the "self" and
"things pertaining to self;" consequently he does not produce tṛṣṇā, the desire for
annihilation, or subsequent destruction. Furthermore, vibhavatṛṣṇā is nourished (upacita)
by vibhavadṛṣṭi (v.7), and vibhavadṛṣți manifests itself following it; now the Srotaāpanna
has already abandoned vibhavadṛṣṭi, so he does not produce vibhavatṛṣṇā.
50. In order to demonstrate that one can "love impermanence," Yaśomitra quotes the Sūtra:
yāvad ayam ātmā jivati tiṣṭhati dhriyate yāpayati tāvat sarogaḥ sagaṇdaḥ saśalyaḥ sajvaraḥ
sapridāḥakaḥ / yataś cāyam ātmā ucchidyate vinaśyati na bhavati / iyatāyam ātmā
samyaksamucchinno bhavati /
51. asmitā = asmimāna.
52. Hsüan-tsang reads bhagnapṛṣṭhatvat, "their back being burned." The Tibetan has rkan,
marrow.
53. Independent or āveṇikī avidyā, is the avidyā which does not accompany other anuśayas,
rāga, etc.
On the universals, ii.54a-b.
54. That is: they bear, in their Dhātu, on the five categories (nikāyas, ii.52b), which are
abandoned through the Seeing of Suffering, etc. According to another explanation, they are
called universals because they are the cause of anuśayas belonging to all five categories.
55. According to Hsüan-tsang, “superior” refers to the higher Dhātus or bhūmis.These
anuśayas are not in the lower ones. On the sarvatragas and the bhūmis, see v.18.
56. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 93a5. Some say that, not having any object, avidyā does not have any
pure dharmas for its object; in fact, it is not jñāna by nature; rather, it forms an obstacle to
the knowledge of things . . . (Samghabhadra TD 29, p. 613b10). See iii.28c, v.38d.
57. See Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 94a12.
58. Hsüan-tsang adds: "which are abandoned through the Seeing of anasrava,” according to
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 93a15, which Vasubandhu summarizes in Kārikā 16.
59. According to other authorities, kuśaladharmacchanda is śraddhā (ii.25) or again the
universal mental state of adhimukti (ii.24). Kathāvatthu, ix.2.
60. One prides himself solely on gross and mobile things which provoke satisfaction in the
lower bhūmis.
61. Our texts interpert anuśete, or anuśayana, in the sense of pușțim labhate, "to undertake
growth," and pratiṣṭhāṁ labhate, “to begin, to become active;" see i. English trans. page 59
and v.39. The Tibetan version anuśete = rgyas 'gyur = to become great. The Chinese
sui-tseng has the same meaning.
In certain cases an anufaya grows by the fact that it becomes active in the object; in other
cases it grows by the fact of the sensations, etc., which favor its growth.
On the two types of anuśayana, see Samyuktahṛdaya, TD 28, p. 901b6ff, Samghabhadra,
TD 29, p. 898c11, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 257a26, and p. 442b24 to 452b19 (Saeki also refers to
Vibhāṣā 32.1 and 16.1). Saeki quotes the Vibhāṣā, p. 110a20: Certain masters say that the
anuśayas do not constitute anuśayana in the dharmas associated with the mind. The
Dārṣṭāntikas say: To affirm that the anusaya constitutes the object of anuśayana is to admit
that it grows by the fact of the pure dharmas or the dharmas of a higher sphere, when it has
for its object similar dharmas [and this contradicts the thesis v.18a-b]; to affirm that it878 Chapter Five
constitutes anufayana in associated dharmas is to admit that the anusaya [for example,
attachment] will never be cut off, or that even if it is cut off, it will always be anufayana, for
one cannot definitively disjoin the mind from associated dharmas [, for example, from
agreeable sensation which nourishes attachment.]." See below note 62.
62. See v.39.
63. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 444c21: "Is a locus of anuśaya also a locus of anuśayana? [That is: is
the object on which an anuśaya can bear—the thing relative to which one takes up
attachment, hatred, doubt, false view, etc.—always favorable to the development (pusți) and
the installation (pratiṣṭhālābha) of the anuśaya?]Pure (anāsrava) things (Nirvāṇa and the
Path) are loci of anuśaya but not loci of anuśayana. Vasumitra says: When one produces
anufaya having impure (säsrava) things for their object, the anusayas progressively increase
(sui-tseng) [that is, they grow by the fact of these things taken as object], in the same way
that the organ of sight of a person who looks at the moon develops (tseng-ch'ang
); when one produces anufayas having pure things for their object, the anusayas diminish,
like the organ of sight of a person who looks at the sun."
64. As long as rāga is not abandoned, it will continue to develop from the fact of the
agreeable sensation which is associated with the mind.
65. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 259c8.
66. See note 27, and also Bodhisattvabhūmi, Musé'on, 1906, 224.
67. According to the Japanese editor, the Sautrāntikas.
68. This refers to the doctrine of Kapila and the Vaiśeşikas, of the philosophical proponents
of an atman.
69. On the roots of evil, iv.8c-d. The commentary on the Näāmasaṁgīti quotes an
Abhidharma treatise which enumerates the six anuśayas: mānadṛgvicikitsāś ca rāgapratigh-
amüdhayaḥ.
70. The word "all" signifies “of the five categories," abandoned through the Seeing of
Suffering, etc. (ii.52b).
71. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 259c8-260a9: Some (= the Dārṣṭāntikas) say that all klefas are bad
(akuśala); others, that the kleśas of Kāmadhātu are bad, whereas the kleśas of the other
Dhātus are neutral; a third hold that, among the three bonds (samyojana) of Kāmadhātu,
one bond is neutral, namely satkāyadṛṣṭi ….. Why is satkāyadṛṣṭi neutral? ….. It is not bad
because it does not absolutely destroy the āśaya (see above, iv.80d) and it does not destroy
the afaya because it is not associated with non-shame and non-respect . . . it is neutral
because it does not have retribution (vipāka). Vasumitra says: "because it does not produce
gross actions of the body and voice" (compare iv.12d, p. 580 of the English translation).
72. On morally neutral things, see ii.66, iv.9d.
73. Kofa, ii.57, 71b.
74. Tṛṣṇā with respect to the dhyānas and the ārūpyas (“nonmaterial" absorptions) which
are "tasteable" (viii.6), at the moment of its arising with respect to the heavenly dwellings,
is, in the higher spheres, neutral. All avidyā of the higher spheres, and the two views of
satkāya and antagrāha in Kāmadhātu, are neutral. Prajñā in Kāmadhātu (1) associated with
these two views, or (2) associated with minds arisen from retribution, etc., is neutral, like all
prajñā of the higher spheres associated with the klesas, or which is also associated with the
minds arisen from retribution, etc. (The content of “etc.” varies according to the spheres,
see ii.72Footnotes 879
75. Hsüan-tsang translates Aparāntakas as “masters of foreign countries." The term
dhyāyin is taken in a pejorative sense, see Aryadeva, Catuḥśatikā, 176 (Mem. As. Soc.
Bengal, iii.8, 1914, p. 473): kaścid dhyāyī cittavibhramam anuprāptaḥ kapālaṁ mama firasi
lagnam iti . . . Bad dhyāna, Majjhima, iii.14.
76. A tṛṣṇottaradhyāyin is a “meditator” who cultivates the "tasteable” dhyāna
(āsvādanasamprayuktadhyāna, viii.6): a dṛṣṭyuttaradhyāyin produces a dṛṣṭi of eternity, etc.;
a mānottaradhyāyin thinks: “I possess this dhyāna, others do not possess it." One who
cultivates dhyāna with excessive tṛṣṇā (tṛṣṇottaram, tṛṣṇoparikam), or who is dominated by
tṛṣṇā (tṛṣṇottaraḥ, tṛṣṇādhikaḥ, is called a tṛṣṇottaradhyāyin. The other two names are
explained in the same way.
These are all different modes of klefa within those who enter into meditation; they are
the root, the cause of neutral dharmas.
According to Hsüan-tsang: Why do the Aparāntakas create these four neutral roots?
Because the mahāpuruṣas cultivate the superior absorptions without passing beyond the
point of departure which is made up of tṛṣṇā, dṛṣți and māna . . .
77. Samyutta, 32.1, 34.12; Ekottara, TD 2, p. 784b2. See De la Vallée Poussin's Nirvāṇa
(1924).
78. See Mahävyutpatti, 86, according to Taishō no. 1536; Dīgha, iii.229, Añguttara, i.197,
ii.46, Milinda, 144; Childers sub. voc. pañho.Five types of very different questions,
Atthasālini, p. 55, Sumangalavilāsinī, 68.
For ekaṁsikā dhammā, anekaṁsikā, see Dīgha, i.191.
79. The Tibetan has "This person;" see page 801.
80. Hsüan-tsang takes up the above paragraph immediately before explaining the
Abhidhārmikas.
81. According to Hsüan-tsang: One should answer (vyākaraṇa) by distinguishing this
question. A general answer is not suitable, for even though the questioner knows in general
that all does not arise, the problem has not been explained (na vyākhyātam).
82. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 75b20. The Vyākhyā explains: saṭpādābhidharmapāṭhin.
83. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 75b29-c2: 'Why should one answer these questions categorically?
These questions lead to great advantages, lead to good dharmas, are favorable to
brahmacarya, produce bodhi, and cause one to attain nirvāṇa. This is why one should
respond to them in a categorical manner. Compare Dīgha, i.191.
84. The Tibetan has: can mi smra ba am / bdag ñid luń ston dụ bzhug ces bya ba'i tha thsig
go.
85. Missing in the Tibetan.
86. According to Hsüan-tsang: When someone asks if puruṣa-saṁjñā is identical or not
identical to the ātman, one should ask: "What ātman are you refering to in asking this
question?," and if he answers "I am refering to the gross self . . .
87. The Tibetan has de bzhin ons pa.The usual reading is de bzhin gśegs pa.
88. Svalakṣaṇakleśa = kleśa bearing on a determinate object; the object of rāga and māna is
always agreeable; the object of pratigha is always disagreeable.
89. Kārikās 25-27 continue the presentation and the criticism of the sarvāstivāda, “the
doctrine of universal existence," as understood by the Sarvästivādin-Vibhāṣikas. This
problem is studied in the Introduction. Our text has been translated by Th. Stcherbatsky,880 Chapter Five
Central Conception of Buddhism, 1923, Appendix, p. 76-91.
De la Valle e Poussin translated the Chapter of Devaśarman's Vijñānakaya which treats
of the existence of the past and future in an anniversary volume of the Ecole française
d'Extrême-Orient.
See Kofa, i.7c-d, 34d, iv.35a-b, v.62; trans. i. page 70.
Kathāvatthu, i.7-8, note of Shwe Zan Aung, p. 375, 392 of the translation;
ix.6-7; Milinda, 50-54; Visuddhimagga, 686 (If one abandons present, past, and
future defilements; comp. Kathāvatthu, xix.1).
Āryadeva, Catuḥśatikā, 256-8 (Memoirs As. Soc. Bengal, iii.8, 1914, p. 491);
Bodhicaryavatārapañjikā, 579-580 (Traikalyavādin); Madhyamaka, xvii. 14,
xxii. 11, xxxv.5; Wassilieff (on the Prasangikas), 363 (=331).
Remarks of A. B. Keith, Buddhist Philosophy, 163-5. See also the bibliography
below note 94.
90. The Chinese versions give: "The three time periods (literally
'worlds,' loka) exist;" but according to the Tibetan: "The Vaibhāṣikas do not
maintain that conditioned things (saṁskṛtas), which have the characteristics of
conditioned things, are eternal; but these masters maintain that they exist in all of
the time periods” (dus rnams kun tu yod par ni gsal bar dam 'cha’o).
91. Samyuktakāgama, TD 2, p. 20a11: rūpam anityam atītam anāgatam / kaḥ
punar vādam pratyutpannasya / evaṁdaršī śrutavān āryaśrāvako'tīte rüpe'nape-
kṣo bhavati / anagatam rūpam nābhinandati / pratyutpannasya rūpasya nirvide
virāgāya nirodhāya pratipanno bhavati / atītaṁ ced bhikṣavo rūpaṁ nābhavisyan
na śrutavān āryaśrāvako..
Compare the quotation from the same Sūtra, Madhyamakavṛtti, xxii. 11;
Majjbima, iii.188.
92. Samyutta ii.72, etc.; Kośa, iii.32.
93. Paramārtha: "If a person says that all exists,-past, present, future, space,
pratisamkhyānirodha (=Nirvāṇa), and apratisaṁkhyānirodha,—it is said that this
person is of the Sarvāstivādin school. There are other persons who say, 'Present
dharmas exist; past actions, if they have not produced their result, exist; but when
they have produced their result, they no longer exist, as do neither future dharmas
which are the results [of a past or present action].' Persons who say that the three
time periods exist but who make these distinctions, are not Sarvāstivādins, but
Vibhajyavādins.
Vasumitra, on the Kāśyapiyas (Wassiliev, 283, fol 176b): "The action whose
retribution has ripened, does not exist; the action whose retribution has not
ripened, exists; the saṁskāras arise from past causes and not from future causes."
This is the thesis of the Kassapikas, Kathāvatthu, i.8.
On the Vibhajyavādins, above note 38.
94. The Vyākhyā gives the terms bhāvānyathika, lakṣaṇāyathika, avasthänyathika,
anyathanyathika.
Bhāvānyathika = "one who maintains that the time periods differ (anyatha)
through the fact of bhāva.”"But anyathānyathika is translated into Tibetan gzhan
dan gzhan du gyur pa pa; and we have the gloss purvāparam apekṣyānyonya
ucyate: "the time period is called reciprocally distinct (anyonya) by reason of what
follows and precedes.” gzhan dań gzhan = anyonya.The Chinese sources translate
the name of the fourth master "who affirms that the difference of the time
periods is related to their relationship (apekṣā)."
See Rockhill, Life of the Buddha, p. 196 (translation of the work of Bhavya on
the sects); Watters, Yuan Chwang, 1.274. The author of the Yogasutras, iii. 13,
iv.12, etc., relies on Sarvästivādin sources, see "Notes bouddhiques,” Bull. Acad. de
Belgique, 1922, p. 522.
1.
ne 1771
sinin motivo Mahdhanettil the dharma is endowed with thisFootnotes
881
characteristic, but it is not devoid of other characteristics, for in this hypothesis a certain
future dharma could not later be this same present and past
dharma.
704a11,
96. The two commentators on Hsüan-tsang differ. According to Fa-pao (TD 41, P.
a19-23), the future is posited relative (apekṣā) to the past and the present; the past, relative
to the present and the future; the present, relative the past and the future. This is also the
opinion of Samghabhadra. According to P'u-kuang (TD 41, p. 311a6-8, a26-28), the future is
posited relative to former things; the past, relative to later things; and the present relative
to both: this is the system of the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 396b18-23.
97. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 396a10: "The Sarvāāstivādins have four great masters who
differently establish the differences of the three time periods ... 1. Vasumitra who says that
they differ through their state (avasthä); 2. Buddhadeva who says that they differ through
their point of view (apekṣā); 3. the follower of difference with respect to bhāva, who says: a
dharma, changing its time period, differs through its bhāva, not through its nature . . . ; a
dharma, passing from the future into the present, abandons its future bhāva and acquires its
present bhāva, yet neither loses nor acquires its nature . . . ; and 4. the follower of difference
with respect to its lakṣaṇa.” The Ekavyavahārika school (i-shuo pu
) says
that the three time periods are only speech, and that their nature does not exist. The
Lokottaravādins posit the time period by reason (i ) of the dharma: thus that which is
worldly (laukika) relatively exists, whereas that which is transworldly (lokottara) really
exists. For the school of the Sütras (ching-pu
), and for the Mahāsāṁghikas
**
), the past and the future do not exist; only the present
(ta-chung-pu
exists.
98. The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 396b18: refutes the theory of the difference of bhāva: "Outside
of the characteristics of a dharma, what can indeed be its bhāva?” But a commentary says:
The nature of a dharma in the three time periods is not transformed; there is only
difference in the fact of its activity or non-activity, etc.: this is the bhāva of a dharma. But
this transformation (pariņāma) is not similar to that of the Sāṁkhyas: these latter say that
the nature of the dharmas is eternal and yet it transforms itself into the twenty-three
tattvas.Now the nature of a conditioned dharma is not eternal. It is by reason of this
modification, activity, non-activity, etc.,—that we speak of transformation. The theories
established by Ghoşaka and Buddhadeva are also irreprochable: they do not present any
great difference from that of Vasumitra. Only Vasumitra gives a solid and simple
explanation. Furthermore the Śāstra Master (Vasubandhu), in agreement with the Vibhāṣā,
prefers it . . .
12€
99. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 393c18: Sensation not yet experienced is future; while one
experiences it, it is present; experienced, it is past . . .
100. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 394c5: Is activity the same thing as the nature of a dharma? Is it
different? It is not possible to say that it is the same thing nor that it is different ...
101. On the definition of abhūtvā bhāvaḥ, see the sources quoted Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 263,
Majjhima, iii.25, Śikṣṣāsamuccaya, 248, Milinda, 52, etc.
102.
svabhāvaḥ sarvadā cāsti bhāvo nityaś ca neṣyate /
na ca svabhāvād bhāvo'nyo vyaktam īśvaraceșțitam //
Quoted by Prajñākaramati, Bodhicaryāvatāra, p. 581, who utlilzes (p. 579-582) the Koša
without citing his source.
That is: The self nature (svabhāva, svalakṣaṇa) of rūpa, etc., always exists; but the being,
rūpa, etc. (rūpadibhāva), is not held to be eternal. Would it thus be different from its self
nature? No, it is not different from its self nature. Purely arbitrary, this theory is an
arbitrary action, which has no justification (nātra yuktir asti).882 Chapter Five
103. Samyukta, 13.21 (TD 2, p. 92b15?).
104. According to Hsüan-tsang: "the word 'is' is applied to what exists, as well as to what
does not exist." Bodhicaryāvatāra, 581.17: astiśabdasya nipātatvāt kālatrayavṛttitvam.See
ii.55d, page 245 of our translation.
105. Or, according to one varient: "on the subject of the Parivrājakas... “ This refers to the
monks who assassinated Maudgalyāyana and who affirmed the non-existence of past action:
yat karmābhyatītaṁ tan nāsti.
According to the gloss of the Japanese editor, this Sūtra is found in Madhyama 4.10;
according to the Vyākhyā, in the Samyuktakāgama. Neither Jātaka 522, nor the
Dhammapada commentary (x.7), which recounts the death of Maudgalyāyana, gives the
name of the Parivrājakas.
106. Quotation (Samyukta, TD 2, p. 92c16) reproduced in Bodhicaryāvatāra ad ix.142 (p.
581): cakṣur bhikṣava utpadyāmānaṁ na kutaś cid āgacchati / nirudhyamānaṁ ca na kvacit
samnicayaṁ gacchati / iti hi bhikṣavaḥ cakṣur abhūtvā bhavati bhūtvā ca prativigacchati.
Another fragment of the Paramärthaśūnyatāsūtra is quoted ad ix.73 (p..474): iti hi
bhikṣavo'sti karma / asti phalam / kārakas tu nopalabhyate ya imān skandhān vijahāti
anyāmś ca skandhän upādatte; a quotation reproduced in Madhyamakāvatāra (p. 262,
Tibetan trans.), Sūtrālaṁkāra, xviii.101 (text p. 158, trans. p. 264) and utilized by
Vasubandhu (Hsüan-tsang's edition, TD 29, p. 154c13, p. 155b26) in the supplement to the
Kośa.
107. Abhūd bhavisyati ca: that which, in the present, has been or will be "visible,” is the
object.
108. Divyacakṣuravabhāsa, vii.42.
109. Samyukta, 26.25. "Progress" = khyad par du 'gro. Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 635b17)
quotes a more developed redaction.
110. Lo rtsi ba pa rnams, "troops in the rain." One should add this quotation to the two
passages mentioned by Garbe, Sāṁkhya-Philosophie, p. 36, Yogabhāṣya, iii.52 and
Samkhyattattvakaumudī, ad 47. Samghabhadra, TD 29, p. 634a5.
111. Mahāniddesa p. 133: sabbaṁ vuccati dvādasāyatanāni; Samyutta, iv.13: kiñ ca
bhikkhave sabbam? cakkhum cevarūpă ca ... Majjhima, i.3. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 91a27. See
also De la Valle'e Poussin's Nirvāṇa (1924), Chap. III, Para. 1.
112. Hsüan-tsang: "The past and the future truly exist, as does the present. All those who,
here, are not capable of explaining [gloss of the Japanese editor, "the objections of the
Sautrāntikas"] and who desire their own good (Mahāvyutpatti, 245.1201), should know that
The nature of things is very profound;' it is not of the sphere of reasoning. Do those who
are not capable of explaining it have the right to deny it? (ch’i pu neng shih pien po wei
STEFODR# )."
Wu
Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 634c19-635a2) protests with vigor: "Do not attribute to the
Vaibhāṣikas opinions which are not theirs! . . . What are the difficulties that I have not
explained?"
=
t'ung-
I do not believe that Stcherbatski's version, p. 91, is correct. dran ba
shih
J* = nī = to explain. There is no reason to correct “undoubtedly” by bśad
pa which is not suggested either by Hsüan-tsang or by Samghabhadra, although MacGovern
thinks so.
'
113. Added by Paramartha.
114. Adhvasaṁgṛhītatvāt = adhvasvabhāvatvāt, i.7c.
115. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 394b19: "When future conditioned (saṁskṛta) things arise, shouldFootnotes 883
one say that they arise having already arisen, or that they arise not yet having arisen? What
harm is there in admitting either of these hypotheses? Both of them are bad...
"Answer: One should say that the dharma, already arisen, arises by reason of causes and
conditions (hetupratyaya): this means that all dharmas already possess their self natures,
each one of them remains in its nature and, already possessing this nature, one says that it
has arisen. But it has not arisen from causes and conditions: even though its nature is
already arisen, one says that it arises because it is produced by a complex of causes and
conditions. On the other hand, an unarisen dharma arises by reason of cause and conditions:
that is, a future dharma is qualified as non-arisen because it presently arises from causes and
conditions ...”
116. Above note 112 and page 821; the Japanese editor glosses vastu as “having the nature
of anufaya, etc."
117. The Vyakhyā defines tadvişayaiḥ as prahīṇaprakāraviṣayaiḥ.
118. Vastu glossed as above; the defilements, v.4.
119. According to the gloss of the Japanese editor: he continues to be bound to the Truth of
Suffering (that is to say to the five upādānaskandhas considered as suffering).
120. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, 1
P. 449a25.
121. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 457 and following.
122. Anayā diśā = anayā vartanyā.
123. See v.3, 17-18, 39.
124. Quoted in Vyākhyā (Petrograd) p. 14 line 19. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 112a13.
125. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 313b15. See above note 21 and vi.58b.
126. For the calculation of the dravyas, “distinct things,” see v.4-5a, 5b-c. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
243c20, p. 247b29.
127. See Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 248b11.
128. They are independent because they are associated with rāga, etc. (Vyākhyā).
Hsüan-tsang: "They are not mentioned because they are very few (being two in number)
and are not independent (that is, not arisng through their own force)."
129. See Atthasālinī, 369, trans. 475. Avidyā is the root of other asravas and of saṁsāra.It is
said: avidyā hetuḥ saṁrāgāya . . . and yāḥ kāṣcana durgatayo. . . (Itivuttaka, Para. 40); see
130. According to the author: vineyajanavaśād dṛṣṭiyogaḥ pṛthag uktaḥ.
131. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 248a22: This name is not justified either by the aspect (ākāra) or by
the object (ālambana) of this upādāna... Whereas the defilements of Kāmadhātu take place
(pravartate) by reason of the pleasure of lust, by reason of external objects, by reason of
enjoyment (bhoga), and by reason of another, and are consequently called kāmopādāna, the
defilements of the two higher spheres are of opposite character and are produced internally:
thus they are called ätmavādopädäna.
132. Anaśanādibhiḥ: by means of starvation, by throwing oneself into water or fire
(jalāgniprapatana), by silence (mauna), or by wearing rags (cīrādāna).
133. Iṣṭavişayaparivarjanena: all types of ascetic practices: rasapariytāga, bhūmiśayyā,
malapaṁkadhāraṇa, nagnacaryā, keśolluñcana, etc. On the other ascetic practices, etc., see
iv.64, 86 and v.7, 8.884 Chapter Five
134. The Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 248a4) contains an interesting text by Ghoşaka.
135. The etymology of upādāna is bhavam upādadāti “who grasps bhava" (see above note
3). Now avidyā does not "grasp" (see above note 3). The Vibhāṣā, (TD 27, p. 247c7) gives
several explanations.
136. The author, according to the Vyākhayā.According to Hui-hui, the Sautrāntika says:
"The upādānas have rāga for their nature: rāga with respect to the five enjoyments is
kāmopādāna; with respect to the sixty-two dṛṣṭis, it is dṛṣṭyupādāna; with respect to the
śīlavratas, it is śīlavratopādāna; and with respect to the ātmavāda of the three Dhātus, it is
ātmavādopādāna.
137. Our Sūtra gives ten synonyms. The first three are mentioned in the Vyākhyā. The list
of Anguttara, ii. 10, has eight terms: kāmarāga, nandi, sneha, mucchā, pipāsā, parilāha,
jjhosāna, and taṇhā (see also Saṁyutta, iv.188, Vibhanga, 374). The version of Hsüan-tsang
has twelve terms.
138. Compare Samyutta, iii.101: api ca yo tattha (pañcupādānakkhandheṣu) chandarăgo tam
tattha upādānaṁm ti (see also iii. 167, iv.89).
139. In other words, it is only rāga which is yoga or upādāna.
SAX which corres-
140. The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 257a23, gives only three explanations: 1. they are atomic; 2.
they constitute anuśayana (sui-tseng
S
); 3. sui-fu
ponds to rjes su 'brań ba = anubandh. Vasubandhu adds sui-chu
corresponds to rjes 'brel = anusaj.
SHEX which
P'u-kuang believes that "atomic” explains -śaya, and that the other terms explain
anu-(and this appears to be the thought of Vasubandhu); for Hui-k'ai, the four terms
explain anusaya (and this is the thesis of Samghabhadra).
i. Samghabhadra, TD 29, p. 641c10:
1) Before the defilements (kleśa) are manifested, their mode of existence (pracāra,
pravṛtti) is difficult to know. They are thus subtle (aṇu). This is why Ānanda says: “I do not
know if I produce or if I do not produce a thought of pride (māna) with respect to my
companions." He does not say that he does not produce a thought of pride because the mode
of existence of the anusaya of pride is difficult to know. If Ānanda does not know of the
existence or the non-existence of a prideful thought, how much less so pṛthagjanas.Such is
also the case for the other anuśayas.
According to another opinion, the anusayas are subtle, because they accomplish their
anuśayana in a very short (aṇu) period of time (kṣaṇa).
2) They accomplish their anuśayana (they become active or nourish themselves) in two
ways: from the fact of their object (ālambanatas), and from the fact of their samprayuktas
(samprayogatas). How is this? As we have explained, either (a) as an enemy (fatruvat)
searching out a weak point (chidrānveṣin) or as a serpent who poisons by his glance
(dṛṣṭivisavat); (b) as a ball of hot iron heats up water or as the serpent who poisons through
contact (sparsavisavat).
These two, the ālambana and the samprayuktas, are similar to the nourishment that
anuśayana creates for an infant: it causes the infant to grow and causes his talents to
accumulate (upacaya) little by little; in the same way the ālambana and the samprayuktas
make the series of the kleśa grow and accumulate.
3) They adhere: they produce the adhesion of the prāptis in a beginningless series.
4) They bind: for they are very difficult to put down, like quartan fever (Huber,
Sūtrālamkāra, P. 177) or rat poison. According to another opinion, they bind, that is, their
prāptis always follow after (anu): like the water of the ocean . . .
For these reasons these two types of kleśa receive the name of anuśaya.
ii. The Tibetan translates (a) phra-rgyas = “atomic-extended," because, says Candra Das,
the anusaya "first comes into insignificant form and then assumes more important
dimensions;" (b) bag-la-ñal; ñal = “to lie down, sleep;" perhaps bag la signifies: "withFootnotes 885
respect to;" the varient of Jaschke, bag-med-pa = “in the absence of fear" is probabaly not
relevant here.
Chinese equivalents: sui-mien
"anu-sleep;” yin-mien KAFE
"darkness-sleep." iii. Non-technical use of anuseti, anusayitum, references of Morris, JPTS.
1886, p. 123: "to adhere closely to,” “to continue, to endure.” Saṁyutta, ii.65, anuseti = ceteti,
pakappeti, "to will, imagine, consider."
141. Anusanga = rjes su 'brel, Mahävyutpatti, 281.122. Vyākhyā: ālambanāt samprayukteb-
hyo vā svāṁ saṁtatiṁ vardhayantaḥ prāptibhir upacinvanti: increasing their series, either
by reason of their object, or by reason of their associated dharmas, they fix it by means of the
prāptis. Anubadhnantīty anukrānteś caturthakajvaravan mūṣikāviṣavac ca: they bind,
because they "follow" like the quartan fever or like the poison of a rat (Bodhicaryāvatāra,
ix.24).
142. Suklavidarśanā: kleśakuṇapam akuśalamūlam asravantity avidyābhavadṛṣṭikāmāsravāś
catvāraḥ.
On āśrava - āsrava - āsrāva - āsava -āsaya, see Senart, Melanges Harlez, p. 292-3; Keith,
Buddhist Philosophy, p. 128 note; Atthasālinī, p. 48. Among the Jainas, Sarvadarśana, trans.
p. 53-54.
143. According to Hsüan-tsang: The anuśayas remove good (kuśala).
144. According to Hsüan-tsang: The anusayas bind beings. The Vyākhyā has a lacuna here.
It gives kleśayanti-which corresponds to 'byor byed-which appears to be a copyist's error
for śleşayanti.
145. The Vyākhyā interprets these definitions: ogha comes from the root vah; haranti is
thus the equivalent of vahanti.The anuśayas are oghas because they transport the mental
series into another existence, or from object to object (viṣayāntara). They are yogas because
they bind this series to another existence, or to an object. They are upādānas because they
grasp this series and put it into a new existence, or into sense objects (kāma).
146. Explanation of the Sautrāntikas (Vyākhyā).
147. Samyukta TD 2, p. 128b29. Compare anusotagāmin and the patisotagāmin of
Anguttara, i.5.
148. A summary of the Pali explanations in Compendium, p. 170, 227.
149. On these different categories, Mahāvyutpatti, 109.52 and following: samyojana,
bandhana, anusaya, paryutthāna, upakleśa, paryavasthāna, paryavanaddha, āsrava, ogha,
yoga, upādāna, grantha, nīvaraṇa. Paryutthāna = kun nas ldan ba; paryavasthāna (var.
paryupasthāna) = kun nas dkris pa; paryavanaddha = yoǹs su dkris pa.On the nīvarañas,
Kofa, iv. trans. p.678, Dīgha, i.246.
150. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 236b19.
151. One distinguishes three samyojanas that the Srotaāpanna abandons (Kośa, vi.43c-d),
discussed in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 236b19; nine saṁyojanas (Vibhāṣā, p. 258a3); five
samyojanas, namely rāga, pratigha, māna, īrṣyā, and mātsarya (Vibhāṣā, p. 252a21).
The sword samyojana raha, mana, insya, fun matsarya connection with suffering,"
"nourishment mixed with poison." The Āryans are disgusted with even the best rebirths
and with impure (säsrava) absorptions, such as the apramāṇas, vimokṣas, abhibhvāyatanas,
and kṛtsnāyatanas (see Kofa, viii), as with a food mixed with poison.
Vasumitra explains why only five klefas are "bonds": "Only the defilements which
embrace error (mi) with respect to things (dravya) and which are svalakṣaṇakleśas (v.23)
bind the mind. Three defilements are of this type,—rāga, pratigha, māna,—and are thus
"bonds." The five views and doubt are sāmānyakleśas (v.23) which include error of886 Chapter Five
reasoning. [and bear on non-existent things, such as the "self”]. Avidyā includes these two
errors, but, more frequently, only the second one; thus it is not cut off like a "bond." Among
the paryavasthānas, jealousy and egoism (īrṣyā, mātsarya) are bonds: error with respect to
things, they trouble the two categories of persons (monks and laity), they trouble humans
and gods, and do evil to many. The other paryavasthānas do not do this."
The Abhidhammasaṁgaha (Compendium, p. 172), numbers the samyojanas in the
Suttas and Abhidhamma.
152. There exists a non-universal (asarvatraga) dṛṣṭisaṁyojana consisting of mithyādṛṣṭi, to
be abandoned through the Truths of Nirodha and the Path; but its objects are the pure
dharmas (v.18); it does not bear on the dharmas associated with the parāmarśas.
153. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 258c21.
154. Vyākhyā: "The reason proposed does not raise any difficulty” (na bhavaty ayam
parihāraḥ). What then is the reason given? On this point, Samghabhadra (TD 29, p.
643b16):
"By reason of their intense activity, īrṣyā and mātsarya constitute separate saṁyojanas …
"The Vyākhyā reproduces the essentials of the text of Samghabhadra and gives some
fragments of the Kārikā that this master adds to the Kārikās of Vasubandhu in the
Samayapradīpikā (Taishō no. 1563). Hsüan-tsang attributes the said Kārikā to Vasubandhu
(TD 29, p. 108b25) and here (p. 108c18-24) places the following commentary in the
Bhasyam: "When one admits the existence of the ten paryavasthānas, one should say: īrşyā
and matsargya constitute distinct samyojanas for four reasons: (1) by reason of their intense
activity (abhikṣṇasamudācāritvāt); (2) because they produce, in good realms of rebirth, lack
of power and of goods (alpeśākhya, alpabhogakāraṇatvāt)—a just punishment for jealousy
and greed; (3) because they indicate the totality of the klefas (sarvasūcanāt), which are
either sad (samtāpasahagata) or happy (āmodasahagata); (4) because they torment two
categories of persons (dvipakşaklefamatvāc, ca; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 259a28): the laity and
the clergy (jealousy over goods, jealousy over spiritual attainments), gods and Asuras, gods
and humans, oneself and others. Thus they have been set aside (mātsarayerṣye pṛthak kṛte).
[The Blessed One said: "gods and humans, Oh Kauśika, are bound by jealousy and greed":
these are par excellence (adhikyena) the kleśas of the good realms of rebirth.]
Paramartha also attributes the following kārikā to Vasubandhu: ... The reason
proposed does not raise difficulties . . . The stanza says: "Because they are the causes of
(rebirth in) a non-noble family and of poverty, because they involve all others, because they
torment the two categories (of persons), jealousy and greed are separate saṁyojanas."The
commentary says: "There are other masters who say that among the paryavasthānas,
jealousy and greed present three defects. Through jealousy, one is reborn into a miserable
family."
155. Madhyama TD 1, p. 778c15 (=Majjhima, i.432; Māluńkyāputra = man-t’ung-tze
Bit ), Dirgha, 8.2, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 153a21; Dīgha, ii.92, 252, iii.234,
Anguttara, iv.459, v.17.
156. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 252b25: “Why are these five called avarabhāgīya? What is the
meaning of this expression? These five saṁyojanas manifest themselves (samudācāra) in
the lower sphere, are abandoned in this same sphere, bind birth (i.e., being about rebirth)
and produce outflowing and retributive results in this same sphere."
157. Apare, according to the Vyākhyā, refers to the Yogacarins. Theory presented in
Vibhāṣā, ibid.
158. Ekottara, TD 2, p. 630a8; Samyukta, TD 2, p. 264b24ff, p. 342b25. The Sūtra, according
to the Vyākhyā, begins: kiyatā bhadanta srotaāpanno bhavati / yataś ca Mahānāmann
āryaśrāvaka idam duḥkham aryasatyam... iyam duḥkhanirodhagāmini pratipad äryasatyam
iti yathābhūtam prajānāti trīṇi cāsya saṁyojanāni prahīṇāni bhavanti parijñātāni tadyathā
satkāyadṛṣṭiḥFootnotes 887
filavrataparāmarfo vicikitsă ca / sa eṣāṁ trayāṇāṁ saṁyojanāṇāṁ prahāṇāt srotaäpanno
bhavati avinipātadharmā sambodhiparāyaṇaḥ saptakṛdbhavaparamaḥ saptakṛtvo devāmś ca
manuşyāṁś ca samsṛtya saṁdhävya duḥkhasyāntaṁ karişyati.Compare Dīgha, iii.107 = 132:
avam puggalo yathānusiṭṭham tathā paṭipajjamāno tiņņam saṁyojanānaṁ parikkhayā
sotaapanno bhavassati avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo. Puggalapaññatti p. 12,
definition of the prthagjana: yassa... tīņi saṁyojanāni appahīnāni... See vi.34a-b, where
this Sūtra is commented upon.
159. "According to the School, there are three types of klesas."This refers to darśanaheya,
v.4. Hsüan-tsang: "The true explanation is that, whereas the Srotaäpanna abandons six
kleśas, it is said that he abandons three, because these three comprise ...
160. Apare, according to the Vyākhyā, refers to the author.
161. Dīrgha, TD 1, p. 51b12; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 253c2:" . . . they cause one to rise, to turn
towards the heights, and the series to be reborn above..
162. Ekottara, TD 2, p. 589c20, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 227a11. Rāga is of three spheres as is
moha (avidyā): “all rāga” and “all moha” mean rāga and moha in whichever sphere and of
whichever type (mode of expulsion, v.5) they belong to. Dveșa (pratigha) exists only in
Kāmadhātu: "all dveșa” means dveşa of whichever type.
The bandhanas do not figure in the lists of the Samgitisuttanta, etc.; but see Samyutta,
iv.292.
163. See above note 5 and v.55a-b.
164. Vyākhyā: There is rāga and dveśa on the occasion of the sensation of indifference, but
not in the same way that there is moha; this latter, being dull (apațu), more easily develops
in the sensation of indifference which is dull. Or rather, one should understand that the rule
refers to rāga, dveșa, and moha relative to personal sensation. Others understand: Rāga and
dveşa do not exist in the same manner; that is, dveșa enters into activity on the occasion of
an agreeable sensation of an enemy taken as an object (ālambanataḥ); the same for rāga on
the occasion of a disagreeable sensation of an enemy. Or rather, the rule extends to personal
sensation: rāga in the agreeable sensation that one experiences oneself, because it is taken as
an object through association; not in the agreeable sensation of an enemy. Compare
Nettippakaraṇa, p. 32; aduḥkhamasukhāya hi vedanāya avijjā anuseti. Compare Yogasutra,
ii.7-8: sukhānuśayī rāgaḥ / duḥkhānuśayî dveṣaḥ. See the theory of the svalakṣaṇakleşas
above, v.23.
165. Hsüan-tsang makes a pāda out of this, with a short commentary: "What are the
anuśayas? The kārikā says: “The anufayas have been mentioned." The Bhāṣyam says: "The
anuśayas are six, or seven, or ten, or ninety-eight, as has been explained. The anusayas
having been explained, one asks concerning the upakleśas.”
166. The Vyākhyā quotes the Šāstra: ye yāvat kleśā upakleśā api te syuḥ / upakleśā na
kleśāḥ.
The upakkilesa of Añguttara, ii.53, Atthasālinī, 380, have nothing in common with the
defilements or kleśas.
167. The author excludes cetanā, etc. with the words "those which are enumerated in the
Ksudravastuka."The Vyākhyā quotes the list of the Ksudravastuka, with their unfortunately
doubtful readings: arati, vijṛmbhikā (Anguttara i.3, Sanyutta v.64, Vibhanga, 33) cetaso
līnatva, tandrī (= jaḍatā), bhakte'samatā (= bhattasammada) [see below v.59b],
nānātvasaṁjñā, a[yoniśo]manaskāra, kāyadauṣṭhulya, śṛngī (=siñga, Vibhanga, 351;
Anguttara, ii.26; Morris, 1885, p. 53), tintilīkā (?), MS. bhittirīkā, Vibhanga, 351, Anguttara,
v.149, tintiņa = nillajja), anārjavatā, amārdavatā, asabhāgānuvartanā (anabhāgavutti),
kamavitarka (Mahāniddesa, p. 501), vyāpādavitarka, vihiṁsāvitarka, jñātivitarka,
janapadavitarka, amaravitarka (v.59b), apamanyanāpratisaṁyukta vitarka (?) (MS.888 Chapter Five
acaranyanãº; Mahāniddesa, etc.: parānuddayataº), kulodayatāpratisamyukta vitarka,
fokaduḥkhadaurmanasya-upāyāsāḥ.See ii.27, English trans. 198; page 851.
Samghabhadra is content to indicate the number of upakleśas, twenty-one, which
confirms our list. Nine vitakkas in the Mahāniddesa.
168. Klefo'pi hi paryavasthānaṁ kāmarāgaparyavasthānapratyayam duḥkham pratisamve-
dayata iti sūtravacanãt.See above p. 768.
169. There is "compression" of the mind in absorption (samāpatti); thus one adds: "which
renders it incapable . . . “ in order to be more precise.
170. Ami... sattvāḥ... vadhyantāṁ vā śīryantāṁ vā anayanavyasanam āpadyantām
ityākārapravṛttî vyāpādaḥ / sattvākarṣaṇasamtrāsatarjanādikarmapravṛttā vihiṁsā /
tābhyām anyaḥ sattväsattvayor äghātaḥ krodhaḥ / tadyathā śikṣākāmasya bhikṣoś
cittaprakopaḥ kaṇṭakādiśu ca prakopa iti /. Vyāpāda manifests itself through curses or
maledictions: "May they perish, may they go at a bad hour!;” vihiṁsā, through bad
treatment, threats, etc.; krodha differs from the preceeding: this is an irritation against
persons and things, the discontent of a bhikṣu who desires that one instruct him (?) with
respect to obstacles, etc.
171. See iv.4, trans, note 28.
172. Jñātājñānām. The Chinese understands: "Accordingly as this refers to persons who are
ignorant or who know." The Vyākhyā explains: rājādibhir jñātānāṁ mrakṣavatāṁ
pudgalānāṁ mrakṣas tṛṣṇāniṣyando mã me läbhasatkāro na bhaviṣyatīti / ajñātānām
avidyāniṣyandaḥ karmatyakatām (??) aśraddadhānas tadavadyaṁ pracchādayati na
parasyāntike viśuddyarthaṁ deśayati / One hides his faults, either because he fears some
damage or some loss of esteem; or because he does not believe that he can "transcend his
actions" (karmavyatikrama?) and that he abstains from confessing in order to purify
himself, as he should. Jñāta = yasassī, Majjhima, iii.38.
173. Not in Hsüan-tsang.
174. We have encountered the same expression iv.8a, where Hsüan-tsang translates: "in
order to avoid the inquiries of Aśvajit." Here he translates here: "Or to falsely deny ..
According to P. Cordier, iv.8a:"In order to utter a puff of words, to make one's own praise,"
that is, "To utter only vain words . . . ," and v.49:"The crooked mind thanks to which, not
recognizing reality as it truly is, one utters words that are obscure and empty of meaning."
See page 846.
175. According to Paramartha: kauțilyam iti katamo dharmaḥ / mithyādṛṣṭyādidṛṣṭiḥ.See
iv.59.
176. Svatantra na rāgādiparatantrāḥ, not dependent on rāga, etc.
177. Vitathātmasaṁdarśanatayeti vitathasyātmanaḥ saṁdarśanatayā mahābraḥmā
äyuşmantam aśvajitaṁ vañcyitum pravṛttaḥ / kutremāni brahman mahābhūtāny
apariseșaṁ nirudhyanta iti pṛṣṭo'prajānan kṣepam akārșit / aham asmi brahmā
mahābrahmā īśvaraḥ kartḥā nirmātā sraṣṭā [dhyakṣaḥ] pitṛbhūto bhūtabhavyānām iti
māyayā ekānte asthād ekānte sthitaś cedam uktavān / vidyamāne tathāgate māṁ
prastavyam manyase itīdam asya śāṭhyaṁ dṛśyate / svaparişallajjayā hy ātmīyām
a[kusalaltam nigūhamānaḥ sa tathā kṛtavām iti /
The MSS has sraṣṭā tyajaḥ pitṛbhūto; Dīgha, i.221: ninmātā seṭṭho sañjitā vasī pitā (on
sañjitā, O. Franke, p. 26); Dīrgha (xxiii.9, 83): sraṣṭā nirmātā asmi sattvānām pitā mātā (S.
Le'vi).
178. See v.45d.Footnotes 889
179. According to Hsüan-tsang: "Avidyā is associated with the first four indriyas, (sukha,
saumanasya, duḥkha, and daurmanasya), having the aspect of joy and despondency and
belonging to the six vijñānas.”
180. The Bhasyam explains manaḥsukha as saumanasya.
181. The Bhāṣyam gives a resume of these explanations: caturvijñānakāyikāś caturvijñāna-
kāyikaiḥ samprayuktāḥ.
182. Bhāṣyam: manobhūmikā manobhūmikair eva saṁprayuktāḥ: “the anuśayas of the
sphere of the manas are associated only with the indriyas of the sphere of the manas."
183. According to Hsüan-tsang: “. . below, to saumanasyendriya.The upakleśas described
above are all associated with upekṛṣendriya, for at the moment of the cutting off of the series
(see page 848, line 17) all are found together with upeksa, for there is a pratipad (vi.66)
which is exclusively of the upekṣābhūmi.In the same manner there is no restriction . . .”
184. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 189c17; Ekottara, TD 2, p. 674a15; the Sūtra quoted iv.77, trans.
note 358; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 194c22, five nīvaraṇas, and meaning of this term; p. 250c15,
why they are enumerated in this order (opinion of Vasumitra, etc.).
According to the Abhidhammasangaha, six nivaraṇas (by adding avidyā), see
Compendium, 172 and note (nīvaraṇa = obstacle to dhyāna), compare Kośa, iv. English
trans., note 436, Atthasālinī, 377.
185. Compare Samyutta, v.145.
186. The sthāna of the Yogasutra, i.30, is styāna.
187. This is the doctrine of the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 250b27.
188. Samyukta 27. See above note 167; Samyutta, v.64, Anguttara, i.3. For alokasaṁjñā, see
Dīgha, iii.49, 223.
189. The Mahāniddesa (see above note 167) quotes these three vitarkas: preoccupation
relating to one's parents [Vibhāṣā: By reason of the parents who either thrive or decline,
either separated or close by, one produces joy, sadness, and the mind gives rise to calculation
or prevision], relating to one's land, relating to the deathless ones [Vibāṣā: By reason of the
small number of years and of old age, to do good to another .. to produce joy or sadness];
see Vibhanga, p. 356 and Saundarananda xv. The fourth cause is the remembrance of former
merry-making and companions: rgod rtses pa rga ba dga'mgur yons su spyod pa rjes su dran
pa.
190. Cetaso vyupasamo in Anguttara, i.4.
191. Paramartha omits the word "five."
192. Hsüan-tsang adds: "and consequently vimukti and vimuktijñānadarșana cannot arise"
(see vi.75c).
193. Apare.Hsüan-tsang: “If one explains the sense of the Sūtra thus, auddhatya-kaukṛtya
should be listed before styāna-middha: for it is by reason of this absorption that
discrimination arises, and the obstacles to this absorption should be listed before the
obstacle to discrimination. For this reason, other masters say that these two nīvaraṇas
destroy in the order in which they are listed . . . “ [According to the Japanese editor, these
other masters are the Sautrāntikas].
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 250c19: Vasumitra says: “At the obtaining of an agreeable object,
there is kāmacchanda; upon losing this object, there is pratigha; once this object is lost, the
mind is depressed and weakened (lei-jo) and one engenders styāna; then the mind is
troubled (kuei : pradușța?)and "overclouded" (men: durdina??); one the
engenders middha; awakening from middha, one engenders auddhatya; after auddhatya,890 Chapter Five
there is kaukṛtya and finally vicikitsā.Such is the order of the five nīvaraņas.”
194. A quotation from the Sūtra, according to Hsüan-tsang.
195. According to the Japanese editor, the Sautrāntikas; former masters according to the
Vyākhyā.
196. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 114b2. According to one opinion, the anuśayas are abandoned in
four ways: 1. through the abandoning of the object: these are the anufayas of an impure
object (sāsravālambana) abandoned through the Seeing of Extinction and the Path; 2.
through the abandoning of the defilements which grasp them as their object: these are the
anusayas which bear on another sphere . . . According to Vasumitra, in five ways: 1.
abandoning through seeing the object: these are the anufayas of a pure object and the
universal anusayas in their own spheres; 2. abandoning through the abandoning of the
object: these are the anusayas of an impure object abandoned through the Seeing of
Extinction and the Path; 3. abandoning through the abandoning of the defilement which
grasps them as its object: these are the universal anuśayas which bear on a different sphere;
4. abandoning through the abandoning of the object and of the defilement which grasps
them as its object (chü yuan tuan ku tuan *): the non-universal anufayas
abandoned through the Seeing of Suffering and Arising; 5. abandoning through the
acquisition of its opposite (pratipakṣa): these are the anusayas abandoned through
Meditation. On the whole, Vasubandhu follows this opinion.
197. The visabhāgadhātusarvatragas are the object of the satkāyadṛṣṭi group; they are
destroyed through the destruction of this group.
198. Through the abandoning of the klesas of the mithyadṛṣṭi group which are [abandoned
through the Truth of Extinction, and the Truth of the Path (v.14),] and which are the object
of the dṛṣṭiparamarśa group, the dṛṣṭiparāmarśas, etc., which have an impure object, are
abandoned.
199. This refers to the ușmagatas, etc. (vi.17). This preparatory path only considers
Suffering and its Arising.
200. These four paths are defined vi.65b-d.
201. Hsüan-tsang renders the ablative (ālambanāt) by sui; but he translated kutas as
ts'ung ho BETJ (through separation from what?); in Samghabhadra's work, ts'ung
is used throughout.
202. Hsüan-tsang: It is not possible that the klefa abandons its associated dharmas
[citta-caittas of the nikāyasabhāga]; it is only possible that it is separated from its object.
The Japanese editor quotes the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 113b25: “it is said that the anusayas
should be abandoned with respect to (yü) their object, not with respect to the
dharmas associated (saṁprayukta) with the mind. The force of their opposition causes the
anuśaya to not arise with respect to this object: it is in this way that the anuśaya is
abandoned, that is, in the same way that a man prevents his son from going back to a
drinking house, to a house of debauchery, or to a gambling house. [It would be impossible
for him to cause the ... with the mind.] Consequently it is said that there is no abandoning
with respect to the said dharmas."
Hui-hui says: "The associated dharmas are the 'mind and its mental states' of the
existence (nikāyasabhāga) under consideration. One cannot separate them from the
defilements. If the defilements do not arise any more with respect to the object, this is what
is called their abandoning. When one abandons the defilements, one solely abandons the
personal defilements (svāsaṁtānika): how can one thus say that the defilements are
abandoned with respect to the object...'
Sūtrālaṁkāra, xvii.19: The defilement is declared to be the object, for it is said:
"Through the abandoning of the bonds made of consciousness the object is annihilated"Footnotes 891
(manomayānāṁ granthänāṁ prahāṇād ucchidyate alambanam).
203. Samghabhadra, TD 29, p. 651a18 (quoted by the Vyākhyā) resolves this difficulty.
"The defilements should be abandoned through separation from the object (ālambanāt
kleśāḥ prahātavyāḥ), for it is through the force of the "complete knowledge” (parijñāna) of
the object that the defilements are abandoned. The object of the anuśayas is twofold:
samyogavastu or asamyogavastu.Possession (prāpti, ii.36) of the anusayas which have for
their object (or sphere, viṣaya = ālambana) a saṁyogavastu, and also of the anusayas which
do not have such an object but which are produced by the first anuśayas, exists in the series
which constitutes a being; even when this series is of non-defiled mind, this possession
continues uninterruptedly, the effect and the cause of past and future defilements
respectively. The same holds for possession of the anufayas which has for its object an
asamyogavastu and for anuśayas not having such an object and which becomes active
immediately after the defilements which have such an object: presently existing possession
is the cause of the production of the future defilement, and the outflowing effect of the
former defilement.
But the possession of the anusayas is opposed (viruddha) by the presence (samavad-
hāna) in the series of the possession which proceeds from a path of abandoning opposing
the anuśayas: for it is this possession of the anusayas which supports the present and the
future defilements which are possessed thanks to it. It results from this—some defilements
produced through a certain object setting into motion some defilements which have another
object--that when [a good possession is produced], the outflowing of a path embracing the
abandoning of this certain object, the possession of the defilements disappears, and the
possessed defilements, even though they remain the same with respect to their object,
nevertheless no longer have [the possession] which is their cause and their result; so one
cannot say that they are abandoned. When the object is not "completely known," the
possessions, effects and causes of past and future defilements, continue uninterruptedly as
possessions of the defilments bearing on this object as well as the possessions of the
defilments having anohter object but produced by the first. When the object is "completely
known," the possession is interrupted. Thus the abandoning of the defilements takes place
through separation from its object (ālambanāt)."
But, if one means to say that the defilements are abandoned through "the abandoning of
their objects, etc.," why say that they are abandoned through the force of the "complete
knowledge" of the object? They are in fact abandoned through the force of the "complete
knowledge" of the Truth of Suffering, etc., existing when this latter is missing, and not
existing when this latter is present. Those who say that the defilements are abandoned
through the force of their opposition should admit that the defilements abandoned through
Meditation are abandoned through the force of the complete knowledge of the Truth of
Suffering, etc., which is their object. (Vyākhyā).
204. According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 83a8; Prakaraṇa, TD, p. 26a6. For other removings,
ii.67a, iv.7c, p. 571.
205. The Abhidharma says: dūre dharmāḥ katame / atītāṇāgatā dharmāḥ / antike dharmāḥ
katame / pratyutpannā dharmā asaṁskrtaṁ ca.Quoted by Aryadeva, Catuḥśatikā, 258,
Memoires As. Soc. Bengal, iii.8 (1894, p. 492), argument concerning past and future. On
distant and near rūpa, see i.20a-b (English trans. pp. 77 and following).
206. This is the explanation of the Sautrāntikas; according to the Vyākhyā: evaṁ tu yuktaṁ
syād iti svamataṁ ācāryasya.
207. de dag gi / bral ba'i thob pa yan dan yan / = [visaṁyogalābhaḥ tebhyaḥ punaḥ punaḥ ]
One takes possession many times, and in a firmer and firmer manner, of the unconditioned
dharma which is Nirvāṇa, the pratisamkhyānirodha or visamyoga of the defilements (i.6,
ii.55d, 57d).892 Chapter Five
208. This refers to the five faculties (ii.2a-b, English trans. p. 155) (śraddhā, etc.) that the
ascetic increases (vivṛddhi), makes evolve or transposes (saṁcāra), and makes sharp
(tiksna).
209. Hsüan-tsang introduces into his translation (TD 29, p. 112a1-16) the following
commentary: "Let us consider the ascetic whose faculties are weak (mṛdu): a. There six
times when the acquisition of disconnection from the defilements of Kāmadhātu abandoned
through Seeing the Truths takes place: 1. arising of the opposition, namely diverse
dharmajñānas of Suffering, etc.; 2-5. the acquisition of the four results; and 6. at the
moment when the moral faculties become strong (tīkṣṇa).
The same for disconnection from the defilements of the two higher spheres abandoned
through Seeing the first three Truths. (Here the opposition is anvayajñāna).
b. For the defilements of Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu abandoned through Seeing the
fourth Truth, only five moments are counted, because the time of the arising of their
opposition (namely mārge'nvayajñāna) is also the time of the acquistion of the first result
(srotaāpattiphala).
c. For the first five categories of defilement of Kāmadhātu abandoned through
Meditation, only five moments are counted: for one should exclude the acquisition of the
first result which is earlier than the abandoning of these first five categories.
d. For the sixth category of these same defilements, four moments: for the time of the
arising of the opposition (namely the sixth vimuktimārga) is also the time of the acquisition
of the second result (sakṛdāgāmiphala).
e. For the seventh and eighth categories of these same defilements, four moments are
counted, since the acquisition of the first two results is earlier than the abandoning of these
two categories.
f. For the ninth category of these same defilements, three moments are counted: (1)
arising of the opposition (ninth vimuktimārga) which is confused wiht the acquisition of
the third result (anāgāmiphala), (2) acquisition of the fruit of Arhat, and (3) perfectioning
of the indriyas.
g. For the defilements of Rūpadhātu and Arūpyadhātu abandoned through Meditation,
with the exclusion of the ninth category of Bhavāgra (naivasaṁjñānasaṁjñāyatana), three
moments are counted, since the first three results have already been acquired.
h. For the ninth category of the defilements of Bhavagra, two moments are counted,
because the arising of the opposition (ninth vimuktimārga) is confused with the acquisition
of the result of Arhat.
When the ascetic has strong faculties, he should avert, in the eight cases, the moment of
the perfectioning of his faculties. [Thus, disconnection from the last category of defilements
is obtained only once. If the author says: 'and, by reducing the number, down to two times,'
this is because he has in view the case of repeated acquisitions (punarlābha)].
The Ascetic who does not pass through all of the results (ii.16c-d, vi.33a) may reduce
these numbers."
210. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 175a12-18: What is jñānaparijñā? Jñāna, darśana, vidyā, bodhi,
abhisamaya . . . What sort of jñāna is called jñānaparijñā? According to some only pure
jñāna, because the definition employs the term abhisamaya (Kośa, vi.27): now
lokasamvṛtijñāna (Kośa, vii.2b) cannot be called abhisamaya.
What is prahanaparijñā? The complete abandoning of raga, the complete abandoning of
pratigha and vicikitsā, the complete abandoning of all the defilements, is called
prahāṇaparijñā.Perfectly knowing (pari-jña) an object is called parijñā.Now abandoning
does not have an object and does not know. How can one speak of prahāṇaparijñā “parijñā
which is abandoning?” But prahāṇa, being the result of knowledge, also receives the name
of parijñā.
The Sautrantikas say that there are two parijñā: 1. jñāparijñā, which is jñāna by nature,
and 2. prahāṇaparijñā, which is prahāṇa by nature.Footnotes 893
211. In the Janaprasthāna, according to Takakusu, p. 89; the three "worldly" pariññās
(relating to nourishment) are in Childers and Visuddhimagga, 606, 692.
212. Hsüan-tsang comments on this first pāda: “all are the result of anāgamya, because
anāgamya is the support for the abandoning of the defilements of the Three Dhātus
abandoned through Seeing and Meditation." On anāgamya, the absorption preparatory to
the First Dhyāna, see vi.47c-d, and viii.22a.
213. The second pada shows that this refers to a samantaka of Ārūūpyadhātu; for anāgamya
is samantaka to the First Dhyāna.
214. The pure path does not exist in the Fourth Ārūpya.
215. Vikalikṛti, "mutilation," is the abandoning of one part of Bhavägra, bhavāgrapradeśa-
prahāṇa, the abandoning of a part of the defilements relative to the highest stage of
existence.
216. According to the Vyākhyā: the Ābhidhārmikas. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 322b9.
217. Even though the category of kleśas abandoned through the Seeing of Suffering is
abandoned, as long as the universal cause abandoned through the Seeing of Arising (and
which bears on the first category) is not abandoned, there is no destruction of the two
causes, and no parijñā.Even though the first eight categories of kleśa (strong-strong .
weak-medium) of a sphere is abandoned, as long as the ninth (weak-weak) is not
abandoned, the sphere is not transcended.
Hsüan-tsang adds: “There can be destruction of the two causes without there being
'transgression of a sphere."" Thus we establish the fourth alternative. In fact, the destruction
of the two causes in the three bhūmis (three lower Dhyānas, three lower Arūpyas) do not
constitute parijñā (the seventh and the eighth parijñā according to the case).
218. The sixteenth moment (mārge’nvayajñāna) forms part of the Path of Meditation.
219. The Āryan who has obtained detachment from Kāmadhātu through the wordly path
before entering into the "comprehension of the Truths" becomes an Anāgāmin in
mārge’nvayajñāna and possesses, from this jñāna onward, only avarabhāgīyaprahāṇaparijñā.-
However the anupūrvaka takes possession of this only later, when he becomes detached
from Kāmadhātu (ii.16c-d; vi36d).
220. The Anāgāmin is called rūpavītarāga, “detached from Rūpa."
221. Hsüan-tsang corrects some items.CHAPTER SIX
The Path and the Saints¹
***
DE MAFootnotes 1041
1. At the beginning of this volume we give a summary of the theory of the Path according to
the Kośa: preliminary path; pure, impure path, etc.
2. We should not translate "by Seeing and Meditation on the Truths." Worldly or impure
Meditation does not bear on the Truths.
On the different meanings of the word bhāvanā, bhāvana, iv. 122c-d, vi.5. vii.27.
Atthasalini, 163: a. acquisition, taking possession of (pratilambha); b. cultivation,
repetition (nișevaṇa, niṣevā, abhyāsa); c. absorbtion (samādhi).
3. Darśanamārga, i.40a-b, vi.25-28; bhāvanāmārga, pure and impure, vi.29-50. Different
mārgas, vi.65b.
4. The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 267a28 presents thirty opinions on the two paths: the Path of
Seeing is an active path; once it is realized, at one stroke it cuts off nine catetories of
defilements; the Path of Meditation is not active, it is cultivated on many occasions and it
cuts off nine catetories of defilements over a long period of time: such as a sharp dagger and
a dull dagger . . . ; the defilements abandoned through Seeing are abandoned as a stone is
smashed; the defilements abandoned through Meditation are abandoned as a lotus stalk is
broken.
The Path of the Seeing of the Truths, first pure view of the truths, cuts off the
defilements, satkāyadṛṣṭi, etc., to which it is opposed (pratițakṣa) in fifteen moments; the
Path of Meditation, pure or impure, opposes one by one each of the nine catetories of
defilements (strong-strong rāga, etc.) of each the nine spheres (Kāmadhātu, the Four
Dhyānas, and the four ārūpyas) (vi.33).
5. According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 404b11.
6. vi.14; 67.
7. vi.67; Mahāvyutpati, 39: to make an effort for the disappearance of the black dharmas,
etc.
8. vyavacāraṇa = parīkṣā = pratirūpaṇa; this is the period of the nirvedhabhāgīyas, vi.17.
9. According to the version of Hsüan-tsang this is the Sūtra of the Good Doctor; according
to Paramārtha, the Sūtra of the Simile of the Doctor (Samyukta, TD 2, p. 105a2b, p.
120a25).
Vyākhyā: sütre py eșa satyānāṁ dṛṣṭānta iti vyādhyādisütre /katham / caturbhir angaiḥ
samanvāgato bhiṣak śalyāpahartā rājārhaś ca bhavati rājayogyaś ca rājāngatve ca saṁkhyāṁ
gacchati / katamaiś caturbhiḥ / ābādhakuśalo bhavati / ābādhasamutthānakuśalo bhavati
ābādhaprahāṇakuśalaḥ prahīṇasya cābādḥasyāyatyām anut pādakuśalaḥ / evam eva caturbhir
angaiḥ samanvāgatas tathāgato'rhan samyaksambuddho nuttaro bhişak śalyāpahartety
ucyate / katamaiś caturbhiḥ / iha bhikṣavas tathāgato . . . idaṁ duḥkham āryasatyam iti
yathābhūtam prajānāti ...
Kern, Manual, p. 47 (Yogasūtra, ii.15; Lalita, p. 448, 458); bhisakka in the Index of the
Anguttara; Milinda, trans. II, 8, note: Śikṣāsamuccaya, 148.5, 243.4, 295.2; Bodhicaryāvatāra,
ii.57, vii.22. etc. See Taishō 17, no. 793.
10. On abhisamaya, below, vi.27a. Atthasālini, 22 (57) distinguishes worldly and
transworldly abhisamaya; but the Păli sources most frequently understand abhisamaya in
the same sense as does the Abhidharma: comprehension of the Truths through aryā prajñā.
11. This theory is not that of all the sources; see p. 908. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 397a26: What is
the nature of the Four Truths? The masters of the Abhidharma say: 1. the Truth of
Suffering consists of the five upādānaskandhas; 2. the Truth of Origin is the cause of the
impure dharmas; 3. the Truth of the Extinction is their pratisaṁkhyānirodha (ii.55d); 4. the
Truth of the Path the dharmas which create the Saints (faikṣa and aśaikṣa dharmas). The
Dārṣṭāntikas say: 1. the Truth of Suffering is nămarüpa; 2. the Truth of Arising is karman
and klesa; 3. the Truth of Extinction is the annihilation (kṣaya) of karman and of kleśa; 4.1042 Chapter Six
the Truth of the Path is calm and insight (famatha and vipaśyanā). The Vibhajyavādins (see
v. English trans. p. 782, 808,) say: 1. that which has the eight characteristics of duḥkha is
duḥkha and duḥkhasatya; the other impure (säsrava) dharmas are duḥkha, but not
duḥkhasatya [compare the Pāļi sources quoted below, note 15]; 2. the tṛṣṇā which produces
later existence is samudaya and samudayasatya; all other tṛṣṇā and the other causes of
impure (sāsravahetu) dharmas is samudaya, but not samudayasatya; 3. the extinction of this
tṛṣṇā is nirodha and nirodhasatya; the extinction of all other tṛṣṇā and of the other causes of
impure dharmas is nirodha, but not nirodhasatya; 4. the eight-part Saikṣa path is mārga and
margasatya; the other dharmas of the Saikṣa and all the dharmas of the Asaikṣa are mārga,
but not mārgasatya. But, in this system, thé Arhats only possess the Truths of duḥkha and
nirodha, and not the Truths of samudaya and mārga. Saṁgītiśāstra, TD 26, p. 392a16;
sastavahetu is the Truth of Origin; pratisaṁkhyānirodha is the Truth of Extinction; the
dharmas of the Saikṣa and the Aśaikṣa are the path.
12. Visuddhimagga, 495: yasmā pana etāni buddḥādayo ariyā paṭivijjhanti tasmā
ariyasaccānīti vuccanti . . . ariyānīti tathāni avitathāni avisaṁvādakānīti attho.
The Āryan is defined, Kośa, iii.44c; same etymology in Anguttara, iv.145. Majjhima,
i.280. etc. In Atthasālinī, 349: the Āryans are the Buddhas, the Pratyekas, and the Śrāvakas;
or rather the Buddhas alone are Ãryans: compare Samyutta, v.435 (tathāgata=ariya).
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 401c27. What is the meaning of the term āryasatya? Are the Truths
so called because they are good, because they are pure (anāsrava), or because the Aryans are
endowed with them? What are the defects of these explanations? All three are bad: 1. one
can say that the last two Truths are good; but the first two are of three types, good, bad, and
neutral; 2. the last two are pure, but not the first two; 3. the non-Aryans are endowed with
the Truths, thus it is said: "Who is endowed with the Truths of duḥkha and of samudaya? All
beings. Who is endowed with the Truth of nirodha? Those who are not bound by all the
bonds (sakalabandhana, see Kośa, ii.36c, English trans. p. 207).” Answer: One must say that,
because the Āryans are endowed with them, these Truths are the Āryasatyas . . .
13. Samyutta, iv.127: yam pare sukhato āhu tad ariyā āhu dukkhato / yam pare dukkhato āhu
tad āriya sukhato vidū. The Vyākhyā quotes the second pāda: tat pare duḥkhato viduḥ.
It also quotes the last pāda of the Saundarananda, xii.22: loke'sminn ālayārāme nivṛttau
durlabhā ratiḥ / vyathante hy apunarbhāvāt prapātād iva bāliśāḥ // In fact, what the Aryans
call sukha is Nirvāṇa or extinction.
14. According to P'u-kuang (TD 41, p. 333c2), the Sautrāntikas and the Sthaviras.
15. a. Vyākhyā: mana āpnuvantīti manāpāḥ / punaḥsaṁdhikaraṇam cātreti vyākhyātam.
b. On the three types of duḥkha, Dīgha, iii.216 (Buddhaghosa, if the summary in
Dialogues, iii.210, is correct, deviates from Vasubandhu); Samyutta, iv.259, v.56;
Visuddhimagga, 499; Madhyamakavṛtti, chap. xxiv (p. 227, 475), which depends on the
Kofa; Bodbicaryavatāra, 346; Rockhill, Life, 189; Yogasūtra, ii.15 (pariņāma, tāpa and
saṁskāraduḥkhatā). Nāmasaṁgīti, 85: duḥkhaṁ saṁsāriṇaḥ skandhāḥ.
c. According to the Yamaka, i.174, painful sensation (of the body and mind) is duḥkha;
the rest is duḥkhasatya, but not duḥkha. Painful sensation is anubhavanaduḥkha (the
duḥkhaduḥkha of the Abhidharma); the rest is duḥkha because it is dangerous
sappatibhayatthena. (According to Ledi Sayadaw, JPTS, 1914, 133).
Kathāvatthu, xvii.5: the Hetuvādins maintains that all conditioned dharmas, with the
exception of the Path but including the cause of suffering, are suffering.
16. Some agreeable dharmas possess vipariņāmena duḥkhatā, the characteristic of suffering,
because they do not last. The Vyākhyā quotes the verse of Aśvaghoșa, Saundarananda, xi.50:
hā caitraratha hā vāpi hā mandākini hā priye / ity ārtaṁ vilapanto gāṁ patanti divaukasaḥ
// (Compare Divya, 194).
Let us note here that Vasubandhu, iv.86, quotes the same poem: grhasthena hi duḥśodhā
drstir vividhadrsținā / ājīvo bhikṣunā caiva pareṣv āyattavṛttinā. (Correct the note p. 189.)The disagreeable dharmas are suffering by their suffering, painful nature (duḥkhasvab-
hāvena, upaghātasvabhāvena). But can they to some extent be happy through transforma-
tion, in that they pass away (vipariņāmasukha)? Without doubt, but these definitions
(upadeşa) have for their purpose depreciating, disliking these things (vidūṣaṇārtham): in
the same way we hold agreeable sensation that arises and lasts to be suffering.
Footnotes 1043
All things are suffering through saṁskāraduḥkhatā: saṁskāreņaiva duḥkhateti
samskārenaiva jananenaivety arthaḥ / yad anityaṁ tad duḥkham yan na niyatasthitaṁ tad
duḥkham yaj jāyate vinafyati ca tad duḥkham ity arthah / tenoktam / pratyayābhisaṁska-
ranād iti pratyayair abhisaṁskriyate yasmāt tasmāt tad duḥkham iti /
Samyutta, iv.207: sukham dukkhato ... dukkhaṁ sallato….. adukkhamasukham aniccato.
17. Quoted in Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 476; compare Jacob, Third Handful of Popular Maxims
(Bombay, 1911). p. 103: akṣipātranyāya.
18. The point of view of the Theravādins, Kathāvatthu, xvii.5.
19. Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 402c10). The Sūtra says: “The Path depends on its preparation
(saṁbhāra), Nirvāṇa depends on the Path; through the pleasure (sukha) of the Path, one
obtains the pleasure of Nirvāṇa. How can one say that there is no pleasure in the skandhas?
There is found therein a little pleasure . . . nevertheless the skandhas are one mass of
suffering, the same if one were to pour a drop of honey into a vase filled with poison … … . ; in
this same way are the skandhas: little pleasure and much suffering. They are thus solely
called duḥkhasatya. There are some who say: In the skandhas, there is absolutely no
pleasure: therefore it is called duḥkhasatya.
20. This is a stanza by Kumarālābha (a Sautrāntika).
21. Saha tu sukhena: tu announces the refutation of the pūrvapakṣa represented by a theory
of the Sarvästivādins (“According to one explanation . . . ) and by a theory of the
Sautrāntikas.
Hsüan-tsang: "The true explanation... " The Japanese editor: "The author presents the
correct explanation of the Sarvāstivādins."
22. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 402c. According to the Vyakhyā, the Bhadanta Śrīlābha, etc.
According to the gloss of the Japanese editor, the Sautrāntikas, the Mahāsāṁghikas, etc.
Samghabhadra, Nyāyānusāra: “The Sthaviras hold that sensation is only suffering."
Compare Kathāvatthu, ii.8, where the Theravada condemn the Gokulikas (=Kukkulikas,
Keith, Buddhist Philosophy, 151).
23. These Sūtras are discussed P.
904.
24. Compare Majjhima, i.507. Refuted p. 908.
25. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 399a23. Pārśva says that pīḍana (affliction, pain) is the characteristic
of duḥkha; Vasumitra says that pravṛtti (or saṁsāra, saṁcāra, liu-ch'uan
) is
the characteristic of duḥkha; etc.
26. According to Hsüan-tsang: If he answers: "Affliction” (bādh), then, since there is
contentment, the existence of pleasure is proved. If he answers: "That which harms," then,
since there is usefulness (anugrāhaka) in this, the existence of pleasure is proved. If he
answers: "That which displeases (arañjanya),” then, since there is something pleasing, the
existence of pleasure is proved. According to Paramārtha: If he answers: "That which
afflicts is called suffering," how does pleasure afflict? If he answers: “That which harms,"
how would it harm since pleasure is useful? If he answers: "That which displeases," how
could it be suffering since pleasure pleases?
27. The Vyākhyāä explains: idam atra duḥkhasya lakṣaṇam ity arthaḥ.
The same Sūtra in Saṁyutta, iv.216, but the questioner of the Bhagavat is “a certain
Bhikṣu": tisso imā bhikkhu vedanā vuttā mayā . . . / vuttam kho panetam bhikkhu mayā yaṁ1044 Chapter Six
kiñ ci vedayitaṁ taṁ dukkhasmin ti / taṁ kho panetaṁ bhikkhu mayā saṁkhārānaṁ yeva
aniccatam samdbāya bbasitam ...
vipariņāma = anyathātva.
The commentary of the Nāmasaṁgīti, viii.9: yat kim cit kāye veditam idam atra
duḥkham.
28. Yathābhūtam: conforming to reality, without adding or subtracting (adhyāropāpavā-
dābhāvāt).
29. The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 402c17 and foll., continues: "When one experiences the
suffering of the damned, one has the idea of pleasure with respect to the suffering of
animals... When one experiences the suffering of mankind, one has the idea of pleasure
with respect to the sufferings of the gods.
30. Vyākhyā: aduḥkhānantaraṁ sukhābhimānaṁ paśyann āha / yadā gandharasaspraṣṭa-
vyavišeșajam iti / madhyaṁ hi duḥkham aduḥkhāsukhaṁ bhavatāṁ na mṛduprakāram ato
vaktavyam tadā katamad duḥkhaṁ mṛdubhūtaṁ yatrāsya sukhabuddhir bhavatīti
viṣayabalād eva hi tat sukham utpadyate mṛduduḥkhasamanantarapratyayabalād
adhimätraduḥkhasamanantarapratyayabalād veti /
Paramārtha: "When a person experiences the pleasure arisen from some excellent
smell, taste, etc., then what suffering does he experience? He experiences a weak suffering,
and with respect to this weak suffering, he produces the idea of pleasure. If this is the case,
when this weak suffering has disappeared...
31. Compare Samyutta, ii.173: If the earth element were absolutely agreeable
suffering ...
absolutely
32. Hsüan-tsang adds: "since suffering diminishes little by little."
If the displacement of the burden does not provoke a pleasure and is only a diminution
of suffering, this diminution would take place gradually: the impression of pleasure would
thus grow from the moment when the burden had been displaced.
33. Utsūtra. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 403a4: "All the impure (sāsrava) dharmas are cause and as a
consequence the Truth of Origin. Why does the Blessed One say that thirst is the Truth of
Origin? There are thirty explanations ...
29
The Yamaka, i.174, ii.250, demonstrates that thirst is the origin, not ignorance (Ledi
Sayadaw, JPTS., 1914, p. 135).
34. Mahāvagga, i.6.20. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 468b27c19: samudayasatyam katamat / yasau
tṛṣṇā nandīrāgasahagatā tatra tatrābhinandinī. According to the Sautrāntikas, four tṛṣṇās
are samudayasatya: 1. desire for present existence, the desire for present results: 2. desire for
later existences, the desire for future results; 3. desire accompanied by nandī; and 4. desire
tatra tatra abhinandini.
35. A non-metrical version in the Tanjur: las dañ sred pa dañ mi rig pa / phyi ma'i tshe la
'du byed rnams kyi rgyu. Three pādas of five syllables in Paramārtha: "Action, thirst,
ignorance, these three in the future are the cause of all existence." Hsüan-tsang has four
pādas: "Action, thirst and ignorance are the cause which produces the future saṁskāras
which creates the series of existence called pudgala”: this is a gāthā taken from Samyukta,
TD 2, p. 88b9.
The Vyākhyā also attests that this quotation is a stanza: . . gāthāyām eṣa nirdeśaḥ
karma tṛṣṇāvidyā saṁskārāṇām cakṣurādīnāṁ hetur abhisaṁparāye.
36. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 224c16: yataś ca bhikṣavaḥ pañca bījajātāny (compare Cosmologie
bouddhique, p. 220) akhaṇḍāny acchidrāṇy apūtīny avātātāpahatāni havāni (?) sārāṇi
sukhaśayitāni pṛthivīdhātuś ca bhavaty abdhātuś ca / evaṁ tāni bījāni vṛddhiṁ virūḍhiṁ
vipulatām äpadyanta iti hi bhikṣava upameyam kṛtā yāvad eväsyärthasya vijñaptaya itīmamFootnotes 1045
dṛṣtāntam upanyasyedam uktam /pañca bījajātānīti bhikṣavaḥ sopādānasya vijñānasyaitad
adhivacanam / pṛthivīdhātur iti catasṛṇāṁ vijñānasthitīnām etad adhivacanam. Compare
Samyutta, iii.54: seyyathā ….. pathavīdhātu evaṁ catasso viññāṇaṭṭhitiyo ... seyyathā
pañcabījajātāni evaṁ viññāņaṁ sāhāraṁ daṭṭhabbam.
On the vijñānasthitis, see Kofa, iii.5.
37. Vyākhyā: ābhiprāyika ity abhiprāye bhavaḥ / abhiprāyeṇa vā dīvyatīty ābhiprāyikaḥ
sütre nirdeṣaḥ / tṛṣṇādhikaṁ pudgalam adhikṛtya kṛta ity abhiprayah / lākṣanikas tv
abhidharme / lakṣaṇe bhavo lākṣaṇiko nirdeśaḥ / … sāsravasya skandhapañcakasya
samudayasatyatvalakṣaṇayogāt.
38. In the Vyākhyā this Sūtra is called the sahetusapratya-sanidānasūtra (see the fragment
quoted in Kośa, iii, Cosmologie); but in the Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 452: pratītyasamutpāda-
sùtra.
39. See iii.30, Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 544.
40. Like the limb which has been smeared with a dried paste of masura. In the way that the
limb is grasped (āgṛhīta) by this anointing, in that same way the ātmabhāva is grasped by
desire.
41. According to the Japanese editor, Ekottarāgama (TD 2. p. 740a-741b).
42. The Vyākhyā quotes the Madhyamaka kārikā, xxiv.8:
dve satye samupāśritya buddhānāṁ dharmadeśanā
lokasamvṛtisatyaṁ ca satyaṁ ca paramārthataḥ //
Compare the stanzas quoted in the commentary to the Kathāvatthu, p.22:
duve saccāni akkhāsi saṁbuddho vadatāṁ varo /
sammutim paramatthaṁ ca tatiyaṁ nupalabbhati // tattha
samketavacanaṁ saccaṁ lokasammutikāraṇam /
paramatthavacanaṁ saccaṁ dhammānaṁ tathalakkhaṇam //
(The edition has tathā lakkhaṇam.)
See the translation of the Kathāvatthu, p. 63, 180, 371; Ledi Sayadaw, "Some points in
Buddhist doctrine," JPTS., 1914. 129.
The problem of the single truth (Suttanipāta, 884), of the two truths and of the four
truths-which implies the question of the real existence of Nirvāṇa (see Anguttara,
ii. 161)-is discussed in Vibhāsā, TD 27, p. 399b10 and following, and in the Nyāyānusāra of
Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 665a27). These document have been translated in the
Introduction.
43. Vyākhyā: The two examples indicate the two modes of bheda or breaking: pots. etc., are
broken by a blow (upakrama) whereas water, etc., is broken by mental analysis (buddhi);
for by breaking one cannot take away the taste, etc. from water. Or rather, that which exists
conventionally (samvṛti) is of two types: 1. conventionally depending on another thing
(samvrtyantaravyapaśraya), and 2. depending of a real thing (dravya): of the first, there is at
one and the same time breaking (bheda) and analysis (anyāpoha) [for example, the pot]; of
the second, there is only analysis: one cannot disassociate an atom which is made up of eight
things (Kośa, ii.22) . . . saṁvṛtisat=saṁvyavahāreṇa sat. paramārthasat=paramārthena sat
svalakṣaṇena sat.
Paramartha, in the Bhāṣyam, departs from the original:
“First if the idea of a thing no longer arises when this thing has been broken, then this
thing exists conventionally (samvṛtisat). When the pot is reduced to baked earth, the idea of
pot does not arise with respect to this baked earth. Therefore things like "a pot" exist only
as a metaphoric designation (prajñapti) of shape (hsing-hsiang # =ākṛti,
samsthāna). Secondly, if the idea of a thing does not arise when, by the mind, one takes away
from this thing other given things (dharmas), then this thing exists conventionally; for
example, water. If one mentally takes away the color, taste, and the primary elements, etc.,1046 Chapter Six
from water, then the idea of water is no longer produced. Thus things such as water exist as
the metaphorical designations of a combination (chü-chi ** samavāya?).
Thirdly, one expresses paramārtha, the real thing, by words, phrases, and syllables (Kośa,
ii.47); it is by reason of words that a knowledge relative to paramārtha is produced.But
when one enters absorption, consciousness does not bear on words (Kofa, vi.5c-d) and,
when it has left absorption, the consciousness no longer bears on paramārtha: thus the
words and the consciousness referred to here exist only as metaphorical designations of the
thing expressed (? hsien-chih
, udbhāvanā?). Why are these three types of
dharmas saṁvṛti? What is only made up of words does not have a nature in and of itself,
and is samvṛti. To say, in conformity with the usage of the world, that "there is a pot, there
is water, there are words," is true and not false. Therefore this is saṁvṛtisatya. What differs
from these three types of dharmas is called paramärthasatya. If the idea of a thing arises as
before when this thing is destroyed, or when one has separated it from other dharmas by
the mind, or when one makes an abstraction of it from words, then this thing or dharma
really exists, for example, rūpa. One can cut rūpa, one can subtract different dharmas from
it, its taste, etc.: but the idea which bears on rūpa remains the same. The same for vedanā,
etc. . . According to other masters, the dharmas which are the object of supermundane
(lokottara) knowledge or of the knowledge acquired consecutively to it are also called
paramarthasatya: the dhatus (ching-chieh R ), the result, and the Path are
paramārtha. What differs from these three is samvṛtisatya.
>
44. According to Hui-hui, the Sauträntikas. The Vyākhyā explains: paramasya jñānasyār-
thaḥ paramārthaḥ / paramāṛthaś ca sa satyaṁ ca tad iti paramārthasatyam. It adds:
trividhaṁ hi yogācārāṇāṁ sat paramārthasat saṁvṛtisat dravyasat /dravyataḥsvalakṣaṇataḥ
sad dravyasat. The older masters are thus the Yogācārins (see iv.4a, note 25).
Compare the doctrine of the Bodhisattvabhūmi, I.iv, fol. 18a, Muséon, 1906, p. 220 and
following; four types of tattvärtha or tattva: 1. the reality recognized in popular usage
(laukikaprasiddha); 2. the reality established by reason (yuktiprasiddha); 3. the reality that
the Śrāvakas and the Pratyekabuddhas cognize through a pure or worldly knowledge, this
leading to the pure knowledge consecutive to the pure knowledge (anāsraveṇa anāsravāvāḥ-
akena anasravapṛṣṭhalabdhena ca laukikena jñānena): this reality is the Truths; and 4. the
reality which is the sphere of knowledge purified of any hindrance to cognizable
objects(jñeyavaraṇaviśuddhajñānagocara): this is tathata. (Compare Sūtrālaṁkāra,-xi.31).
45. This worldly knowledge is saṁvṛtijñāna, vii.2.21.
46. Paramārtha: “The truths have been spoken of in summary. If one asks for a long
presentation, one should see how it is spoken of in the Treatise of the Six Higher
Knowledges (abhijñā) (liu shen shih lun ABTR ) (TD 29, p. 269a3).
47. Paramartha: “One must tell by which cultivation of which means one enters into the
Seeing of the Truths. Thus, beginning from the first step, one must tell of its progression."
(TD 29, p. 269a4). Hsüan-tsang: "One must tell by which cultivation of which means one
arrives at darśanamärga (TD 29, p. 116b27).
48. a. Here bhāvanā is the equivalent of samādhi or absorption (iv.123c-d).
b. Vṛtta or vṛtti (vi.8a) is almost synonymous to fila, as we can see in the Saundara-
nanda, xiii. 10, xvi.31; it is the perfect fila of the Bhikṣu to be content with the clothing of a
monk, etc. (vi.7c-d).
49. Udgṛhṇāti, glossed by paṭṭhati.
50. Satyadarśanānuloma = satyadarśanadhikārika.
51. On the three paññās, Dīgha, iii.219; Vibhanga, 324, Visuddhimagga, 439 (in the order:
cintā, suta, bhāvanā).Footnotes
1047
52. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 940c25. Vasubandhu does not admit this theory; this is why he says:
"According to the Vaibhāṣikas ...
>>
53. "This thing corresponds to this name; this is the name of this thing."
54. According to Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 669c5), the opinion of the Sautrāntikas.
55. To what sphere do the prajñas belong, Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 218a23). (See vii.18c-d).
śrutamayi: Ist opiņion, Kāmadhātu and the Four Dhyānas; 2nd opinion, adds
dhyānāntara; 3rd opinion, adds anāgāmya. cintāmayī: Kāmadhātu. bhāvanāmayī: impure, in
17 spheres: pure, in 9 spheres.
Mode of acquisition: Ist opinion, the three obtained through prayoga (exercise) and
through vairāgya (detachment); 2nd opinion, and also at birth (aupapattika); and further
the frutamayi of Rūpadhātu at birth and through prayoga, the śrutamayî of Kāmadhātu
through prayoga; the cintāmayi through prayoga; and the bhāvanāmayī in the three
manners.
56. These grammatical explanations are omitted by the Tibetan translator. The two Chinese
translators omit the explanation by Pāṇini iv.3.134, but however give the example.
57. Hsüan-tsang: "How would he who desires to apply himself (prayuj) to bhāvanā purify
his own person (āśrayabhājana) so that bhāvanā will be successful?” (TD 29, p. 116c23).
58. The first "separation" is to separate the organs from the objects of sense. Fire shoots
forth from fuel, defilement from the vişayas (Saundarananda, xiii.30); but, as wind is
necessary for fire, so too parikalpa or vitarka is necessary to the fire of the defilements: thus
there should thus be a second "separation," separation from bad thoughts (Saundarananda,
xiii.49). Bad thoughts or akuſalavitarka (Kośa, v.46, 59), with their opposites, are explained
in Saundarananda, xv.21 (vyāpāda-vihimsā and maitrīkāruṇya, kāmavitarka, jñātivítarka,
30-41, janapadavitarka, 42-51, amaraṇa or amaravitarka). One gets rid of these vitarkas by
ānāpānasmṛti (vi.9). vi.58 (Hsüan-tsang TD 29, p. 130a13.)
On aranya, in which one cultivates "separation from the body," see Visuddhimagga, 71.
59. On alpecchatā and saṁtușți, see Anguttara, v.219, i.38, Visuddhimagga, 81, Divya, 61,
96, etc.
60. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 214a17 and foll. Vasubandhu does not admit this explanation.
61. See U. Wogihara, Asanga's Bodhisattvabhūmi (Leipzig 1908). p. 34-36 (Śikṣāsamuccaya.
35.6).
62. Kośa, ii.25, iv.8.
63. See Dīgha, iii.224-5; Visuddhimagga, 59, 93, 627. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 907b11 and foll.,
discusses the name, the nature, etc. of the vamsas. and how the first three exist in the higher
spheres.
64. Prahāṇabhāvanārāmatā = nirodhamārgārāmatā; affection or willingness with respect to
Nirvāṇa and to the Path leading to Nirvāṇa. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 909a15, four expanations.
Digha, iii.225: · pahāṇārāmo hoti pahāṇarato bhāvanārāmo hoti bhāvanārato. . . yo hi
tattha dakkho... ayam vuccati... porāne aggaññe ariyavaṁse țhito.
65. Vṛtti = jīvikā or food, drink, etc.; karmānta = work, labor; on samyagājīva, see iv.86a,
vi.68, samyakkarmānta, vi.68.
66. Hsüan-tsang: "who, having renounced the worldly regimen and popular activity, have
left the world by taking refuge in the Buddha in order to search out deliverance.” (TD 29, p.
117a20) Paramārtha: "who leave the world buddham adhikṛtya, and search out deliverance"
(p. 269b21).1048 Chapter Six
67. Hsüan-tsang: He establishes a regimen, an activity auxiliary to the Path.
68. Mahāsaṁgīti = Dīgha, iii.228. Anguttara, ii.10, 248, on the four arisings of desire or
thirst, tanhuppāda. The fourth itibhavābhavahetu taṇhā uppajjajmānā uppajjati in our text,
corresponds, to itibhavavibhavahetos tṛṣṇā.
69. Hsüan-tsang omits iti which Paramārtha translates. Vyākhyā: The word iti indicates the
different types of bhava and vibhava (bhavavibhavaprakārābhidyotaka). Desire for a certain
type of existence: “May I be Indra! May I be a Cakravartin!"; desire or vibhava or vināśa,
nonexistence: "May I be annihilated! May I not exist after death!" (aho batocchidyeyam na
bhaveyaṁ paraṁ maranād iṭyādi). See Kośa, v.10c, v.19.
70. Literally: "In what sort of a person will bhāvanā be successful?"
Hsüan-tsang: ". . . what receptacle (bhājana) can be the support of bhāvanā?”
71. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 662c8. According to the Abhisamayālaṁkārāloka, one is vitarkacarita
because of ragavikalpabāhulya. Sūtrālaṁkāra (Huber) Para. 42: One teaches aśubhā to the
old washerman, prāṇāyāma to the old blacksmith.
How one arrests the vitarkas, Majjhima, i.118, Vitakkasaṁthānasutta.
Rāgacarita, tṛṣṇācarita, iv.80a, 100a; opposed to dṛṣṭicarita.
72. On aśubhabhāvanā, Mahāvyutpatti, 52; the Sūtra on the vimuktyāyatanas quoted in
Vyākhayā, p. 57 (ad 1.27) has a slightly different list which ends: vikṣiptakaṁ vā asthi vā
asthisaṁkaliko vā. Dīgha, ii.296 (aṭṭhisaṁkhalika); Dhammsangani, 264; Atthasālini, 298;
Visuddhimagga, 178; Psalms of the Brethern, p. 125; Przyluski, Açoka, 386; Maitri-upa-
nişad. i.3.
See Kośa, viii.29, 32, 35b-d.
73. rgyus pas brań bren du sbrel ba'i ken rus. Paramārtha: bones attached to red nerves.
Hsüan-tsang has only vipaḍumaka.
74. On adhimuktimanasikāra, ii.72, p. 320 of the English translation and p. 920, 923.
Viskambhaṇa = vikkhambhana, Visuddhimagga, 5.
75. The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 205b13 and foll., presents four opinions on these three
categories of ascetics.
76. In the preparatory exercise (prayogakāle) one should avoid all occasions of desire; thus
the ascetic will not consider even one part of a feminine body.
77. Tibetan: "in order to reduce or concentrate his mind.
78. Tibetan: "In order that the mind is even more concentrated."
79. Quoted in Vyākhyā ad viii.32. Hsüan-tsang puts all the characteristics mentioned in the
Bhāṣyam in the kārikā: “Non-desire, of the ten spheres, having for their object visible
things of Kāmadhātu, produced by humans, loathsome, having an object of its own time
period, acquired in two ways."
80. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 206c11, gives three opinions. Vasubandhu adopts the third.
81. Particularly Śäriputra and Aniruddha, who were capable of meditating on aśubha with
respect to the Buddha and to goddesses (Vibhāṣā).
82. See p. 918. Aśubha does not cut off the defilements; it is thus impure; only the
meditations which include seeing of the sixteen aspects (suffering, impermanence, etc.) cut
off the defilements.
83. Visuddhimagga, 111, 197, 266-293; according to Samyutta, v.321, etc. Saundarananda,Footnotes 1049
xv.64. On prāṇāyāma, etc., Hopkins, "Yoga-Technique in the Great Epic," JAOS, xxii.333.
84. According to Hsüan-tsang (TD 29, p. 118a8), an explanation from a Sūtra (glossed as
Samyukta 29.2, TD 2, p. 205c25); Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 134a25) quotes the Prajñāptiśāstra.
85. See p. 926.
86. There is upekṣā in the Fourth Dhyāna, but inbreathing and outbreathing are absent
there.
87. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 423a2, gives divergent opinions: it is also adhimukti-manaskārasaṁ-
prayuktā.
88. Non-Buddhists possess the teaching (upadeśa) of prāṇāyāma, but not that of
anapanasmrti.
89. Mahāvyutpatti, Para. 53; Dīgha, ii.291 (Warren, p. 354; Sp. Hardy, Eastern Monachism,
p. 267); Majjbima, 1.425.
90. Vyākhyā: adhyupekṣya = anāsahya.
91. Not mentioned in the Vibhāṣā.
92. Kośa, iii.45c-d.
93. Divya, 105, vairambha and vairambhaka; Saṁyutta, ii.231, verambhavātakhitta (var.
verambaº) sakuna; Jātaka, translation, iii.164, 287, 288.
94. See Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 135a15. Paramārtha: Either between the eyebrows, or on the
point of the nose, in the desired place and as far as the toes, hold mindfulness in the center
like a thread which holds pearls together. Tibetan: Like a manisūtra placed at the end of the
nose to the tips of the toes, ascertain if the breaths (aśvāsapraśvāsāḥ) are favorable or
unfavorable, cold or hot. Vyākhyā: kim anugrāhakā ete yāvad uṣṇā iti sthāpanī (?) veyaṁ
draṣṭavyā kāyapradeśa evānugrāhakādiviśeṣasthāpanataḥ.
95. Manisūtravat. Compare Eastern Monachisms, 269, Dīgha, i.76.
96. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 133a5: Some say that it belongs to the sphere to which the body
belongs. In a being of Kāmadhātu, when he has a mind of Kāmadhātu, it a Kāmadhātu mind
which precedes inbreathing-outbreathing; when there is a mind of the First Dhyāna, it is
with a mind of the First Dhyāna . . . Others say that it belongs to the sphere to which the
mind belongs ... As inbreathing-outbreathing is a part of the body, the first opinion is the
best one.
97. See ii.57c.
98. Paramārtha: “No object of a lower mind nor of another mind." Commentary: "A mind
of their sphere or of a higher sphere can take these two breaths as its object, but not a lower
mind, nor an airyāpathika or nairmāṇika mind.”
Vyākhyā: nādhareṇairyāpathikanairmāṇikena iti / airyāpathikaṁ nairmāṇikam ca
cittam adharabhūmikaṁ saṁmukhībhavati yāvac caturthadhyānopapannasyety ata
āśańkyocyate nādharabhūmikābhyāṁ tābhyām upalakṣaṇam. See ii. English trans. p. 315
99. The practice of the smṛtyupasthānas produces perfect consciousness, for the Blessed One
said: ekāyano'yam bhikṣavo mārgo yad uta smṛtyupasthānāni / kevalo’yaṁ kuśalarāśiḥ yad
uta catvāri smṛtyupasthānāni (Compare Samyutta, v.167, 146).
The nirvedhabhāgīyas (vi.17) are smṛtyupasthāna; the Path of the Seeing of the Truths
is, by nature, dharmasmṛtyupasthāna; but here the author examines impure (sāsrava)
smṛtyupasthāna, the exercises preparatory to entrance to the Path. Smṛtyupasthāna is the
first of the bodhipākṣikas, vi.67. See Kośa, vi.18a, 19d, 67 and following, vii.15, etc.
Anguttara, i.43, Dīgha, ii.290, Majjhima, i.56, Samyutta, v.141; Visuddhimagga, 239-266;1050 Chapter Six
Fragments of Idikutsari (Pischel, Ac. de Berlin, 28 July 1904, p. 1143), with cittānupaśyatā
for anupaśyanā.
100. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 217a12. See ii.72. p. 320 of the English translation.
In the Vijñānavāda school, a consideration of characteristics leads to the consideration of
the absence of characteristics, as we see in the Bodhisattvabhūmi, I.xvii, fol. 100b: katham ca
bodbisattvo ma bày Gnanayena saptatrimsatam bodbipaks yan dbar màn yatbabbutam
prajānāti / iha bodhisattvaḥ kaye kāyānudarfī viharan naiva kāyaṁ kāyabhāvato vikalpayati
nāpi sarveņa sarvam abhāvataḥ / tāṁ ca kāyanirabhilāpyasvabhāvadharmātāṁ prajānāti /
iyam asya pāramārthikī kāyekāyānupaśyanā smṛtyupasthānam saṁvṛtinayena punar
bodhisattvasyapramāṇavyavasthānanayajñānānu gataṁ kāyekāyānupaśyanāsmṛtyupasthā-
nam veditavyam /... sa naiva kāyādīn dharmān duḥkhato vā vikalpayati samudayato vā
nāpi tatprahāṇaṁ nirodhataḥ kalpayati näpi tatprāptihetum märgataḥ kalpayati /
nirabhilāpyasvabhāvadharmatayā ca duḥkhadharmatām .. prajānāti.
101. See i.2a, ii.24, vii.1.
102. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 554c21 and following; compare Samyutta, v.331.
103. The forms of the anupaśyanā type are criticized in Bhāmatī, ii.32, and elsewhere.
104. Darśanam (=jñāna, vii.7).
105. Vyākhyā: yadi hi smṛtir ālambanaṁ dhārayaty evaṁ prajña prajānātīti / tad evam
smṛtyopatiṣṭhata iti smṛtyupasthānam prajñā.
Hsüan-tsang: As an axe (=prajñā) cuts wood (=body, sensation, etc.) sustained by the
force of the axe-handle (= mindfulness).
106. Prajñā is called smṛtyupasthāna because it is applied (upathişthate) thanks to
mindfulness (smṛtyā).
107. Where is it applied (kva punar upatişthate)? To the body... to the dharmas.
108. The smṛtyupasthānas are innumerable; why only count four? Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
938a13.
109. These are the four aspects of the Truth of Suffering, vii.13a.
110. Tata uşmagatotpattiḥ (quoted ad iv.125d). See p. 935.
Vyākhyā: uşmagatam ity uṣmaprakāraṁ kuśalamūlam.
Kern, Manual, 56, note, mentions Jātaka, v. p. 208: brahmacārim . . . uṣmagatam
[=samaṇateyam] and Majjhima, i.132, usmīkata = highly proficient, brilliant. Usmāgata,
very hot, Atthasālinī, 338. See below, note 124.
From the gloss in Sūtrālaṁkāra, xiv.26, trans. p. 166, note, one can conclude that
uṣmagata=āloka=dharmanidhyānakṣānti.
The editor mentions Majjhhima, ii.175.
Sarad Candra Das, Dict. 658; Bodhipathapradipa, stanza 69; Nyāyabindu of Vinitadeva,
P. 47.
111. Hsüan-tsang: The dharmasmṛtyupasthāna, cultivated many times and carried to its
highest state, gives rise . . .
112. This dharma is the best among the non-fixed roots of good (that is to say among the
uşmagata and the mūrdhānas), as the head of a man; this is why it is called "head"" or rather,
this dharma is the line of drawing back or of advancing, like the summit of a mountain; this
is why it is called "summit."
mürdhaśabdo'yaṁ prakarṣaparyantavācī / tathā hi loke vaktāro bhavanti mūrdhagatā
khalu asya ārīr iti / ... ebhyo hi pāto' tikramo veti mūrdhabhyaḥ pātaḥ parihāṇir atikramo
vā kṣāntisaṁmukhībhāvo vā . . .Footnotes
1051
113. Hsüan-tsang: first placing of the foot; Paramārtha: to place the aspect (TD 29, p.
271c3).
114. It is through dharmasmṛtyupasthāna, by considering the dharmas, that the ascetic, at
the beginning of the states of "heat” and “head," sees the upādānaskandhas as
impermanent, suffering, etc. He impresses on the Truths--that is to say on the
upādānaskandhas as effects (duḥkha), on the upādānaskandhas as causes (samudaya), on
extinction (nirodha = Nirvāṇa), and on the Path (mārga)—the characteristics or aspects
(ākāra) which are suitable to them. This is the vinyasana or ākaraṇa of the aspects.
115. Compare uttāpanā, vi.57c.
116. See note 124.
This "patience" differs from patience, a virtue of the Bodhisattva, iv.lllc-d; it is
connected to the pure "patiences" which form part of the Path of the Seeing of the Truths
(vi.25d), but it is impure, worldly, and, as a consequence, is a jñāna contrary to the pure
patiences (vii.1).
Kṣānti in the sense of agreement, acquiescence--mentioned by Kern according to the
Lalita--is known from Pâļi sources: Suttanipāta, 897; Majjhima, i.487, ii.43: aññaditthika
aññakhantika aññarucika (non-Buddhist monks of another opinion); Samyutta, ii.115:
aññatra saddhāya aññatra ruciyā . . . aññatra diṭṭhinijjhānakḥantiyā aham etaṁ jānāmi . . .
jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇan ti: it is not by faith, agreement, or view-reflection-acquiescence,
that I know that old age proceeds from birth. Vibhanga, 245, 325, etc. In Gauḍapāda, iv.92,
kṣānti is understood in the Buddhist sense, as agreement.
We need not occupy ourselves with the dharmeṣu samyak-saṁtīraṇakṣānti of the
Bodhisattvabhūmi, nor with the kṣāntis of the Mahāyāna, Lalita, 36.16 (Rājendralāl), Lotus,
Burnouf, 380; Sukhāvatīvyūha, Para. 55; Prajñāpāramitā, 331, 451, 517, Daśabhūmaka,
Chap. vi; Sūtrālaṁkāra, xi.52, xix.36. For dharmanidhyānakṣṣānti, see above note 110.
117. In fact the Path of Seeing (darśanamārga) consists of dharmasmṛtyupasthāna; thus the
agradharmas are also dharmasmṛtyupasthāna since they adjoin darśanamārga. And kṣānti
adjoins the agradharmas.
118. Weak patience thus bears on the Four Truths of the three spheres seen under the
sixteen aspects.
119. Darśanamārga is pure (anāsrava); it is not a sabhāgahetu (ii.52a), a cause similar to
itself, since up to now, no pure dharma has appeared in the series of the ascetic. It therefore
solely depends on the agradharmas of which it is the puruṣakārapḥala, ii.56d.
According to the Sūtrālaṁkāra (xiv.23), laukikāgradharmāvasthā ānantaryasamādhi.The
supreme worldly dharmas immediately produce the pure Path, destroying the quality of
Pṛthagjana: see vi.25c-d at the end and note 123.
120. The ascetic necessarily possesses samvara or discipline (iv.17b), which is rūpa.
For Ghoşaka (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 29 c 8), the nirvedhabhāgīyas are either of Kāmadhātu
(uşmagata and mūrdhānas): four skandhas, for in Kāmadhātu rūpa does not accompany the
mind (anuparivartin, iv.17a); or of Rūpadhātu (kṣānti, agradharmas): five skandhas.
See below vi.20d.
121. We fail to see how this agrees with vi.21c.
122. One has already acquired possession of the four types (jāti) of smṛtyupasthāna bearing
on the Four Truths. Hsüan-tsang, TD 29, p. 157a11.
123. This resemblance is in the identity of the sphere of absorption (bhūmi), and in the
identity of the object (suffering of Kāmadhātu). It also results from the fact that the
agradharmas are the ānantaryamārga of the first pure kṣānti in the destruction of the state
of Prthagjana. (vi.25c-d).1052 Chapter Six
124. Nirvedhabhāgiya in the Pāļi sources (same meaning as in Kośa, viii.17, opposed to
hānabhāgīya, etc.), see iv. 125c-d and notes and also Dīgha iii.277, Anguttara, iii.2, 327,
Vibhāṣā, 330.
Gotrabhū, Puggalapaññatti, p. 12, corresponds to the possessor of the laukikāgradhar-
mas.
The four nirvedhabhāgīyas, Wassiliev (very good), 150 (139), 271 (246); Mahävyutpatti,
55; Dharmaśarīra; Divya 80.1 (where mūrdhagatāni is a mistake for ușmagatāni; where we
have satyānulomāḥ kṣāntayaḥ which can be the kṣāntis of the Kośa, vi.25d), 166, etc.;
Bodhicaryāvatāra, ix.41; Sūtrālaṁkāra, xiv.23; Bodhisattvabhūmi.
125. The Tibetan omits the grammatical explanation of which the Vyākhyā gives the
beginning: vidha vibhāga iti. We should have vedha according to Pāṇini, iii.3.15.
126. Darśanamārgaparivāritvāt, that is, because they are the preparation, the exercise
preparatory (prayoga) to darśanamārga.
127. See iv. English trans p. 679. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 33c17: In what body are the four
nirvedhabhāgīyas produced? In a masculine or feminine body. Does the woman who
produces uşma possess it in a masculine body? ... In short the woman who obtains the first
three possesses them in the future in a feminine or masculine body; in the same way, a man
possesses them, in the future, in a feminine or masculine body.
128. The man who has acquired one of the first three nirvedhabhāgīyas can be reborn as a
woman.
129. This conforms to the principles presented in iv.40. "Passage into another sphere"
means "birth into another sphere."
130. This means that the non-Ãryan loses the nirvedhabhāgīyas by death, even when he is
reborn into the sphere where he has acquired them (see iv. English trans. p. 616). The
Vyākhyā presents the views of Vasumitra, which are incorrect (he admits that, in the case of
a Pṛthagjana, the loss is sometimes caused only by death, sometimes by death and the
change of sphere). But Saṁghabhadra has demonstrated that it is solely through death that
a Pṛthagjana loses the nirvedhabhāgiyas.
131. We have seen (vi.20c-d) that an ascetic can produce the nirvedhabhāgīyas in states of
absorption distinct from the Four Dhyānas properly so called.
132. This means that the ascetic who has newly realized the nirvedhabhāgīyas does not
again take up the possession of the nirvedhabhāgīyas which he has lost.
133. Vyākhyā: sati [... lacuna...] pratisīmā nāma maryādā / tasyā daiśiko deśayitā
pranidhijñānalābhī.
Hsüan-tsang: "If one meets a dharmācārya who speaks well and who knows the avasthās
(liao fen wei JA# )...
134. Non-possession (aprāpti, asamanvāgama, asamanvaya) is explained ii.36c and
following.
All parihāṇi is vihāni, but the reverse is not true.
135. Here the Chinese translators differ. Hsüan-tsang (TD 29, p. 120b21):
What are the advantages of the acquisition of these roots of good?
Heat will certainly obtain Nirvāṇa.
If, among the four nirvedhabhāgīyas, one obtains heat, even though one falls, even
though one cuts off the roots of good, even though one commits mortal sins (ānantarya,
iv.96), and even though one falls into the painful realms of rebirth, one will not
transmigrate for a long time, for one will necessarily obtain Nirvāṇa. If this is so, whatFootnotes 1053
difference is there between Heat and mokṣabhāgīya? If there is no obstacle, Heat is close to
the Seeing of the Truths, because, like it, it includes the Seeing of the [sixteen] aspects of the
Truths.
One who obtains the Summit . . .
Paramārtha (TD 29, p. 272c7): One who has obtained Heat, Even though one loses it
through falling, is still destined for Nirvāṇa (nirvāṇadharman). If this is so, what difference
is there between Heat and mokşabhāgīya? Because if there is no obstacle, this is a state close
to the seeing of the Four Truths. Furthermore, the stanza says: One who has obtained Heat,
and who falls from it, will not take up a false teaching (hsieh chiao. Mahāvyut-
patti, 179.12 hsieh chiao t'u
= pāṣaṇḍika) in this state. If one does not take up
a false teaching, in what way does one differ from one who has obtained the Summit?
He who obtains the Summit...
136. In other words, he has obtained the apratisaṁkhyānirodha of certain realms of rebirth,
etc. See ii.55d.
137. See iv.96, note 439.
138. He will obtain Nirvāṇa in his seventh rebirth.
139. Here the Chinese translators add a pāda. Hsūn-tsang (p. 120b24):
The supreme dharmas enter into nyama.
He who has obtained the supreme dharmas, even though he is in the condition of a
Pṛthagjana, is nevertheless capable of entering into samyaktvanyāma. Even though the
stanza does not say that these dharmas are abandoned at death, yet from the fact that, by
these dharmas, one immediately enters into samyaktvanyāma, it results implicitly that they
are not abandoned at death. Why is only the possessor of the supreme dharmas capable of
entering into nyāma? Because he has already obtained the extinction-through-absence-of-
causes (apratisaṁkhyānirodha) of the quality of Pṛthagjana; because the supreme dharmas
are capable, like ānantaryamārga (vi.28) of expelling the quality of Pṛthagjana (p. 944).
Paramārtha (p. 272c20):
The supreme dharmas abandon the quality of Pṛthagjana.
He who has obtained the root of good supreme dharmas does not lose this root through
falling or through death; then he has already obtained extinction-through-absence-of-causes
(apratisaṁkhyānirodha) of the quality of Pṛthagjana: he will not again fall into this quality.
Why? Because, without any effort, he will see the Truth of Suffering in the moment which
immediately follows the supreme dharmas.
140. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 33b4. From another point of view, the nirvedhabhāgīyas are the six
types described below (vi.56a):parihāṇadharman, cetanādharman, etc. The ascetic can pass
from one to the other.
141. On the Bodhisattva voluntarily being born in painful realms of rebirth, see
Kathāvatthu, xxiii.3; Vasumitra and Bhavya (Ekavyavahārikas, etc.); Mahāvastu, ii.279;
Huber, Sūtrālamkāra, 408; Jātakamālā, 33.3; Jātaka, 31, p. 205. The transgressions of the
Bodhisattva in Jātaka, bibliography of Hopkins. JAOS, 1906, 464. See iv.108c.
142. According to the Vibhāṣā, the Śrāvaka (a person of the family of the Śrāvakas), in the
state of uşma and mürdhan, can pass to the vehicle of the Pratyekabuddhas and the
Buddhas; in the state of kṣānti, he can pass to the vehicle of the Pratyekabuddhas; but in the
state of lokottara, he cannot change. The Pratyekabuddha (a) “who cultvates in a group"
(vargacărin), the first two states, can pass into the vehicle of the Buddha; the last two
cannot change; the Pratyekabuddha (b) who is likened to a rhinoceros (khadgaviṣāṇakalpa),
cannot change, regardless of which state is acquired. Vasubandhu, iii.95, admits that the1054 Chapter Six
vargacărin had formerly been a Śrāvaka: but the Vibhāṣā does not authorize the opinion
that the person of the family of the Śrāvakas, having obtained a result (=having become a
Śrāvaka), can become a Pratyekabuddha: this is in conformity with the thesis that this
person, once he has acquired lokottara, cannot change.
P'u-kuang justifies the position of Vasubandhu.
143. Paramārtha continues:
The pratyekabuddhagotra cannot be revoked. Why? The stanza says:
23e-f. Because he does not search out the good of others; to otherwise change the gotra
is not denied.
If the ascetic has initially formed the resolution to become a Pratyekabuddha, and later
cultivates Heat and the Summit, these two roots of good cannot be turned into a
Bodhisattva's roots of good. Why? Because he has not formed his resolution with a view to
realizing the good of others... It is not forbidden for the Pratyekabuddha to pass to the
gotra of the Śrāvakas. Furthermore the stanza says: 24a-b...
144. On the Rhinoceros, see Suttanipāta, 35, Visuddhimągga, 234.
145. See iv.46, viii.11.
146. This duration, for the Bodhisattva, is made up of 34 thoughts or moments: 16 of the
Seeing of the Truths (darśanamärga), 18 of detachment from the last Arūpya (see ii.44, p.
227 of the English translation); according to P'u-kuang, for the Pratyekabuddha, 160
thoughts--probably 16 of darśanamārga and 144 (8 x 18) for detachment from the Four
Rūpas and from the Four arupyas.
147. These Pratyekabuddhas are vargacārins. Vyākhyā: utpādita-nirvedhabhāgiyamatro'pi
vargacārī pratyekabuddha ity abhiprāyaḥ.
148. Hsüan-tsang: After having produced the first two nirvedhabhāgīyas, he can change to
another vehicle.
149. iii.44c-d, iv. 124, vii. 30, 34. Mokṣabhāga = mokṣasya prāptih, the acquisiton of
deliverance; that which leads to this acquisition is called mokṣabhāgīya.
150. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 525b15, p. 895a16, etc., a great variety of opinions; duration of the
career of the Pratyekabuddhas, etc.
151. asyāṁ dharmatāyām, that is to say in pravacanadharmatā, according to Scripture;
Hsüan-tsang (TD 29, p. 121a13) understands: “in this same way entering into dharmatā,
maturation, deliverance, three conditions do not take place together." Paramārtha (TD 29.
p. 273a28): "Why this succession? In this dharma, correct reasoning (yukti) and teaching
(agama), it holds that the series enters, matures, and is delivered."
152. When the production of the nirvedhabhāgiyas takes place in the existence which
immediately follows the planting of the mokṣabhāgīyas, the Path cannot be produced in the
same existence as the nirvedhabhāgīyas. “But he who has taken posssession of the
mokṣabhāgiyas in a former existence, can, in that same existence, produce the nirvedhabhāg-
iyas and the Path." (Vyākhyā).
153. According to others they proceed also from absorption (bhāvanā).
154. Add: "by studying a stanza of four pādas."
155. See iv.125. English trans. note 558 .
156. Hsüan-tsang adds: One plants the mokṣabhāgīyas due to an encounter with a Buddha;
according to others (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 35a19), due also to the encounter with a
Pratyekabuddha (See iv.125, English trans. p. 707).Footnotes 1055
157. He who says "pure" speaks of being freed of all äsrava, desire, ignorance, etc.
158. The kārikā has dharmakṣānti for dharmajñānakṣānti as one says Datta for Devadatta,
"Given" for "Given by God."
159. The ascetic solely considers the upādānaskandhas of Kāmadhātu under the aspects of
Suffering, etc.
160. Bearing on the Suffering of the higher spheres, the same pure kṣānti is an
anvayajñānakṣānti, vi.26b-c.
161. Dharmajñāna is defined vi.26b, vii.2 and following. Samyutta, ii.58, Vibhanga, 293, 329,
dharmmañāna, duḥkhe nāṇa, dukkhasamudaye ñāṇa ….. Dhamme ñāna is the prajñā bearing
on the four paths and the four results, on the Four Truths applied to the twelve parts of
pratītyasamutpāda; anvaye ñāna differs from anvaye jñāna.
The relationship between of dharmakṣānti and dharmajñāna is specified vi.28, 49, vii.1.
Pure kşānti or dharmakṣānti expells all elements of doubt (vicikitsā); therefore doubt is not
abandoned when it is produced; thus it is not jñāna. Kṣānti expells a certain defilement: it is
thus anantaryamārga or prahāṇamarga, the path of the expulsion or abandoning (iv.87); it
gives rise to a jñāna which includes the acquisition of disconnection from this defilement, in
other words, of the pratisaṁkhyānirodha of this defilement (ii.55d): the jñāna is therefore
vimuktimārga, the path of deliverance.
162. On samyaktva, mithyātva, iii.44c-d, iv.80d.
163. Vyākhyā: tatra samyaktve niyama ekāntībhavo niyāma iti.
api tu niyama iti. Vyākhyā: yamaḥ samupanivişu cety (iii.3.63) appratyayasya
vibhāşitatvāt.
164. a. Three different words, Mahāvyutpatti, 245.98-101, niyama (mi gyur ba:
non-transformation), niyāma (nes par gyur ba = determination), nyāma (skon med pa:
absence of defect), nyāmāvakrānti (entry into the absence of defect); ibid. 48.16,
niyāmapratipanna.
Wogihara (Asanga's Bodhisattvabhūmi, Leipzig, 1908, p. 31) has given a summary of
the five opinions of the Vibhāṣā on niyāma-nyāma, and has diligently brought together the
Pāli and Sanskrit references.
Niyāma and sammattaniyāmāvakkanti, Saṁyutta, i.196, Suttanipāta 55, 371, Saṁyutta,
iii.225. Add Anguttara, i.121, Kathāvatthu, v.4, vi.1, xiii.4 and the note of Shwe Zan Aung,
translation, p. 383 (on niyāma, p. 275, note).
Niyāma and nyāma, Lalita, 31.20, 34.10, Aṣṭasāhasrikā, 33.18, 322.5, 331.10, 337.5,
Bodhisattvabhūmi.
Niyāma = skon med pa, in the treatise of Vasumitra on the sects; the Chinese li-sheng
(Hsüan-tsang) should not be understood as "abandoning of arising," but
"abandoning of that which is raw,” ni-āma, a fantastic etymology of nyāma = niyāma which
is a grammatical variant of niyama.
b. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 12a13. Many opinions. Furthermore, the defilements to be
abandoned by Seeing cause beings to fall into the painful realms of rebirth and to there
suffer vivid sufferings, exactly like a raw or non-digested food (sheng-shih
4 )
which remains for a long time in the body producing various types of sharp sufferings.
Consequently these defilements are called āma (non-digested). The Path of Seeing that
destroys them is called niyāma (that which brings about the abandoning of non-digestion).
Furthermore, satkāyadṛṣṭi is very resistant (kang
hard) and violent, as
difficicult to put down as a savage beast: it is thus called āma (sheng in a natural
state, not tamed). The Path of Seeing that destroys them is called niyāma. Furthermore, the
term āma here designates the quality of Pṛthagjana.
MI.
>
:1056 Chapter Six
c. Hsüan-tsang (TD 29, p. 121b4): This Patience is called "entry into samyaktvanyāma”
and also "entry into samyaktvaniyama,” for, by it, one enters for the first time into
samyaktvanyāma and also into samyaktvaniyama. The Sūtra says that samyaktva is Nirvāṇa,
or rather the word samyaktva designates the Path. Ama (rendered in Chinese by sheng
to arise, raw, natural), signifies kleśa or crudity of the roots of good, of the faculties
(indriyas). The Path is capable of causing one to pass from out of this, and so is ni-āma.
Because it is capable of making certain the attainment of Nirvāṇa, or because it determines
the consciousness of the characteristics of the truths, the Path is called niyama. To obtain
this state is called “to enter.”
9
Paramārtha (p. 272b15): This Patience is called "entry into samyaktvaniyama." Why?
By reason of this Patience, the ascetic enters into samyaktvaniyama. What dharma is
samyaktva? In the Sūtra, Nirvāṇa is called samyaktva.Niyama with respect to it, that is to
say ekāntībhāva, is absolute determination, non-alternative. To obtain this niyama is called
"to enter."
d. Abhisamayālaṁkārāloka: sarvadharmaniḥsvabhāvatāsākṣātkāri sphuṭataraṁ jñānam
utpadyate / tada bodhisattvaḥ samyaktvanyāmāva-krāntito darśanamārgaṁ pratilabhate /
atra ca rāgapratighamānāvidyā-vicikitsaḥ satkāyāntagrāhamithyādṛṣṭidṛṣṭiparāmar.
śaśīlavrataparāmarśā ca kāmadhātau catuḥsatyabhedena catvāriṁśad bhavanti / evam
rūpadhātau [ārūpyadhātau ca] ta eva catuḥsatyadarfanaprahātavyā aṣṭaprakārapratighavar-
jita dvāsaptatiḥ / samudāyena dvādaśottaraṁ kleśaśataṁ darśanapraheyaṁ prahīyate
satyalokābhisamayād ataḥ pramuditāyā bhūmeḥ prathamakṣaṇo darśanamārgaḥ / See v.3
English trans. p. 772 and 781; note 183.
165. See ii.40b-c, p. 215 and following of the English translation. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 12a13:
The laukikāgradharmas are the immediately antecedent condition (samanantarapratyaya,
ii.62) of the abandoning of the quality of Prthagjana, of the acquisition of the quality of
Āryan, of the abandoning of mithyātva, and of the acquisition of samyaktva. As they are
capable of entering into samyaktvaniyāma, they are called laukikāgradharmas, or "superior
worldly dharmas.” “Abandoning of the quality of Pṛthagjana": the mind-and-mental states
(citta-caittas) which constitute the superior or higher worldly dharmas bring about the
abandoning of the quality of Pṛthagjana. Question: "What is it that, at the present time,
brings about the abandoning of this quality? . . . " Certain masters answer that this power
belongs at the present time to the higher worldly dharmas. Question: "These dharmas are
dharmas of the Pṛthagjana: how do they, being such, bring about the abandoning of the
quality of Prthagjana?” Answer: There is no contradiction. An elephant-driver on an
elephant controls this same elephant; a rider controls his horse; a pilot directs the ship; the
charioteer drive the chariot ... the oodcutter climbs the tree and cuts the tree: in this
same way the higher worldly dharmas... Other masters say that the duḥkhe dharmajñāna-
kṣānti (first pure moment), at the present time, brings about the abandoning of the quality
of Prthagjana: in its arising state, this Patience expels the said quality; in its perishing state,
it brings about the abandoning of the ten types of anuśaya which are abandoned through the
Seeing of Suffering of Kāmadhātu ... Other masters say that the quality of Pṛthagjana is due
to the higher worldly dharmas and to the duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti aiding one another:
the higher worldly dharmas are indeed in contradiction to the quality of Pṛthagjana, but
they are weak and are not capable, by themselves, of expelling it. However these dharmas
lead to the arising of duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti, and the quality of Pṛthagjana is abandoned
by the combined force of both of these.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 231b20. Some pretend that the quality of Pṛthagjana is the ten
anusayas abandoned by the Seeing of Suffering of Kāmadhātu; these are the Vātsīputriyas
according to whom the quality of Pṛthagjana is of the sphere of Kāmadhātu, defiled (klista)Footnotes
1057
in its nature, and to be abandoned by Seeing... Others say that the quality of Pṛthagjana is
not a thing in and of itself: these are the Dārṣṭāntikas (see ii. English trans. p. 215 and
following). In order to refute these opinions and to show that the quality of Pṛthagjana is a
thing in and of itself ... the masters of the Abhidharma say: "It is called quality of
Prthagjana because it arises separately (sheng fen ku #55#k ), and because it is the
nature of the Pṛthagjana (i-sheng t'i RE ).
166. First opinion of the Vibhāṣā. See above note 119, note 123, and note 139.
167. Third opinion of the Vibhäşṣā.
168. The word abhisamaya has been explained above p. 897.
169. According to the Vyākhyā, the Dharmaguptakas, etc. According to P'u-kuang, the
Mahāsāṁghikas, etc. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 533a22: There are some masters according to
whom the abhisamaya of the Four Truths takes place at once, namely the Vibhajyavādins
who base themselves on the Sutra: "The Blessed One said: If, with respect to duḥkhasatya,
there is no doubt, perplexity, there is no longer any doubt, perplexity, with respect to the
other three Truths." Since doubt and perplexity relative to the Four Truths disappears at
the same time, the abhisamaya certainly takes place at one and the same time, and not
successively. In order to refute this opinion, in order to show that abhisamaya takes place
successively and not at one time, it is said: "If it were otherwise, this would be in
contradiction to the Sūtra which says: “Anāthapiṇḍada approached the Buddha, saluted him,
and said: 'Oh Blessed One, does the yogācāra successively penetrate (abhi-sami) the Four
Truths as one gradually climbs . . . ?'' (see p. 948).
The Theravada denies successive comprehension (anupūrvābhisamaya) against the
Andhakas, Sabbatthivādins, Saṁmitiyas and Bhadrayānikas, Kathavatthu, i.4 and ii.9
(compare p. 382); see the opinion of the “Elders," Visuddhimagga, p. 690 and following,
and the Sūtras referred to, among which Samyutta, v.436: yo dukkhaṁ passati dukkhasamu-
dayam pi so passati ….. that Buddhaghosa explains as does Vasubandhu: iti ... ekaṁ saccam
ārammaṇaṁ katvā sesesu pi kiccanipphattivasenāpi vuttam.
170. Hsüan-tsang: yugapat = at one and the same time, at once; Paramārtha: "According to
another school, the comprehension of the Truths is only one thought."
171. Kyokuga Saeki here quotes the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 405a27. The succession (krama) of
the comprehension of the Truths is explained: Question: In the comprehension
(abhisamaya = hsien-kuan
) of the Truths, does one see the unique
characteristics or the common characteristics [of the Truths]? Answer: One sees
(kuan) their common characteristics. Question: If this is the case, why does not
the comprehension of all the Truths take place at one and the same time? [If, seeing
suffering, one sees one of its common characteristics, for example the characteristic of being
produced by causes, one evidently sees the Truth of Origin at the same time as the Truth of
Suffering.] Answer: Even though, in the comprehension of the Truths, one sees their
common characteristics, one does not understand all their common characteristics but only
one part
of them... What difference is there in the view that one takes of Kāmadhātu and
of the higher spheres? The difference between coarse and subtle. Why does one see at the
same time the truth relating to the two higher spheres? Because both of them belong to the
sphere of absorption. If the person who has entered the comprehension of the Truths has
not yet understood the suffering of the two higher spheres, how can one say that he
understands? Comprehension is of two types: 1. the comprehension of "grasping"
(chib-shou
grāha?), and 2. the comprehension of purification (li-jan
; parisuddhi?). The person who enters comprehension possesses this twofold
comprehension with respect to the suffering of Kāmadhātu, and he only possesses the1058 Chapter Six
second with respect to the suffering of the higher spheres.
172. For example, the vedanā associated with prajñā which is applied (ālambate) to the
Truths, has them for its object, grasps (grhṇāti) them.
173. The result of the comprehension of the Truths is the perfect or complete consciousness
(parijñāna) of suffering, the abandoning of arising, etc. This result takes place (bhavati) also
by reason of the dharmas not associated with the mind, for example the anāsravasaṁvara
(iv.13c) of the ascetic who sees the Truths.
174. It is seen through prajñā: it is the object of the sensation which accompanies this
prajñā; the result (i.e., the complete consciousness of suffering) is acquired due to all the
non-associated dharmas.
175. In fact, the Seeing of Suffering implies the abandoning of the kleśas to be abandoned
through the seeing of suffering, thus the "abandoning of the arising" occurs through the
cutting off of the prāpti of the kleśas; “actualizing extinction" through the arising of the
prapti of extinction, an arising which results from the "cultivation of the Path."
176. āryaśrāvakasya duḥkhaṁ vā duḥkhato manasikurvataḥ … . . . . anāsraveṇa manasikāreņa
samprayukto dharmāṇāṁ vicayaḥ (a paraphrase of Samyukta, TD 2, p. 106a5?).
177. The Mahāsāṁghikas, etc., admit that there is vyutthāna, the leaving from
contemplation, in the course of abhisamaya. Many masters of the Vibhāṣā deny this.
178. Above note 172; see Buddhaghosa quoted note 169.
179. The Vyākhyā quotes the three sadṛṣṭāntāni sūtrāni which are found in the
Samyuktakāgama: the Sūtra of the kūṭāgāra (Saṁyutta, v.45a). Our text distinguishes
mūlapada, bhitti, talaka, and chadana; 2. the Sūtra of the four flights of stairs, or of the four
bodies (catuskaḍevara sopāna); 3. the Sūtra of the four degrees of stairs (catuṣpadikā
niśrent). Questioners: Anāthapindada, and a Bhikşu, Ananda.
sadṛṣṭāntāni trīņi sūtrāṇīti Samyuktakāgame paṭhyante / katham Anāthapiṇḍada āha /
kim nu bhadanta caturnām āryasatyānām anupūrvābhisamayaḥḥ / āhosvid ekābhisamaya iti
/ caturṇāṁ grhapate āryasatyānām anupūrvābhisamayo na tv ekābhisamayaḥ / yo grhapate
evam vaded aham duḥkham āryasatyam anabhisametya samudayam āryasatyam abhisame-
şyāmīti vistarena yāvad duḥkhanirodhagāminīm pratipadam āryasatyam abhisameşyāmīti
maivam voca iti syād vacanīyam tat kasya hetoḥ / asthānam anavakāśo yad duḥkham
āryasatyam anabhisametya samudayam āryasatyam abhisameşyati …. . tadyathā gṛhapate ya
evam vaded aham kūṭāgārasya vā kūṭāgāraśālāyā vā mūlapadam apratiṣṭhāpya bhittim
pratisṭhāpayisyāmi / bhittim apratiṣṭhāpya talakaṁ pratiṣṭhāpayiṣyāmi / talakaṁ
apratiṣṭāpya cchadanaṁ pratiṣṭhāpayiṣyāmīti maivaṁ voca iti syād vacanīyam / tat kasya
hetoḥ... (Samyukta, 16.14).
athānyataro bhikṣur āha / kiṁ nu bhadanta caturṇām āryasatyānām anupūrvābhisa-
mayaḥ / āhosvid ekābhisamaya iti / bhagavān āha / caturṇām āryasatyānām iti pūrvavad
yāvat tadyathā bhikṣo ya evaṁ vaded ahaṁ catuḥkaḍevarasya sopānasya prathamasopānaka-
devaram anabhiruhya dvitīyam abhirokṣyāmi / dvitīyam anabhiruhya . . . maivaṁ voca iti
syād vacanīyam / tat kasya hetoḥ / asthānam anavakāśo yac catuḥkaḍevarasya sopānasya
prathamasopanakaḍevaram anabhiruhya dvitīyakaḍevaram abhirokṣyati... / evam ihāpi
nedam sthanam vidyate yad duḥkhasatyam adṛṣṭvā samudayasatyam drakṣyati . . . tathā
Aryananda āha / kim nu bhadanta caturṇām āryasatyānam anupūrvābhisamayaḥ /...
pūrvasūtravad yāvat / tadyathānanda ya evaṁ vaded aham catuṣpadikāyā niḥśreṇyāḥ
niḥśreṇīpādam anabhiruhya prāsādam abhiroksyāmīti... Authenticity of these Sūtras,
Samghabhadra in "Nirväņa" (1924), p. 24.
180. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 533a24. yo duḥkhe niṣkāṁkṣo nirvicikitso buddhe'pi sa iti. See also
Samyukta, TD 2, p. llla6.Footnotes 1059
181. kāṁkṣā = vicikitsā; or kāṁkṣā = niścayābhilāṣa and vicikitsā = vimati.
182. According to the Mahāyāna, five spheres excluding dhyānāntara.
183. See ii. English trans. p. 278, and below vi.65.
The Suttanipäta, 226, knows an ānantarikasamādhi; the Anguttara has adaṇḍa
ānantarika which destroys the defilements; Visuddhimagga 675 explains: "because the good
transworldly dharmas ripen without interval (anantaravipāka).”
According to the Abhisamayālaṁkārāloka, darśanamārga ends at the first moment of
the Pramuditā sphere (above, note 164d). There then comes bhāvanāmārga which ends
with the anantarya called Vajropama: tato'nye dvitīyādayaḥ kṣaṇā yāvad vajropamākhya
ānantaryamārgo yasmād anantaram samantaprabhā buddhabhūmir avāpyate . . .
184. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 465c11: The ānantaryamārga cuts off the defilements, because it
cuts off the possession of the defilements in such a manner that they no longer continue; he
also realizes extinction (nirodha) because he acquires possession of visaṁyoga in such a
manner that it springs forth. Vimuktimārga realizes extinction because it arises at the same
time as does the possession of visamyoga.
185. There is cutting off of the prāpti of the defilements, expulsion of the thief by the first
path; by the second, prāpti of "disconnection," the closing of the door. On the acquisition
and the loss of the prāptis, ii.40.
186. The eight saṁyojananikāyas to be abandoned by each of the eight jñānas (duḥkha-
dharmajñāna, duḥkhe'nvayajñāna, samudaye dharmajñāna, . . . mārge'nvayajñāna) and that
to be abandoned through bhāvanā.
The Sūtra also says: iti hi bhikṣavo jñānavadhyāḥ kleśāḥ / vidyudupamaṁ cittam.
187. As for the category "to be abandoned through bhāvanā,” it is abandoned through the
jñānas: in the path which follows the path of seeing, there is no longer any place for the
kṣāntis. Anantaryamārga, like vimuktimārga, is jñānas.
Here we can understand v.6, English trans. p.775 and 861.
In darśanamārga, the defilements are expelled by the kṣāntis; in pure bhāvanāmārga,
which is only a new seeing of the Truths and in which the kṣāntis no longer have any place,
the defilements are expelled by the jñānas.
Only Twenty-eight anuśayas are expelled in a definitive manner by darśanamārga, and
are thus expelled by the kṣāntis. The other ten are expelled by a bhāvanamārga which is
either pure (in the case of the Aryan) or impure (in the case of the Pṛthagjana); in these two
cases they are expelled by jñānas (vii.9).
[Nevertheless, it is solely through a pure bhāvanamārga that the anuśayas of bhavāgra
are expelled.]
188. Atthasalinī, 43: “The path of Srotaāpanna is called dassana because it is the seeing of
Nirvāņa for the first time ... The paths that follow do not see anything that has not been
seen previously (adiṭṭhapubbaṁ kim ci na passati) and are thus called bhāvanā.”
189. The first jñāna sees the duḥkha of Kāmadhātu which has already been seen by the first
kṣānti; but it belongs to a pudgala qualified as adṛṣṭadṛṣṭi “seeing that which has not been
seen," for the adṛṣṭadarśana, “seeing of non-view" continues (pravartate) with respect to
samudaya, etc.
190. According to the Tibetan: yathādṛṣṭabhāvanāt.Paramärtha: "As he cultivates anew that
which has been seen ….. “Hsüan-tsang: "As it is similar to the cultivation of what has been
seen . . .
191. The fifteenth moment sees all the mārga, with the exception of itself: it forms part of
the märga and it is seen by the sixteenth moment. Thus this belongs to someone who sees
that which has not been seen before.1060 Chapter Six
192. Lunga and kedāram (neuter) are lexically interesting.
193. That is to say: the seventeenth moment is only the repetition of the sixteenth, etc.
prābandhika, prakarṣaka, vi.17b, 42a.
194. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 279a21: Why is he called a śraddhānusārin? ... See vi.63a-c. These
two Saints are free from premature death, ii.45a-b, English trans. p. 236, iii.85c.
The definitions of the Abhidhamma (saddhānusārin -saddhāvimutta dhammānusārin
-diṭṭhipatta) correspond (for example Puggalapaññatti, p. 15); see also Visuddhimagga,
659.
195. ii.2a-b; p. 155 of the English translation.
196. That is to say in the state of Pṛthagjana.
197. On the abandoning of the defilements by a worldly path, the sakalabandhana (ii.36c,
English trans. p. 207, vi.63d), the bhūyovītarāga, the vītarāga, the ānupūrvaka, see ii.16c-d,
English trans. p. 177; Pāļi references. ii, note 84.
198. The Abhidhamma reads saddhāvimutta. On adhimokṣa, Kośa, ii.72, vi.7c.6; viii.30.
Vyākhyā: śraddhāprajñādhikatvenādhimokṣadṛṣ ṭiprabhāvitatvād iti / śraddhādhikatve-
nādhimokṣaprabhāvitatvāc chraddhādhimuktaḥ / śraddhādhiko muktaḥ śraddhādhimukta
iti kṛtvā / na tu tasya prajñā naivāsti / tayā na tu prabhāvita iti na tannāma labhate /
prajñādhikatvena dṛṣṭiprabhāvitatvād dṛṣṭiprāptaḥ / na tu tasya śraddhā nāstīti pūrvavad
vacyam / apare tu punar nairuktam vidhim alambya vyācakṣate / śraddhādhipatyena
darśanaheyebhyo muktaḥ śraddhādhimuktaḥ / dṛṣṭyadhipatyena praptaphalo dṛṣṭiprāpta iti
1.
199. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 464b8; Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 947a5. It is certain that this
ascetic acquires, by means of the Path of Seeing, a pure sukhendriya of the sphere of the
Third Dhyāna; for, reborn into the Fourth Dhyana or above, he possesses sukhendriya
(According to the principle: sukhendriyeṇa caturdhadhyānārūpyopapannaḥ pṛthagjano na
samanvāgataḥ / āryas tu samanvāgataḥ); for, if his sukhendriya were impure (as was the
Third Dhyana that he possessed before entering into the Path of Seeing), he would have
lost it by being reborn into another sphere (Fourth Dhyana). Now, if he acquires, through
the Path of Seeing, a pure sukhendriya of the Third Dhyāna, he is found to possess a path
higher than his result, which is a result of Anāgāmin of the domain of the sphere where he
has entered in order to practice the Path of Seeing. This theory is written in the Vibhāṣā
(asty eṣa Vibhāṣāyāṁ likhitaḥ pakṣaḥ); but it is not a theory to which one should cling (sa tu
na sthāpanāpakṣo lakṣyate): in fact, the Vibhāṣā continues: "Others say" (apare āhuḥ).
These others say that the possessor of a Dhyāna who enters into the Path of Seeing
depending on a sphere lower than this Dhyāna obtains at the sixteenth moment a result of
Anāgāmin of the sphere of the Dhyana that he possesses and also of the domain of all the
lower spheres.
200. The Bhasyam of 33c-d is quoted in the Abhisamayālaṁkārāloka.
201. eșa dṛṣṭāntayogaḥ. That is to say: dṛṣṭāntayuktir dṛṣṭāntayogaḥ / dṛṣṭāntaprakāra ity
apare / tadevam anayā yuktyā anena vā prakāreņṇānyo’pi dṛṣṭānto vaktavya iti sūcayati /
anyatha hy eşa dṛṣṭānta ity eva brüyāt. The Tibetan translates: eșa dṛṣṭāntaprakāraḥ.
Hsüan-tsang: "Such is the relationship of the defilements and the qualities."
202. Compare Milinda, 83, 290.
203. Mahāvyutpatti, 46.2: de ltar thogs pa (or na) srid pa lan bdun pa = saptakṛdbhavapa-
ramah.
The expression of the Sūtra: saptakṛtvaḥ paramaḥ is translated in our Bhāṣya: mchog tu
thogs na lan bdun pa; the Kārikā has de ltar thogs na …..
On the sattakkhattuparama, see Anguttara, i.233, iv.381; Visuddhimagga, 709;
Nettippakaraṇa, 168, 189; below note 210.Ī
204. Hsüan-tsang: āpanna signifies
person has attained a river, he is called srotaāpanna.
Footnotes 1061
he-who-obtains-for-the-first-time. Paramārtha: If a
205. The "eighth," aṣṭamaka. P’u-kuang mentions two explanations: 1. the srotaāpannapha-
lapratipannaka, and 2. the person in possession of duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti.
Mahāvastu, i.120.9, 159.8 (aṣṭamakādikā pudgalā yāvad arhatpudgalā.)
Discussions on aṭṭhamaka, Kathāvatthu, iii.5-6.
206. The Mahīśāsakas think that a Srotaāpanna is reborn (at the most) a total of seven
times; the Ch'eng-shih lun ENTER
(TD 32, number 1646) admits
fourteen births, not recognizing the intermediate existences. According to the Sarvăstivād-
ins and the Mahāyāna, twenty-eight existences.
The Uttarapathakas think that a Srotaäpanna is necessarily reborn seven times,
Kathāvatthu, xii.5.
207. The same for the other four skandhas: however one only counts seven "skills” and not
thirty-five. One can compare, sufficiently distant, Samyutta, iii. 160-1.
208. See below vi.54d.
209. Puggalapaññatti, 26.
210. aṣṭamam bhavam abhinirvartayati; compare Suttanipāta, 230, Khuddakapāṭha, vi.9: ye
āriyasaccāni vibhāvayanti . . . na te bhavam aṭṭhamam ādiyanti. Kośa, iv, English trans. p.
679.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 240c11. Why does the Srotaäpanna live only seven more existences..
. no more, no less? Pārśva says: If more, if less, one would produce doubt; that he is born in
seven existences does not contradict the dharmalakṣaṇa, that is to say the nature of things
and is not censurable . . . Furthermore, by the force of action, he takes up seven existences;
by the force of the Path he does not take up an eighth. The same way that a person is bitten
by a seven-legged-snake, made seven by the force of the primary elements and, by the force
of the poison, not made eight. Furthermore, if he takes up eight existences, he would not
possess the Path in his eighth birth, for the nature of the Path is such that it cannot be
supported in an eighth body of Kāmadhātu.
211. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 42c2: saptakṛtvo devāṁā ca manuṣyāṁś ca saṁsṛtya saṁdhāvya
duḥkhasyāntaṁ karoti. Vyākhyā ad v.43c. p. 961.
212. This is also the case for the Ürdhvasrotas of the Akaniṣṭhaga class, vi.37b.
213. It is also evident that the text refers to Kāmadhātu, since it makes mention of the
human realms of rebirth. I observe that Ananda, by his agreement with the Bhagavat,
becomes the king of the gods seven times, and a king in Jambudvīpa seven times, Anguttara,
i.228; but he is not a Srotaāpanna.
214. An argument which is not in the Vibhāṣā (note of the Japanese editor) and one which
Samghabhadra does not accept (Vyākhyā).
215. Not mentioned in the Vibhāṣā (note of the Japanese editor). Let us understand that
this Saint probably becomes a Rși (isipabbajā).
Wassilieff, 248, followed by Minayef, Recherches, 220, has poorly understood
Vasumitra: "According to the Sarvāstivādins, one cannot say that the four results are
obtained only in the robes of a monk ... “One should translate: "It is not an absolute rule
that the four results of the religious life are obtained one after the other. He who, detached
by a worldly path, enters into nyāma, becomes a Sakṛdāgāmin or an Anāgāmin according to
the nature of his detachment." (As explained vi.30b-d).
On the laity and the obtaining of the results see Kośa iv. English trans. note 115: Rhys
Davids, Dialogues, iii.5 (bibliography).
216. Digha iii.107: ayam puggalo yathānusiṭṭham tathā paṭipajjamāno tiņņaṁ saṁyojan-1062 Chapter Six
ānaṁ parikkhayā sotāpanno bhavissati avinipātadhammo niyato bodhiparāyaṇo ti. i.233: so
tiñņam samyojanänaṁ parikkhayā sattakkhattuparamo hoti sattakkhattuparam deve ca
manuse ca sandhavitvā saṁsāritvā dukkhassa antaṁ karoti. Elsewhere dukkhassantakaro
hoti (Puggalapaññatti).
According to the Vyākhyā, the Sanskrit Sūtra has: srotaapanno bhavaty avinipātad-
harmā niyataṁ saṁbodhiparāyaṇaḥ / saptakṛtvaḥ paramaḥ saptakṛtvo devāṁš ca
manusyāmś ca saṁdhāvya samsṛtya duḥkhasyantam karoti.
The purity of conduct (prayoga): the rules of morality (šīlāni) dear to the Āryans; purity
of sentiments (āśaya): avetyaprāsāda (vi.73b).
218. We can also understand kṣānti = citta, in opposition to prayoga.
219. See the note ad iv.50. Analogous comparison in Milinda; in Añguttara, i.250; a bit of
salt defiles a small amount of water, but does not defile the Ganges.
220. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 147b7. It is called Nirvāṇa (1) because it is extinction of the
defilements (klesanirödhāt); (2) because of the calming (hsi | = nirvāpana, uparama)
of the three fires (rāga, dveșa, mohāgni); (3) because there is extinction of the three
characteristics (doubtless the three characteristics of "conditioned things,” Kośa, ii.45); (4)
because there is disjunction (li
viyoga, visamyoga) from the defilements
(mala); (5) because there is disjunction from the realms of rebirth (gati); (6) because vana =
thick forest, nis = leaving, nirvāṇa = leaving the thick forest of the skandhas … (7) because
vana = all the sufferings of transmigration, nis = to pass beyond (atikrama), nirvāṇa = to
pass beyond all the sufferings of transmigration. And six other explanations.
: =
Etymology of the word Nirvāṇa, E. Senart, Nirvāṇa (Album Kern, 1903, p. 101); Pāṇini,
viii.2.50 (Goldstucker, 226); Dhammapada, 283, 344; Visuddhimagga, 293; Compendium,
168.
221. According to one variant: dvitrajanmā, which conforms to Pāṇini, ii.2.25, v.4.73.
On kolankola, Anguttara. i.233, iv.381. Puggalapaññatti, 16 (tiņṇam saṁyojanānaṁ
parikkhayā kolańkolo hoti dve vā tīņi vā kulāni saṁdhāvitvā . . . ). According to
Nettippakaraṇa, 189, the kolankola is in the Path of Seeing. Visuddhimagga, 709 (mediocre
penetration and faculties).
222. According to the Vyākhyā: What does the Srotaäpanna become who is delivered from
one or two categories? Some answer that he becomes a kulamkula. The Kārikā says:
"Delivered from three or four categories," by way of an example, or rather in order to
indicate the limit, by excluding the abandoning of the fifth category. Others answer that he
becomes a saint for five or six births.
223. The ekavicika who has abandoned the eighth category of defilements does not
necessarily abandon the ninth, which would include the result of Anāgāmin and "passage
beyond Kāmadhātu,” (dhātvatikrama). The ninth category is capable of being an obstacle to
the acquisition of the result, phalaṁ vighnayitum samartha. But the same does not hold for
the sixth category, because the Sakṛdāgāmin, like the Srotaāpanna, exists within
Kāmadhātu.
224. These two types are mentioned in Dharmasaṁgraha, Para. 103.
225. That is to say: "having seen the Truths when he was the god Trāyastriṁśa, having
transmigrated (saṁsṛtya) within two or three families, he obtains Nirvāṇa among the
Trayastrimśas, or among the Four Great Kings, etc."
226. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 205c3: trayāṇaṁ saṁyojānāṁ prahāṇād rāgadveṣamohānāṁ ca
tanutvāt sakṛdāgāmi bhavati (Compare Anguttara, i.233, iv.380. Puggalapaññatti, 16). Sūtra
quoted below vi.53c-d. Abandoning of satkāyadṛṣṭi, śīlavrata and vicikitsā through the
Seeing of the Truths; reduction of the defilements to be abandoned through Meditation.
1Footnotes 1063
227. The ekavīcika is the ekabījin of the Păļi lists, who is inferior to a Sakadāgāmin.
Visuddhimagga, 709 (lively penetration and faculties).
228. The ascetic who successively acquires all the results (ānupūrvika) becomes a
Srotaapanna by abandoning three bonds, satkāyadṛṣṭi, śīlavrataparamarśa, and vicikitsā,
through the Path of Seeing; then abandoning kämacchanda and vyāpāda through the Path
of Meditation, he becomes an Anāgāmin. The ascetic who is qualified as a kāmavītarāga,
that is to say who, before entering onto the Path of Seeing, has abandoned kāmacchanda and
vyāpāda through the worldly path of meditation, becomes an Anāgāmin by abandoning
satkāyadṛṣṭi, śīlavrataparāmarśa and vicikitsa through the Path of Seeing.
229. See Anguttara, iv.70, 380 (Sanskrit redaction Vyākhyā, iii. 12d, Cosmologie bouddhique,
138). Samyutta, v.201, Puggalapaññatti, 16-17, 70, Visuddhimagga, 677, Compendium, 69,
149.
To the Sanskrit upapadyaparinirvāyin (=utpannaparinirvṛṛti of our Kārikā) there
corresponds upahacca, upapajjaparinibbāyin; see Kathāvatthu, iv.2, Cosmologie
bouddhique, 235.
230. Utpannasyeti. Yaśomitra contests this reading by reason of the rule anyapadārthe
bahuvrihiḥ. The scribe has omitted the letter e (lekhakenaikāro’tra vināśitaḥ): it should
read: utpanne'sya. We would have: utpanne janmani parinirvṛtir asyety utpannaparinirvṛ-
tiḥ. There follows a rather long discussion.
231. Absent in the Tibetan, but given by Paramārtha.
232. "Obtains Nirvāṇa,” parinirvāti, that is to say, "brings about the extinction of all the
vices" (sarvāśravakṣayaṁ karoti). Vyākhyä.
233. Paramartha and Hsuan-tsang have: "not a long time" = quickly na cirat; but the
Tibetan has, mi 'chi bar = "without dying."
234. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 167c13, definition of sopadhiśeṣanirvāṇa: “If of an Arhat, of a
person in whom the vices are completely destroyed, the life continues (shou ming yu ts'un
##; ayuḥparyantaḥ . . . : "the limit of life is still preserved"), the series of
the primary elements and of derived matter is not cut off, the series of thoughts continue
one after the other by reason of a body endowed with the five organs: as there remains a
support (i = upadhi), the destruction of the bonds that this Arhat obtains, touches, or
realizes, is what is called sopadhiśeṣanirvāṇadhātu." On the two Nirvāṇas, vi.64a-b
(Anguttara, iv.77), vi.65d, vi.78. We have attempted to sort out some references in our
"Nirvāṇa," Paris, 1924 (Beauchesne), p. 171.
1
235. The first Anāgāmin also does not possess this mastery; but the action which makes
intermediary existence last differs from the action that makes the second Anāgāmin last:
this is why the Nirvāṇa of the first is anupadhifesa.
236. Anguttara, ii.155, defines (1-2) the sasaṁkhāraparinibbāyin, who obtains Nirvāṇa with
samkharas, either in this life, or after death (3-4), the asaṁkhāraparinibbāyin who obtains
Nirvāṇa without saṁkhāras, either in this life, or after death. Saints 1 and 3 are of strong
faculties, 2 and 4 of weak faculties. Saints 3 and 4 cultivate the Dhyānas; saints 1 and 2 are
described, without any mention of Dhyāna, as aṣubhānupassī … . . āhāre pratikūlasaññīsabba-
loke anabhiratasaññī sabbasaṁkhāresu aniccānupassī and having the thought of death.
samkhara = pubbapayoga, Visuddbi, 453.
237. Opinion of the Sautrāntikas. The Anāgāmins are evidently placed in a decreasing order
of merit, in an increasing order of the length of their lives in Rūpadhātu.
238. One says ürdvaṁsrotas, as one says ürdhvaṁdamika, ürdhvaṁdahika or even cirantana.
239. We also have akaniṣṭhaparama (below note 245).1064 Chapter Six
On the mixing of Dhyānas vi.42. On the heaven of the Akanişthas, iii.72c, vi.43a. This is
the summit of Rūpadhātu, the eighth heaven of the Suddhāvāsas. The Compendium has the
Anăgămin who has cultivated the Fifth Dhyāna rise to the Śuddhāvāsas; it stops below
those who have practiced the first four (see p. 69, 149).
240. One would call him bhavāgraga or bhavägraparama. The naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñā is the
Fourth Arūpya, thus "the summit of existence."
241. Dharmasamgraha, Para. 103: pluto'rdhaplutaḥ sarvāstānaplutaḥ (let us correct:
sarvasthānacyutaḥ).
242. ekam api sthānāntaraṁ vilanghya. Paramārtha: "From the First Dhyāna (=Brahma-
kāyika), he is born among the Suddhāvāsas and, going beyond 'another' place, he is born
among the Akanisthas.” Hsüan-tsang: "From there, successively, he is reborn among the
lower Suddhāvāsas, and, in the interval, goes beyond one place, he is born among the
Akanişthas."
243. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 423c18; Madhyama, TD 1, p. 547a9 (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 272b15): A
Brahma-deva thinks: "This place is eternal, not subject to change . . . one has never seen that
one arrives here; even more one does not go beyond this place . . . ": compare Dīgha, i.17
and see iv.44b-d, iv. 96 (English trans. note 439).
244. Consequently the Kāśmīrians only count two heavens in the First Dhyāna (ii.4ld,
iii.2d).
245. The terms akaniṣṭhaparama and bhavāgraparama are given as traditional (nanu
cākaniṣṭhaparama...ity uktam).
246. On abhinirvṛti distinct from upapatti, iii.40c, vi.3, p. 909. It appears that the doctrine of
action retributable in intermediary existence is in contradiction to the thesis of iv.53d
(which I have perhaps poorly understood).
=
247. Anguttara, iv.70, “seven good gatis" or rather "seven gatis of good persons" =
purisagati. Hsüan-tsang explains: gatir = vṛtti. Vyākhyā: gatir utpattiḥ samparaya ity ete
sūtre paryāyā ucyante. gati- birth, future realm of rebirth, realm of rebirth.
248. Since, Hsüan-tsang adds, the other Saikṣas, cultivating the good, do not differ [from the
Anāgāmins].
249. Vyākhyā: yāsu gatiṣūpapannās tatra tatra caiṣām atyantam anāgamanam.
250. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 427a13; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 878a5-b4. Definition of the sappurisa,
Nettippakaraṇa, 169.
251. But they can practice incontinence (which supposes an akušala mind). The Srotaäpanna
observes the filas, Huber, Sütrālaṁkāra, 221.
252. "In general" (prāyena): in fact, they are disengaged from the defilements expelled by
seeing, and from a part of the defilements expelled by Meditation.
253. The true satpurusas have acquired the discipline which prevents all transgressions
(sarvapāpa); they have abandoned all of the bad defilements to be abandoned through
seeing (darfana) (like the other Śaikṣas) and also the nine categories of defilements of
Kāmadhātu to be abandoned by Meditation (bhāvanā).
254. The Bhāṣya has: kim punaḥ parivṛttajanmano'py anāgāmina eṣa bhedo'sti. I have added
the definition based on the Vyākhyā.
255. The Vyākhyā quotes the Sūtra: "Dying here and reborn among humans, if having
obtained the quality of Arhat I do not obtain Nirvāṇa, falling from the quality of Arhat atFootnotes 1065
among
the end of this human life (ante mama hīyamānasya), I shall be reborn (upapatrir
bhavisyati) among the esteemed gods under the name of Akanişthas (ye te devā akaniṣṭhā
iti viśrutāḥ).” Śakra is srotaāpanna: he foresees that he will be reborn humans and
will obtain the quality of Arhat, first that of Anägāmin: he will thus be a parivṛttajanman
anāgāmin. Therefore, according to vi.4la-b, he cannot become Akaniṣṭha, that is to say "go
into another sphere."
256. According to the Tibetan, dharmānabhijñatvāt; according to the Vyākhyā:
dharmalakṣaṇānabhijñavāt; according to Hsüan-tsang: "because he does not know the
"
Abhidharma.”
257. sambarṣaṇīyatvāt; that is to say: kāmaduḥkhaparityāgābhilāṣeṇa saṁharṣaṇīya ity
abhiprāyaḥ.According to Samghabhadra: cyutanimittopapattiduḥkhodvignasya saṁharāaṇī-
yatvāt.
258. On the moral faculties (faith, etc.), see vi.57c, 58d, 60 and following.
259. prajñādīnā mindriyāṇāṁ nisyandaphalapuṣṭiviśeṣād ity arthaḥ. That is to say: because
the indriyas are not extremely developed by the results, similar to them, upon which they
bear.
260. A different doctrine in the Sammitīyanikāyaśāstra.
261. The mixture consists of "mixing the pure Dhyāna with two impure Dhyānas"
(Vyākhyā), to intercalate one or many moments of impure Dhyāna between two moments
or two series of moments of pure Dhyāna. In the Dharmaśarīra (Stonner, Ac. de Berlin,
1904, 1282), uyavakirabbalvanā]vidhāni (bbāvanāvidba, Visuddbimagga, 122).
262. On pure and impure Dhyāna, see viii.6.
263. Anguttara, i.38, knows a Dhyāna which lasts only a moment and a prolonged Dhyāna.
Above vi. 17b, 28c.
264. On the dṛṣṭadharmasukhavihāras, see especially Digha, iii.113, 222, Anguttara, v.10,
iv.362; Kośa, ii.4, vi.58b, viii.27. Nirvāṇa, 1924, p. 80.
265. The first three Dhyānas each produces three types of gods of Rūpadhātu; the fourth
produces eight types of gods: Anabhrakas, Puṇyaprasavas, Vṛhatphalas, and the five
Suddhāvāsikas: Avṛhas, Atapas, Sudṛśas, Sudarśanas and Akaniṣṭhas (iii.2c-d).
266. tasya pudgalasya tāvatī śaktiḥ (Vyākhyā). Such a person cannot do so any longer.
267. "Pure, impure, pure: three thoughts; then: pure, impure, pure, three other thoughts"
(Vyākhyā), and so on.
268. Opinion of Sriläbha (Vyakhyā). The fourth of the six opinions presented in the
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, P. 880c12.
269. But the order of words, according to Paramārtha, is indeed the order that the Tibetan
gives; according to the Bhasya: nirodhalābhy anāgāmī kāyasākṣī.
On nirodhasamāpatti, in addition to the references indicated, ii.43 (English trans. p. 225
and following), add iv.54, vi.63, 64a, viii.33a and Visuddhimagga, 702-709:"One cannot say
that this absorption is saṁskṛta or asaṁskṛta, conditioned or unconditioned, laukika or
lokottara, worldly or transwordly because it does not exist in and of itself (sabhāvato
n'atthitaya)." This absorption, according to the Uttarăpathakas and the Andhakas, is
"unconditioned” (Katthāvatthu, vi.5). note 273.
On the kāyasakkhin, Anguttara, iv.451 (necessarily an Arhat), Puggalapaññatti, 14,
Visuddhimagga, 93, 659 (interesting).
270. Hsüan-tsang: This saint, in leaving nirodhasamāpatti, obtains a calmness of body
[becoming again] conscious, such as he had not acquired before this samāpatti; and he
thinks: "This nirodhasamāpatti is very calm and totally similar to Nirvāṇa". In this way he1066 Chapter Six
immediately perceives (sākṣātkaroti) the calmness of the body [leaving samāpatti] and he is
thus called a kāyasākṣin, for, by reason of the possession [of the calmness of the body, in the
course of the samāpatti], and by reason of the consciousness [of the calmness of the body,
once he has left the samāpatti], he immediately perceives the calmness of body.
271. On the Saikṣa and the Śikṣās, see p. 983.
272. Mahävyutpatti, 36, trīni śikṣāṇi, adhiśīlam, adhicittam, adhiprajñā; Dharmasaṁgraha,
140, tisraḥ śikṣaḥ, adhicittaśikṣā, adhiśīlaśikṣā adhiprajñāśikṣā ca; Dīgha, iii.219, tisso
sikkhā, adhisīla, adhicitta, adhipaññasikkhā; Anguttara, i.235, ii. 194, iii.441. The
Visuddhimagga is only a commentary on the Samyutta, i.13: sile patiṭṭhāya . . . cittam
paññaṁ ca bhāvayam . (p. 4: sīlena adhisīlasikkhā pakāsitā hoti, samādhinā
adhicittasikkhā, paññāya adhipaññāsikkhā); Childers, sikkhättaya; Schiefner, Meʼlanges
Asiatiques, viii.572.
See Kośa, vi.45b. viii.1. The correct readings are adhiśīlaṁ śikṣā, adhicittaṁ śikṣā,
adhiprajñāṁ śikṣā, as we can be assured vi. p. 983-4 and Dharmasaṁgīti quoted in
Śikṣāsamuccaya, 119.14.
273. The Canon is undecided on the place of nirodhasamāpatti in the Path, on its usefulness
for the extinction of the cankers (āsava): Majjhima, i.465, iii.28, Dīgha, i.184, Anguttara,
iv.426. We know that it is added, in ninth position, to the Dhyānas and Ārūpyas
(Mahavyutpatti, 68.7: navānupūrvavihārasamāpattiḥ, Dīgha, iii.266: nava anupubbani-
rodhā); it is the eighth vimoksa.
274. The Vaibhāṣikas deny that Mahābrahmaloka is a separate heaven (iii.2d); the
Bahirdeśakas, the Non-Kaśmīrians, recognize it as a separate heaven, but admit that the
Aryans do not enter it (vi.38a-b).
275. Paramārtha: "It is called Vajra absorption."
Vajropamasamadhi, Mahāvayut patti, 21.55; Kośa, iii.53b-d, vi.77, viii.28; Sūtrālaṁkāra,
xiv.45; Pañcakrama, iii.60, 67, vi.26. In Puggalapaññatti, 30, the saint who destroys the
defilements is vajiropamacitta: "In the same way that there is no gem or stone which the
diamond does not crush . . . " One can also mention the ñāṇavajira of Netti, 112.
Vajrasamādhi, Religieux eminents, p. 153. We know of the abuse that Buddhism makes of
the vajra.
276. Maulaṁ dhyānam anāgamya apraviśya utpadyata ity anāgamyam (Vyākhyā). See vi.47c;
viii.22c; v.66.
277. Hsüan-tsang adds: According to other masters, the vajropamasamādhis obtained in
anāgamya, by reason of the distinction of their aspects and the objects of the jñānas, are one
hundred and sixty-four in number. In fact, the anvayajñāna of nirodha bears on the nirodha
of eight spheres both in general and in particular; and one should take into consideration
the four aspects. One should thus add one hundred and twelve to the calculation of the first
masters. The same for dhyānāntara and the Dhyānas. For the Ārūpyas, we have fifty-two,
thirty-six, and twenty-four.
A long discussion in the Vyākhyā.
278. Paramārtha: Through the aquisition of the nirodha of the ninth, consciousness of
kşaya.
On kṣayajñāna, vii.4, 7, 12, 43; constitutes Bodhi together with anut pādajñāna, vi.67;
confused with the samyagvimuktijñāna, vi.75, 76, with āsravakṣayābhijñā, vii.42, viii.20.
279. Paramārtha: Aśaikṣa, Arhat.
280. Nityaṁ śikṣaṇaśīlaḥ. Šikṣā śīlam esām iti śaikṣāḥ, according to Pāṇini, iv.4,62.
281. In fact, he observes the rules (śikṣā) of the Vinaya. Mahāvagga, i.36.8.Footnotes 1067
Sile fikṣā adhiśīlaṁ śikṣā ….. prajñāyāṁ śikṣā adhiprajñaṁ śikṣā, Pāṇini, ii.1.16; above
note 272.
282. See viii.1.
283. The Vyakhyā quotes the Sūtra: adhiprajñaṁ śikṣā katama / idam duḥkham iti
yatbabbutam prajānāti. (Compare Samyutta, vi.229, Anguttara, 1.235; Kośa, viii.1). “That,
Oh Bhikṣus, is seen which is seen by pure (ārya) prajñā.”
284. Punar apaśikṣaṇāt = yatra śikṣitaḥ śīlādiṣu tatra punar apaśikṣaṇāt: the Pṛthagjana can
lose the Pratimokṣa discipline (iv.16), Heat (vi.17), etc. The Āryan, the Śaikṣa can lose
certain dharmas, but he cannot lack the three śikṣās.
285. Paramārtha transcribes Śīvaka; Hsüan-tsang translates this as tan-p'a; the
Tibetan translates this as zhe byed.
286. According to the version of Hsüan-tsang; Paramārtha: "He who applies himself to the
three śikṣās, because he applies himself to the three śikṣās, is called a Šaikṣa." The Tibetan:
"Because he applies himself to the śikṣās, he is called a Śaikṣa."
287. Dhammasaṁgaṇi, 1015.
288. The Nirvāṇa acquired (prāpta) by a Śaikṣa is not called faiksa: only the saṁskṛtas
(ii.38a) are śaikṣa. Dhammasaṇgaṇi, 1017.
289. [Except when he is sakalabandhana, encumbered with all of the bonds. It appears that
one could better translate: “Because the Pṛthagjana can be endowed with Nirāṇa.”]
290. v.6a-c, viii.20.
291. See ii.38b, English trans. note 200.
292. See vi.61d-62b.
293. The Pṛthagjana is taken as an example, because the Āryan has acquired worldly and
transwordly prāpti through disconnection from Kāmadhātu. When he is reborn into the
Second Dhyāna, the first disappears, but not the second.
294. Hsüan-tsang adds: As it has been said of the Aryan, who becoming detached through
the two paths from the defilements of the eight spheres to be abandoned through bhāvanā,
obtains the two types of prāptis of disconnection from these defilements-it follows that
the Pṛthagjana, who only employs the impure path, only acquires an impure prāpti; it also
follows that the Aryan, it being a given that only the pure path permits him to become
detached from the defilements to be abandoned through darśana and from the defilements
of the ninth sphere to be abandoned through bhāvanā, obtains only a pure prāpti of
disconnection from these defilements.
=
295. Sarvatas = of all the spheres of the sphere where the ascetic is found, of a lower
sphere, of a higher sphere.
Anāgamya, viii.22a. The fundamental (maula) absorptions, namely the four absorptions
of Rūpadhātu or Four Dhyānas and the Four Ārūpyas, have a preliminary or prefatory
absorption, samantaka. The sāmantaka of the First Dhyāna is called anāgamya. See above
note 276.
Pure anāgamya = the anāgamya in which the ascetic produces a thought, a path free
from the asravas, satkāyadṛṣṭi, etc. = a pure path produced in anāgamya.
The former Abhidhamma teaches that the ascetic destroys the defilements (āsavas), that
is, becomes detached from all of the spheres, by being firmly supported (that is, by
producing the eliminating prajñā of the defilements) in seven absorptions (Four Dhyānas
and Three Ārūpyas). Añguttara, iv.422 to be corrected according to iv.426 (the1068 Chapter Six
Fourth Ärūpya is excluded as in Kośa, below, note 301).
The theory of anāgamya and its use in “detachment” (vairāgya) rests on the idea that an
ascetic cannot enter Dhyana without being free from the defilement of a lower sphere, and
that he cannot, in this same lower sphere, become free from the said defilements: hence the
necessity of a preliminary absorption.
296. Hsüan-tsang combines Kārikā 47c-d (two pādas) and 48d (one pāda) into one Kārika,
and adds a fourth pada:
"By the pure Anagamya path, there is detachment from all the spheres; through the
other eight, detachment from his sphere and from a higher sphere: through the impure
path, there is detachment from the immediately lower sphere." [Bhāṣya of the last pāda.]
Bhasyam: By supporting oneself on the samantakas, one becomes detached from the
lower spheres. In the same way that the anantaryamārgas support themselves on the
sāmantakas, is this the case for the vimuktimārgas?
Adding a first pāda, he makes the following Kärikā out of 48a-c.
Kārikā. The sāmantakas detach one from the lower spheres; the last vimuktimārga of
the three arises from the müla or from the samantaka; for the higher spheres, from the
müla only.
Bhasyam. There are eight sämantakas which can serve as the support of the Path. There
are nine spheres from which one should become detached. The first three samantakas
detach one from the three spheres which are respectively lower than them (that is to say:
The first three sämantakas serve as the support of a path which detaches one from the three
spheres...). The ascetic before realizing the ninth vimuktimārga, either enters the mula
dhyāna, or remains in the samantaka. The five higher sämantakas detach one from the
spheres which are, respectively, lower than it. Before realizing the ninth vimuktimārga, the
ascetic necessarily enters the müla and does not remain in the sāmantaka; for, whereas, for
these five samantakas, the mūla and the sāmantaka are equally upekṣendriya, the mūla and
the sāmantaka have a different vedanendriya in the first three Dhyānas. Some ascetics are
not capable of entering into the mula because the transformation of the vedanendriyas is
difficult. [One necessarily enters it when one is capable of this transformation] because, at
the moment when one becomes detached from it, one is joyous [: thus, at the ninth
vimuktimārga, one passes, when possible, from the sāmantaka (upekṣendriya) to the mūla
(sukhendriya, saumanasyendriya).]
297. Remember that detachment (vairāgya) from one sphere-that is to say the abandoning
of the nine categories (strong-strong, etc.) of defilements of Kāmadhātu, of the First
Dhyana, etc.--include nine pairs of paths: a path of abandoning (prahāṇamārga or
ānantaryamārga) and a path of deliverance (vimuktimārga). The ascetic who detaches
himself from Kāmadhātu by meditating in the state of absorption called anāgamya produces
in this state the first eight paths of abandoning and the first eight paths of deliverance; he
also produces in this state the ninth path of abandoning. The question is asked whether, in
order to produce the ninth path of deliverance, he remains in anāgamya or passes into the
First Dhyana. Same question for the other sāmantakas and the "fundamental" absorption
which they precede.
298. The last vimuktimārga does not arise from out of higher samantakas.
299. All samantakas contain the sensation of indifference; the first three Dhyānas, contain
the sensations of sukha or saumanasya, viii.7; therefore in order to pass from the samantaka
into the fundamental absorption, the ascetic should transform his sensation.
300. Add: "when the ascetic is not capable of transforming his sensation; when he is capable
of doing so, the last vimuktimārga arises from the fundamental Dhyāna, vītarāgabhūmibā-
humanyāt."
301. One cannot produce the pure path in the absorption of the Fourth Arūpya orFootnotes 1069
Bhavagra; the ascetic, in order to be delivered from the defilements relating to this state,
should avail himself of a pure path (vi.45c-d); thus employing a pure path practiced in the
Third Ārūpya: same doctrine in Visuddhimagga, 708, and also apparently in Anguttara,
iv.422, 426.
302. Sambhavatas. When one sees the lower sphere as "coarse" one sees the higher sphere
as “calm,” and so on. According to another explanation, one sees the higher sphere under
one of these three aspects, “calm,” etc., and not necessarily under the three aspects. Here we
have three of the aspects of Nirvāṇa, vii. 13a.
303. Mahävyutpatti, 85.14-16, sthūlabhittikatā, audārikatā, duḥkhilatä. Vyākhyā: khilaṁ
durbhedam (?) kutsitaṁ khilam duḥkhilam.
304. Hsüan-tsang: "because it can be surmounted only with great effort."
305. The drsti of the Aśaikşas: to see things as they really are, to truly know the general
characteristics (sāmānyalakṣaṇa) of the dharmas, impermanence, etc.
306. Hsüan-tsang: "The aśaikṣī samyagdṛṣṭi arises among the Immovable Ones, even
though one does not say so formally, for all the Arhats possess it . . . "
307. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 336c28. Sāmañña, brahmañña and their results. Samyutta, v.2;
Visuddhimagga, 215, 512. For Buddhaghosa the dharmas associated with the Path and the
four results of samañña are neither suffering nor ariyasacca.
308. The Abhidharma reconciles the thesis of the Theravādins with that of the
Pubbaseliyas, Kathāvatthu, xix.3.
309. Hsüan-tsang: "they have the vimuktimärgas (saṁskṛta) and pratisaṁkhyānirodha for
their natures."
310. Paramartha enumerates the four results, srotaāpannaphala, etc., and quotes the Sūtra.
311. Puruşakāraphala is that which arises (jāyate) and also that which is attained (prāpyate)
through the special power of a dharma: the path of deliverance arises from śrāmaṇya, and
abandoning or pratisaṁkhyānirodha is attained by the power of frāmaṇya.
312. As one can supplement the work (pravacana) of Pāṇini, as omniscient as he is, he is a
Pṛthagjana.
313. When the ascetic obtains the result of Srotaäpanna, there is acquisition of the total
abandoning of the defilements to be abandoned through the Seeing of the Truths
(darśanabeyakleśas), acquisition inherent (samgrhīta) in a single path of meditation
(ekabhāvanāmārga), namely in the sixteenth moment; when the ascetic obtains the fruit of
Sakṛdägămin, there is acquisition of the totality of the abandoning of the darfanabeyas and
of the abandoning of the first six categories of defilements to be abandoned through
meditation, acquisition inherent to the path which is the fruit of Sakṛdāgāmin; and so on.
314. When an ordinary person (prthagjana), bound by all the bonds (sakalabandhana),
enters the Path of Seeing the Truths and becomes Srotaãpanna through the abandoning of
the defilements which one abandons by this Path, he can then either expell the first six
categories of defilements of Kāmadhātu through the Path of Meditation on the Truths
(pure path): he obtains the result of Sakṛdāgāmin through the pure or transworldly
path,--or expell the same six categories through the worldly path of meditation (as
described vi.49c): he obtains the same result through the worldly path. But an ordinary
person can become free from the same six categories of defilements through the worldly
path before entering into the Path of Seeing: when he achieves this Path, he acquires the
result of Sakṛdāgāmin. The result results from the worldly path.1070 Chapter Six
315. See above vi.35c.
316. Vibbāsā, TD 27, p. 911c5. Kośa, vii.32 (Anguttara, ii.8).
317. Kleśānāṁ bāhanāt. Bāhitā anenānekavidhāḥ pāpakā akuśalā dharmā iti brāhmaṇaḥ /
tadbhāvo brāhmaṇyam anāsravo mārgaḥ (Vyākhyā). Compare Dhammapada. 388.
318. Eşa hi bhagavān brahmety etad udāharaṇam Sivakenoktam (See note 285; var. Jīvaka).
Madh., 34.12; Majjh., i.341, 368, Sam., ii.27: . . . tathāgato … . . brahmacakkaṁ pavatteti. The
Tathāgata is dhammakāya brahmakāya dhammabhūta brahmabhūta in Dīgha, iii.84; gloss
of Buddhaghosa (The word brahma is used in the sense of excellent, seṭṭhaṭṭhena) in
Dialogues, iii.81. brahmabhūta = identified with Brahman, see Bodhisattvabhūmi, fol. 142b:
brāhmaṁ, cakraṁ pravartayatīty ucyate / tat kasya hetoḥ / tathāgatasyaitad adhivacanaṁ
yad uta brahmā ity api śāntaḥ śītībhūta ity api / tena tatpreritaṁ tatprathamatas tadanyaiḥ
punas tadanyeṣām / evaṁ pāramparyena brahmapreritam sarvasattvanikäye bhramati
tasmād brāhmam cakram ity ucyate. Nirvāṇa, (1925), pp. 72-73.
319. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 104a15. It is moreover certain that the Wheel of the Law, which the
Bhagavat set into motion, and which Śāriputra sets into motion after the Bhagavat
(Samyutta, i.191), is the teaching.
320. Kramaṇāc cakram, see below note 332.
321. The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 912a4, mentions ten reasons.
322. On the parts of the Path, vi.67, 71.
323. Tadutpattau pravartitam iti sūtre vacanat. Vyākhyā: tad evam āryasya Kauṇḍinyasya
darśanamārga utpanne devatābhir uktaṁ bhagavatā pravartitaṁ dharmacakram iti
sūtravacanāt. The Vyākhyā quotes a Sūtra which corresponds (with variants) to the
Mahāvagga, i.6, 23-30. Lotus, p. 69, line 12.
Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 934c8): The divinities do not say: "the Wheel of the Law has
been set into motion,” under the Bodhi tree, but rather in Benares. Thus the setting into
motion is to cause one to penetrate into another. Some say that teaching itself (the sermon
at Benares) is the Wheel of the Law: but this teaching is only the means, not the true Wheel.
324. See Nettippakaraṇa, 60.
325. Vyākhyā: tatra pratyakṣārthatvād anāsravā prajñā cakṣuḥ / niḥsaṁśayatvāj jñānam /
bhūtārthatvād vidyā / viśuddhatvād buddhiḥ / viśuddhā dhīr buddhir iti nirukteḥ // punar
bāhyakānāṁ satyeşu darśanam kudṛṣṭivicikitsāvidyānām apratipakṣaḥ sasravam ca / tato
višeṣaṇārthaṁ cakṣurādigrahaṇam // punas trișu parivarteșu prathamaṁ darśanaṁ cakṣur
yathādṛṣṭavyavacāraṇam / jñānaṁ yāvad [...] bhāvikatām upādāya / vidyā yāvad
vidyamanagrahaṇād yathāvadbhāvikatām upādāya / buddhir yathābhūtārthāvabodhāt //
punar ananuśruteṣu dharmeṣv ānumānikajñānapratiṣedhārthaṁ cakṣur ity āha /
adhimokṣikajñānapratiṣedhārthaṁ jñanam iti / ābhimānikajñānapratiṣedhārthaṁ vidyeti/
sāsravajñānapratiṣedhārthaṁ buddhir iti /
Pure prajñā -- is called eye, because its object is immediately perceived: knowledge
(jñāna), because it is free from doubt (vii.1); science, because its object is real; intelligence,
because it is pure: in fact the etymology of buddhir is viśuddhā dhî, “pure mind.”
Furthermore, the view that the non-Buddhists have of the Truths (suffering, etc.) is not
opposed either to bad opinions, nor doubt, nor ignorance, and it is impure (cāsrava): in
order to show the contrast with the seeing that the saints have of the Truths, this seeing is
called eye, etc. . . . Furthermore, the Sūtra says "eye" in order to avoid the idea that it refers
to a consciousness arrived at through induction; “knowledge,” because it does not refer to a
knowledge arrived at through imagination (compare ii. English trans. p.320; vi.9);
"science," because it does not refer to a supposed knowledge; “intelligence,” because it does
not refer to an impure knowledge.Footnotes 1071
According to the Vibhāṣā, jñāna is the dharmajñäna, vidyā, is the anvayakṣānti, buddhi is
the anvayajñāna (vi.25-26). Another theory is presented in Kośa, vii.7.
326. The Sūtra on "Skillfulnes in Seven Things," has been quoted above, note 207. For
dvayadeśanā: . tena hi bhikṣo dvayam te deśayişyāmi tac chṛṇu sādhu ca manasi kuru
bhāṣiṣye / dvayaṁ katamat / cakṣū rūpāṇi yāvan mano dharmāś ca.
327. Vyākhyā: atra ācārya āha . . . We have here, according to the Japanese editor, the
opinion of the Sautrāntikas.
328. a. This is suffering, its origin, its extinction, the path; b. this should be known . . . ; c.
this is known, abandoned, realized, cultivated.
329. Tridhākaraṇa: a. the nature of the truths (satyasvarūpa), b. the operation to be done;
and c. the achievement of the operation.
330. The Abhisamayālaṁkārāloka depends on the Abhidharma: tatra trayaḥ parivartā
dvādaśākārā yasmin dharmacakra iti vigrahaḥ / tatrāmi trayaḥ parivartā yad uta idam
duḥkham āryasatyaṁ tat khalv abhijñāya parijñeyam abhijñātam / idam duḥkhasamudaya
aryasatyam tad abhijñāya prahātavyam prahiņam / idam duḥkhanirodha äryasatyam tad
abhijñāya sākṣātkartavyaṁ sākṣātkṛtam / idam duḥkhanirodhagaminī pratipad āryasatyam
tat khalv abhijñāya bhāvayitavyaṁ bhāvitaṁ mayeti bhikṣavaḥ pūrvam ananuśruteșu
dharmeşu yoniśo manasikurvataḥ pratyakṣārtḥatvād anāsravā prajñā cakṣur udapādi
niḥsaṁśayatvāj jñānaṁ bhūtārthatvād vidyā viśuddhitvād buddhir udapādīty etat
kriyāpadam ekaikasmin satye triṣv api yojyam / ataḥ pratyekaṁ caturṇām āryasatyānāṁ
triparivartanāt triparivartam / cakṣurityādayaś cākāraś catvāras triparivartanāt pratisatyam
traya ity ato dvādaśākāram / etāvataiva jagadarthasaṁpādanāt paripūrṇaṁ triparivartadvā-
daśāākāraṁ cakram iva dharmacakram yat prathamato vārāṇasyāṁ bhāṣitaṁ sūtram /
yatḥā rājñaś cakravartinaś cakraratnam agresaraṁ sarvas tu balakāyas tad evānusaran
paścăd āgacchati / tathā sakalatrailokyādhipates tathāgatasya tat sūtram agrataḥ kṛtv.
sarvo'pi deśanadharmaḥ prabhavati.
(An extract from the Seventh Chapter.)
331. According to the Japanese editor, the opinion of Vasubandhu.
Nyāyānusara, TD 29, p. 709a28: The opinion of the masters of the Vibhāṣā
(Vaibhāṣikas) is, in general, that the whole of the holy path (ārya mārga) is called the
Dharmacakra ... but there are some divergent opinions: according to some, it is the Path of
Seeing that is called Dharmacakra; according to others, it is the sermon at Benares. Notes of
the Japanese editor: According to the commentaries, the first opinion is now the third, the
second is that presented in the Kārikā; and the third is now the second. According to
Samghabhadra, the third is the basic opinion of the Sarvästivādins . . . P'u-kuang says that
the second and the third are those of the Sautrāntikas and of Vasubandhu.
332. Vyākhyā: kramaṇāc cakram iti kṛtvā.
333. In the same way that one says prabhukta odanaḥ.
334. This person is detached from Kāmadhātu through the worldly path, as for example
Brahmā; he should cultivate the Path of Seeing in order to obtain the result of Anāgāmin.
For the Aryan the fact that he is reborn into Rūpadhātu proves that he is already an
Anagamin.
335. Since one does not become a Buddha or a Pratyekabuddha in this sphere, the only bodhi
that one can obtain there is the bodhi of the Śrāvakas; now a Śrāvaka only obtains
comprehension of the truths (abhisamaya) due to the words of another, parato ghoșa.
336. The principle presented in viii.29a-b opposes the teaching that there is a darśanamārga
in Ārūpyadhātu.1072 Chapter Six
337. Vyākhyā: vidhānaṁ vidhā upāya ity arthaḥ.
338. Madhyama, TD 2, p. 616a10, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 235c7. See in the Puggalapaññatii, p.
12, the definition of the samayavimutta, samayavimutta, kuppadhamma, akuppadhamma,
parihāṇadhamma, aparihāṇadhamma, cetanābhabba, anurakkhanābhabba. The akopyad-
harman Arhat distinct from the Saikṣa, Mahāvastu, iii.200.
339. Paramartha: "Their deliverance is occasional and dear.” Anguttara, iii. 173. See P. 1006.
cetovimukti and prajñāvimukti, vi.76c.
340. P. 1006. In the world, that which is dear (kanta) should be guarded (anurakṣya). The
Sūtra says: tadyathā nāmaikākṣasya puruṣasya jñātaya ekam akṣi sādhu ca suṣṭhu
cānurakṣitavyaṁ manyeran māsya śītaṁ māsyoṣṇam māsya rajoṁśavaś cakṣuși nipateyur
māsya yad apy ekaṁ cakṣur avinaṣṭaṁ tad api vinaśyad iti / evam eva samayavimuktasyār-
hato...
341. In the same way samayavimukta = samayāpekṣaś ca vimuktaś ca.
342. Different meanings of samaya, Samantapāsādikā, i.107.
343. What does gotra, or family, mean? (1) The gotra is the roots of good (kuśalamūla):
certain persons have such roots of good that they are parihāṇadharman, etc.; (2) gotra
consists of the characteristics of the faculties, more or less sharp, from the stage of
Prthagjana onward; (3) the Sautrāntikas say that gotra is the seed, the power (sāmarthya) of
the mind. The Pṛthagjana and the Śaikṣa are "of the family of the parihāṇadharman” when
they bear the seed of the parihāṇadharman Arhat; the Aśaikṣa or Arhat is a parihāṇadhar-
man because this seed is actualized in their result (tadbījavṛttilābhāt).
344. Uttāpana, uttāpanā = uttaptīkarana, vi.18b, synonym saṁcāra, transposition, vi.4lc-d.
345. Consequently vi.57b should be understood as follows: The person who, by his nature, is
of sharp faculties, becomes a dṛṣṭiprāpta in the sixteenth moment (this is the case seen
previously vi.57b). But the person who, having already become a Šaikṣa, and perfects his
faculties, obtains the quality of dṛṣṭiprāpta after having a been śraddhādhimukta.
346. Arhats 2-5 are also susceptible of falling away; Arhat number 1 is characterized by the
absence of the qualities of Arhats 2-5. In this same way Arhats 3-5 are cetanādharman and
so on.
347. Cetanādharman = māraṇadharman: ātmānaṁ cetayate, below notes 350 and 367.
Paramartha: "to kill-harm his body" (sha-hai tzu shen *
) or "to kill oneself"
(tzu-hai
É‡ ).
The explanation of the Puggalapaññatii, p. 12, differs.
348. Hsüan-tsang: The parihāṇadharman, meeting weak causes of falling, falls away from
that which he has acquired; but not the cetanāādharman. The cetanādharman, fearing
falling away, always thinks of putting an end to his existence. The anurakṣanādharman
guards that which he has acquired. Dīgha, iii.226, on the anurakkhaṇāpadhāna.
349. Sūtra: pañca hetavaḥ pañca pratyayaḥ samayavimuktasyārhataḥ pariḥāṇāya
samvartante / katame pañca / karmäntaprasṛto bhavati / bhāṣyaprasṛto bhavati /
adhikaraṇaprasṛto bhavati / dirghacārikāyogam anuyukto bhavati / dirgheṇa ca rāgajātena
sprsto bhavati.
Anguttara, iii.173 (compare Kathāvatthu, i.2, trans. p. 64) has two lists of five dharmas:
pancime dhammā samayavimuttassa bhikkhuno pariḥāṇāya saṁvattanti: kammārāmatā,
bhassārāmatā, niddārāmatā, saṁghaṇikārāmatā, yathāvimuttaṁ cittam na paccavekkhati.
The second lists replaces the last two terms by indriyesu aguttadvāratā, bhojane
amattaññutā.
350. In the higher spheres, there is neither ātmasaṁcetanā nor parasaṁcetanā, see Kośa,Footnotes 1073
ii.45c-d, English trans. p. 236, Dīgha, iii.23, 231, Anguttara, ii.159. p. 1007.
351. Paramārtha: Four persons fall away from the gotra; five fall away from the result.
352. This family, in fact, is akṛtrima.
353. On the falling away of the Arhat and the problems connected with it, Ang., i.96, iii. 173,
Kathāvatthu, i.2, ii.2, etc.; Points of Controversy, p. xliii; our note: The five points of
Mahadeva, JRAS., 1910, p. 413. According to Buddhaghosa, the Sammitīyas, Vajjiputtiyas,
Sabbatthivādins and some of the Mahasāṁghikas admit the falling away of an Arhat.
Vasumitra, in Wassilief, p. 262, 263, 282: the Mahāsāṁghikas admit the falling away
(parihāṇadharman) of a Srotaapanna, but deny the falling away of an Arhat; 272; the
Sarvāstivādins deny the falling away of a Srotaäpanna, but admit the falling away of an
Arhat. Confirmed by the Chinese sources: Sarvāstivādins: No falling away from the first
result; falling away from the other three. Mahāsāṁghikas, Mahīśāsaka, etc.: No falling away
from the quality of Arhat; falling away from the first three results. Sautrāntika, Mahāyāna:
No falling away from the results; falling away from the dṛṣṭadharmasukhavihāras. Opinion
of the Vibhajyavādins, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 312b9, below note 374.
354. An anonymous objection (atra kaś cid āha): (1) A cetanādharman, the cetanādharman
family which has been made firm by the śaikṣa and aśaikṣa paths, can perfect his faculties,
and so acquire a new gotra: therefore he falls away from his gotra. The reason given by
Vasubandhu does not hold. (2) If one does not fall away from a family which has been
rendered firm by the worldly and transworldly paths, one will fall away from the result of
Srotaäpanna, which is never rendered firm by the two paths. Response of Yaśomitra. (1)
Vasubandhu means to say that the cetanādharman, falling away from the result of Arhat,
will not merely because of this fall away from his gotra if this has been made firm by the
Śaikṣa and Aśaikṣa paths. (2) The second remark is made with respect to a person who does
not reflect: here it refers to his family (gotra), not to his result. In fact, no result is at one
and the same time (yugapad) obtained by a worldly and a transworldly path; but the family
can be made firm by these two paths.
355. One does not fall away from the result of Srotaäpanna, because, when one obtains this
result, it is always the first result that he obtains. One can fall away from the result of
Sakṛdāgāmin when one obtains this result after having obtained that of Srotaäpanna; but
not when one becomes a Sakṛdāgāmin without passing through the stage of Srotaāpanna
(the case of the bhūyovītarāga, ii.16c, vi.30b, 45b); the same for the result of Anāgāmin.
356. Vibhāṣā, TD 29, p. 316b28. Why can one fall from the three higher results, and not
from the result of Srotaäpanna? Because the defilements abandoned through seeing are
produced with respect to non-existence (avastu); one does not fall away from the
abandoning of these, defilements. How can one say that they are produced with respect to
non-existence? ... Furthermore the result of Srotaäpanna is established by the abandoning
of the defilements abandoned by the view of the truths in their totality, bearing on the three
spheres.
357. smrtisampramoșāt = kliṣṭasmṛtiyogāt (see ii. English trans. p.190, 194).
358. There is no falling away from the anāsrava result; with respect to the first five Arhats,
there is falling away from the “blisses of this world,” which are sāsrava.
359. According to the Japanese gloss, Madhyamāgama, TD 1, p. 574c19?, which according to
Anesaki is Samyutta ii.50 (Kalārasutta). The first and the last result can only be obtained by
the pure path (=āryaprajñā), vi.45c.
360. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 752a24, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 53c9; Samyutta, iv.25.1074 Chapter Six
361. Madhyamāgama, 49.21; Saṁyutta, ii.239. Tatra bhagavān āyuşmantam Anandam
amantrayate sma / arhato'py aham Ananda lābhasatkāram antarāyakaraṁ vadāmīti /
äyuşman Ananda āha / tat kasmād bhagavān evam āha / arhato'py aham Ananda
lābhasatkāram antarāyakaraṁ vadāmīti / bhagavān āha / na haivānanda aprāptasya
praptaye anadhigatādhigamāya asākṣātkṛtasya sākṣātkriyayai / api tu ye'nena catvāra
adhicaitasika drstadharmasukhaviḥārā adhigatās tato'ham asyanyatamasmāt parihāṇim
vadāmi / tac cākīrṇasya viharataḥ / yā tv anenaikākinā vyapakṛṣṭenäpramattenātāpinā
prahitātmanā viharatā akopyā cetovimuktiḥ kāyena sākṣātkṛtā tato’syāhaṁ na kena cit
paryāyena parihāṇiṁ vadāmi / tasmāt tarhy Anandaivaṁ te śikṣitavyaṁ yal lābhasatkāram
abhibhaviṣyāmo na cotpannair lābḥasatkāraiś cittaṁ paryādāya sthāsyati / evaṁ te Ananda
śikṣitavyam. See below note 363 and p. 1010.
362. Kośa, ii.4 (English trans. p. 157), vi.42c-d, viii.27.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 137a10. Because they reside (viharanti) in the four types of bliss, they
are said to have obtained four dṛṣṭadharmasukhavihāras: 1. pravravyāsukha, 2. vivekasukha
(yuan-li lo **** ), 3. śamathasukha (chi-ching lo
bodhisukha.
), and 4.
But this refers to the Dhyānas in general.
Samyutta, ii.278, Anguttara, iii. 131, v.10, Dīgha, iii. 113, 222: eso kho bhikkhave bhikkhu
catunnaṁ jhānānam abhicetasikānaṁ diṭṭhadhammasukhaviḥārāṇaṁ nikāmalābhī;
Anguttara, iv.362: arahanto …. . diṭṭhadhammasukhavihāraṁ yeva anuyuttā.
The four blisses are adhicaitasika (=adhi cetasi bhava), that is to say they belong to the
sphere of the four basic Dhyānas. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 418a2: The four types of adhicaitasika
are the Four Dhyānas.
The Bodhisattvabhūmi distinguishes the brahmavihāras (=apramāṇa, Kośa, viii.29), and
the aryavihāras (=vimokṣamukha, viii.24), and the divyavihāras (=dhyānas and ārūpyas).
(chan-ch'uan
Ei
363. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 316a4. The Sūtra says: "Ānanda, of the four blisses (ādhicaitasika
dṛṣṭadharmasukhaviḥāra) acquired by the Tathāgata, I say that there is a successive
) falling away, as in the case of the Śrāvaka on the occasion of
worldly encounters. As for the immovable deliverance of the mind (described as above:
kāyena sākṣāt kṛtā . . . ), I say that there is no falling away." It follows from this text that,
even in the case of the Buddha, there is a falling away from "fruition" (upabhoga, Kośa, vi.
59) The Sautrāntikas conclude from this text that dear and occasional deliverance (sāmayikī
kāntā vimukti) is the four blisses. Question: By falling away, does the Sūtra understand the
falling away from that which is acquired, or the falling away from a resultant state? In the
first hypothesis, there would be no falling away from the blisses, for these are dharmas that
one continues to possess (präpti) even when one does not enjoy them; in the second
hypothesis, there would be falling away from immovable deliverance, for this deliverance is
not always present (sammukhibhūta)... Response: With respect to deliverance, the
essential thing is possession: for, when one possesses deliverance, one no longer has
anything more to obtain; therefore, even though it is always present, one says that the saint
does not fall away from it. With respect to the blisses, the essential thing is their presence;
one says then that the saint has fallen away from them when he is not enjoying them.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 417c21 and following: When one of the sukhavihāras is present, one says
that the others have fallen away.
364. In opposition to the samantakas, threshholds to the Dhyānas properly so called.
365. 1) yaḥ parihiyate dṛṣṭadharmasukhavihärebhyaḥ sa parihāṇadharmā; 2) yo na
parihiyate tata eva so'parihāṇadharmā; 3) yaḥ samādhibhraṁśabhayād ātmānaṁ cetayate
(ii. English trans. p. 236) sa cetanādharmā; 4) yo'nurakṣati katham cid guṇaviseşam
so'nurakṣaṇādharmā; 5) yo yasminn eva gune sthitas tasmād ananurakṣann api na kampate
sa sthitākampyaḥ; 6) yaḥ pareṇa pratividhyati (guṇavišeșam utpādayātīty arthaḥ) sa
prativedhanābhavyaḥ; 7) yo na kupyati (utpannebhyo na parihiyate) so’kopyadharmā.
de arta dan atau per abbadethan stay, Thuy preFootnotes
1075
By adding prajñāvimukta and ubhayatobhāgavimukta (vi.64), we have the nine Aaikṣas.
366. Vasubandhu asks the question and answers it.
367. The Vaibhāṣika objects: nanv āyuṣmān Godhiko’rhattvāt parihīṇaḥ.
Paramartha here adds a pāda: "Godhika was a samayavimukta.”
On Godhika, a good example of a saint of the cetanādharman class, see Samyutta, i.120;
Comm. on the Dhammapada, 55; Samyukta, TD 2, p. 28ba3, which differs. Vibhāṣā, TD 27,
p. 312b22; Ekottara, TD 2, p. 642c1 (Vakkali).
368. Maraṇakāla evārhatvaṁ prāptaḥ: he attained the quality of Arhat at the very moment
of death, that is to say in a moment later than the application of the dagger (śastrādhāna);
parinirvṛtaś ca: and he obtained parinirvāṇa by the same stroke of the dagger (tenaiva
sastraprabāreņa).
369. Dīgha, iii.273, differs: katamo eko dhammo uppādetabbo? akuppaṁ ñāṇaṁ. katamo
eko dhammo sacchikātabbo? akuppă cetovimutti.
370. Utpadya, which can be explained according to iii.3.172 or iii.3.169.
371. Prakaraṇapāda, TD 26, p. 702b17; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 313b15; see Kośa, v.34.
The Tibetan and Hsüan-tsang have: "It is by reason of three causes that the anusaya of
kāmarāga arises."
372. Vyākhyā: tadyathā cakṣūrūpālokamanaskārasāmagrī cakṣurvijñānasyotpattaye
prasiddhā sā tadanyataravikalā sati tadutpattaye na bhavati.
373. tadbījadharmatāyām anapoddhṛtāyām, which is to be understood as kleśabījasvabhāve'
nunmülite.
374. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 312b9. The Vibhajyavādins deny the falling away of the Arhat, in
the sense of the production of defilements (kleśa), and support this with examples. When a
pot is broken, there only remains the pieces of baked earth which no longer make up the
pot. The same for the Arhat: Vajropamasamādhi (vi.44) breaks the defilements; thus the
Arhat will not produce any more defilements and he will not fall away. When a tree is burnt,
only its ashes remain ... the defilements have been burnt by pure knowledge (anāsrava
jñāna) . . . But, to affirm that the Arhat does not fall away is to contradict the Sūtra which
distinguishes two types of Arhats, one who is movable and one who is immovable (kopya,
akopyadharman). Yet how does one explain the examples of the Vibhajyavādins? There is
no reason to explain them: they are neither Sūtra, nor Vinaya, nor Abhidharma . . .
375. Paramärtha adds a pāda: “There is falling away of the Arhat, by reason of
Angārakarşūpama."
376. Samyutta, iv.190, Saṁyukta, TD 2, p. 314b6; the following portion of the text quoted
here is quoted above vi.60a.
We know the Păļi redaction: tassa ce bhikkhave bhikkhuno evam carato evaṁ viharato
kadāci karahaci satisammosā uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā dhammā sarasaṁkappā saṁyojaniyā
/ dandho bhikkhave satuppādo / atha kho naṁ khippam eva pajahati vinodetivyantikaroti
anabhāvam gameti.
377. The Vaibhāśika understands evaṁ carataḥ as smṛtimataś carataḥ, “who does all of the
actions of a Bhikṣu (carataḥ) with his mindfulness always attentive,” because the word smṛti
immediately follows (anantaraṁ smṛtivacanāt); but see Samyutta, iv.189. line 8.
378. The Chinese translators: astim samayaḥ, asty avakaśo yat But according to the
Vyākhyā: kadācit smṛtisampramosad utpadyante pāpakā akuśalā vitarkāḥ.
379. Anguttara, iv.224, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 188b18.1076 Chapter Six
kati bhadantarhato bhikṣoḥ kṣīṇāsravasya balāni / aṣṭau śāriputra / arhato bhiksor
dirgharātram vivekanimnam cittaṁ yāvan nirvāṇaprägbhāram / angārakarşüpamāś canena
kāmā dṛṣṭā bhavanti yathāsya kāmān jānataḥ kāmān paśyato yaḥ kāmeṣu kāmacchandaḥ
kāmasneho... käāmādhyavasānaṁ tad asya cittam na paryādāya tiṣṭhati... asravasthānīyair
dharmaiḥ śītībhūtaṁ vāntībhūtam.
yaṁ pi bhante khīņāsavassa bhikkhuno vivekaninnaṁ cittaṁ hoti vivekapoņaṁ
vivekapabbhāraṁ vivekaṭṭhaṁ nekkhammābhirataṁ vyantibhūtaṁ sabbaso āsavaṭṭhā-
niyehi dhammehi, idam pi... balam.
380. But these texts can be understood of the Saikṣa. The mind of the Śaikşa is "inclined
towards isolation," etc.; but the Aśaikṣa possesses all these qualities to their maximum
(prakarsena). The Saikṣa is "cooled" with regard to the dharmas, in which the asravas lodge,
and which belong to Kāmadhātu.
381. The Sūtra has: yāvat tu cāro na supratividdhaḥ. According to the Vyäkhyā,
piṇḍapātādicāraḥ. In Saṁyutta, iv.189, line 7, cāro ca vihāro ca anubuddho hoti. Cāra, the
quest, is anubuddha, supratividdha, when the monk is not attached to agreeable objects, etc.
382. There are, therefore, six catagories of mokṣabhāgiyas and nirvedhabhāgiyas (vi.24,
17c).
383. Therefore a Pṛthagjana who enters, with weak faculties, the Path of Seeing, necessarily
becomes a Śaikṣa with weak faculties and protects his family, gotra.
384. Through the path which has the aspects of impermanence, etc. (anityādyākārapatita
mārga, vii.13) (the transworldly path), and through that which has coarse aspects, etc., and
of calm, etc. (vi.49c), we do not become fixed to things up above. Yet we believe that the
Prthagjana perfects his faculties in these two manners, for, later, Vasubandhu declares that
the Aryans do not perfect their faculties by an impure (sāsrava) path (vi.61b). Thus the
Prthagjana cultivates by desiring: "May my faculties become sharp!", and, cultivating
(abhyasya) either the worldly path or the transworldly path, he obtains perfectioning of his
faculties by means of anantarya and vimuktimārga.
385. vi.36c. It is not a questinn here of Pṛthagjanas and of Saikṣas. The Arhat also perfects
his faculties.
386. We can compare Anguttara, v.169: anadhigataṁ nādhigacchati / adhigatā parihāyati ..
We have seen that there is an upabhoga of Nirvāṇa, ii. English trans p. 159.
387. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 318b11 and following. Two opinions: 1. The three fallings for the
Samayavimukta, the last two for the Akopyadharman and the Pratyekabuddha, the third for
the Buddha; 2. the three fallings for the Samayavimukta, the last for the Akopyadharman
and the Pratyekabuddhas, none for the Buddha. Vasubandhu adopts the theory of the first
masters; the second ones are followed by the Mahāyāna.
Compare Kośa, iv.12c, vi. p. 1006; Majjhima, i.249.
388. The Immovable Ones have not acquired the dharmas proper to the Great Disciples, the
Mahāśrāvakas, such as Śāriputra or Maudgalyāyana; for example, they lack prantakotika
(vii.41). And the Mahāśrāvakas themselves do not now possess nor will they possess the
dharmas special to the Buddhas or Svayambhūs. See i.1, English trans. p.55, and vii.30.
389. Two interpretations are possible:
a) The Sauträntikas affirm that the deliverance of the six Arhats is immovable. The
Vaibhāṣika would object: "If the pure deliverance of any Arhat is immovable, why is only
the 'non-occasionally delivered one' (asamayavimukta) defined or recognized as Immovable
(akopyadharman)?" The Sautrāntikas answer: "It is certain that the pure deliverance of
every Arhat is immovable; but the definition of an Immovable One is as we have saidFootnotes 1077
(p. 1007, line 12), namely: "Some, by reason of the distraction caused by their virtues and
their honors, fall away from the blisses by losing their mastery in absorption: these are the
Arhats with weak faculties; others do not fall away, and these are the Arhats with sharp
faculties." The latter are recognized as Immovable Ones. As the Arhat with weak faculties
falls away from the blisses by reason of distraction, whereas the Arhat with sharp faculties
does not fall away (that is to say, does not lose possession of them), it follows that the
Vaibhāṣikas cannot advantageously object: "How does an Immovable One fall away from
the blisses?"
b) It has been said above that an Immovable One does not fall away from the blisses, and
the Sūtra declares that there is falling away from the blisses for the same person for whom
deliverance is immovable. In the presence of this declaration formulated in general terms,
one says: "The deliverance of any Arhat is immovable," that is to say: "an Immovable One
is not sufficiently characterized by the possession of this deliverance." One therefore adds:
"For an Immovable One, it is defined as we have said." Therefore one cannot object: "How.
390. Here the importance of the theory of the falling away of the Arhat sensibly diminishes.
Samghabhadra (TD 29, p. 722a13): When the amount of life approaches its exhaustion,
there is no falling away, because there is no weakening of mindfulness; if life still remains to
him, falling away is impossible... Who falls away? Who does not fall away? He who has
entered the Path after aśubhā meditation can fall away; but he who has entered it after
ānāpānasmṛti does not fall away. It depends on whether alobha or amoha has been
accumulated. In what sphere, in what realm of rebirth is there falling away? In Kāmadhātu,
persons of the three continents. As for the six gods of Kāmadhātu . . . (see note 396).
391. See above note 376. The Tibetan:
experiences small weakness of mindfulness..
"; but the Tibetan text presents a lacuna, as results from the version of Paramārtha. "Small,"
according to the Vyākhyā, is dhandha, with the sense of manda.
392. The Vyākhyā defines confidence by quoting the stanza:
sucīrṇabrahmacarye’smin mārge cāpi subhāvite /
tuṣṭa āyuḥkṣaye bhoti rogasyāpagame yathā // which is quoted below by Vasubandhu.
393. iv.33a, vi.40c.
394. On the nature of these paths of "transformating the faculties," above note 384.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 349a and following; the opinions differ.
a. Nirvedhabhāgīyas: in the fourth, no perfectioning; in the first three, perfectioning
through 9 änantaryas and 9 vimuktis (1st opinion), through 1 ànantarya and 1 vimukti (2nd
opinion), through 1 prayoga (3rd opinion).
b. Darśanamārga, no perfectioning.
c. Aśaikṣas, 1 prayoga, 9 ānantarya, 9 vimuktis (adopted by Vasubandhu), 1 prayoga, 1
ānantarya, 1 vimukti (2nd opinion).
Śaikṣas, 1 prayoga, 1 ânantarya, 1 vimukti (adopted by Vasubandhu), 1 prayoga, 9
ānantaryas, 9 vimuktis (2nd opinion).
395. Paramārtha: "By reason of long cultivation."
396. Now it is through fear of falling away that the ascetic sharpens his faculties. We have
seen above that the Aryans and persons arisen in the higher spheres cannot transform their
faculties (vi.4lc-d).
Persons born among the six classes of gods of Kāmadhātu cannot fall away. They
certainly possess sharp faculties, since they are disgusted with the heavenly joys from the
point of view of the Truths: ye pūrvam atyudārebhyo viṣayebhyo saṁvijanto yataḥ (?)
satyāni paśyanti te katham tän alambya parihäsyante / avasyam hi te tīkṣṇendriya
bhavantity abhiprāyaḥ.1078 Chapter Six
397. The Aśaikṣa perfects his faculties as he has obtained the result of Arhat; since he
obtains this result in nine spheres, so too there is perfecting of the faculties.
The Saikṣa perfects his faculties as he has obtained the results of Saikṣa; as he does not
obtain these results in the Arūpyas, so too there is the perfecting of the faculties. The first
two results of Saikṣa are obtained in anāgamya; the third in six spheres. (But opinions
differ).
398. See vi.33, 46d.
399. Vyākhyā: phalam phalavisiṣṭam ceti / phalam sakṛdāgāmiphalam / phalavisiṣṭaṁ
prathamadhyānādiprahāṇāya prayogānāntaryavimukti-višeṣamārgalakṣaṇam.
Paramartha: The person who cultivates the transformation of his faculties abandons the
result and the path of weak faculties higher than the result (phalaṁ phalavisistam ca
mrdvindriyakaṁ mārgam).
Hsüan-tsang: He abandons phala and phalavišiṣṭamārga.
400. Vyākhyā: phalamārgam eva pratilabhate / kāmadhātuvairāgyamātrasamgrhītam / na
cānāgāmiphalam ārūpyasaṁgṛhītam iti / pañcānām avarabhāgīyānāṁ prahāṇād anāgāmīti
sūtre vacanāt / darśanamārge ca tatrābhāvāt tadabhāvaḥ kāmadhātvanālambanād iti
vyākhyātam etat.
Paramartha: He obtains, in the family of sharp faculties, both result and Path; not the
result of Anāgāmin included in Ārūpyadhātu. This is because the Śaikṣa does not transform
his faculties in Ārūpyadhātu.
Hsüan-tsang. What he obtains is only a result, and not the path, of candidate: therefore
it is not a result of Śaikṣa included in Ārūpyadhātu. This is why the Śaikṣșa transforms his
faculties in only six spheres.
One should here study the commentaries on Hsüan-tsang.
401. Paramartha: Two Buddhas and seven Śrāvakas are nine by reason of their nine
faculties.
402. Yuan-hui says: The Immovable One is of two types, the first is called aparihāṇadhar-
man because his faculties are sharp in origin; the second is called Immovable because there
is a perfectioning of his faculties.
403. Buddha: strong-strong faculties; Pratyekabuddha: strong-medium; Immovable:
strong-weak...
404. The two types of Buddhas are included in the seventh class.
405. Paramārtha: By reason of prayoga . . . they make seven.
406. See vii.39c.
407. For the Dharmānusārin, 3 types of faculties, a single gotra, 15 paths, 73 types of
detachment, 9 physical persons, for a total of 29,565.
For the Sraddhādhimukta, considering his sixteenth moment (of the acquisition of fruit,
vi.31), we have 3 types of faculties, 5 gotras, 1 path, 73 detachments, 9 physical persons
9,855.
Vyākhyā: Bhagavadviśeșa remarks: "There are twelve types of Śraddhādhimukta from
the point of view of the Path, because he is to be found in the path of bhāvanā." We do not
understand with what intention he expresses himself thus. . .
The Vyākhyā examines the different types of Sraddhādhimukta in his career up to the
quality of Arhat (35,235); of a Dṛṣṭiprăpta to the acquisition of the result (1,971: no
difference for the gotra), in his career up to the quality of Arhat (7,047); of a Kāyasākṣin
(who is either a Sraddhādhimukta or a Dṛṣṭiprāpta), of a Prajñāvimukta, of a ubhayatobhā-
gavimukta. The Vyākhyā discusses the calculations of Bhagavadviseșa.
408. Anguttara, iv.452, Puggalapaññatti, p. 14. Añguttara, iv.77. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 330b24.
AFootnotes 1079
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: Of these five hundred Bhikṣus, ninety obtained the three
vidyās (Kośa, vii.45c), ninety the twofold deliverance; the others are Prajñāvimuktas
(compare Samyutta, i. 191). Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 319b11?: The vidyās with the eight
vimokşas, is the twofold deliverance. See also Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 733a28 and following.
409. Kleśāvaraṇa is the obstacle or bond made up of the defilements. Vimokṣāvarana is the
obstacle--namely bodily and mental powerlessness (akarmaṇyatā)--which is opposed to the
production of the eight vimokşas (vii.32a).
410. Paramartha follows this text. Hsüan-tsang follows a reading ahāryadharmo’paripūr-
naśaikṣaḥ, and translates: "Even having abandoned five kleśas, and being immovable, he is
not called a complete Šaikşa.” Gloss of the editor: "Even though he is complete in his
faculties and the result, he has not obtained nirodhasamāpatti."
411. On the parupūra and aparipūra Bhikṣu, see Anguttara, iv.314.
412. Consequently the "Supreme Worldly Dharmas," laukikāgradharmas (vi.19b-c), are
prayogamārga. The path that the kṣāntis constitute (vi.18c) is also prayogamärga, but
extended (viprakṛṣṭa) prayogamärga (Vyākhyā). It is by way of example that Vasubandhu
speaks here of the "near preparatory path."
413. In the "perfecting of the faculties" (indriyasamcāra, vi.60c-d) and elsewhere,
ānantaryamārga is not the abandoning of avaraṇa.
414. Vimuktimārga is the moment of thought which immediately follows the abandoning of
the āvaraṇa: the moments which follow vimuktimārga can be similar to it: “I am
delivered!", and are, like it, “liberated paths"; but they are called višeṣamārga.
415. On višeșamārga, vi.32c-d, 61d-62b, vii.18c. The moments of thought that follow the
sixteenth moment (vimuktijñāna) of abhisamaya, and which are similar to it (tajjātīya); also
all "continuation” of a vimuktijñāna; prolonged kṣayajñāna (vi.45a). So too the path which
has for its object the "blisses” (sukhavihāra) or the taking possession of certain spiritual
qualities (vaiseşikaguṇābhinirhāta), see viii.27c.
Paramārtha translates by a gloss: “Višeṣamārga is the other paths which arise following
vimuktimārga, that is to say, the paths of samādhi, abhijñā, indriyasaṁcāra, etc.”
416. Below note 419.
417. eșa hi nirvāṇasya panthās tena tadgamanād iti / loke yena gamyate sa mārga iti
pratītaḥ / anena ca nirvāṇaṁ gamyate präptyate tasmān mārga iti deśayati / mārgayanty
anena veti mārga anveṣaṇa iti dhātuḥ paṭhyate (10.302) / yena nirvāṇam anvişyate sa
mārgaḥ.
418. This second phrase is glossed: yasmād vā tābhyāṁ nirupadhiśeṣaṁ nirvāṇaṁ praviśati
yad[d]utpattau nirupadhifeșanirvanapraveśaḥ. On the two Nirvāṇas, above p. 966.
Others translate: Because, by means of these paths, due to the acquisition of higher and
higher paths, one enters nirupadhiśeṣa.
419. Magga distinct from pațipadā, Ang. ii.79, Majjh. i.147.
420. Dharmaskandha, TD 26, p. 463a22, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 482a26-486a5. Dīgha, iii.228,
229 (two groups of four), Vibhanga, 331 (speaks of samādhi without any other details),
Nettipakarana, 113, Visuddbi, 85 (catubbidbo (samādbil dukkhāpatipadādand babbinnadin
asena).
Four different paṭipadās, Childers, 364b.
421. For the Vyākhyā, these are the dhyānas (dhyānāni) which "flow without any effort
being necessary” (ayatnavāhīni). For Paramärtha: "the paths are, in the dhyānas, realized
without effort." 'bad mi dgos par ran gis nan gis 'byun ba'i phyir = “because, without any1080 Chapter Six
effort being necessary, [the paths] easily arise of themselves." See vi.71d, viii.23a.
422. On the history of this expression and its first use, see the remarks of E. Hardy, Preface
to the Nettipakaraña, and Mrs. Rhys Davids, Preface to the Vibhanga. Saṁyutta, v.227, the
bodhapakkhiyas are the indriyas; Vibhanga, 249, the bodhipakkhikas are the "limbs of
Bodhi"; Visuddhimagga, 678, classical list; Patisambhidā, ii. 160.
The thirty-seven, without being isolated from other good dharmas, form a group in
Anguttara, i.39 and following.
Classical list of thirty-seven, Digha, ii.120; Lotus, 430; Childers, 92; Spence Hardy,
Manual, 497; Kern, Manual; Milinda, trans. ii.207; Lalita (Rājendralāl), 8, 218;
Dharmasaṁgraha, 43; Mahāvyutpatti, 38-44; Dharmaśarīra, the short edition from
Turkestan, Stönner, Ac. de Berlin, 1904, p. 1282 (bodhipākṣika). The thirty-seven are
maggabhāvanā, Vinaya, iii.93, iv.126. They include the preparatory path, etc.; see Kośa,
vi.70.
Variant lists. The Vibhajyavādins (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 499a14) have a list of 41, adding
the four āryavamśas (Kośa, vi.7). Netti, 112, admits 43 bodhipakkhikas, placing, says the
commentary, six saṁjñās before the "mindfulness”: anicca, dukkha, anatta, pahāna, virāga,
nirodhasaññā (see Anguttara, i.41). Buddhaghosa (Anguttara, i. ed. of 1883, p. 98) mentions
a list that includes 3 satis, 3 padhānas, 3 iddhipādas, 6 indriyas, 6 balas, 8 bodhyangas, 9
maggangas; on the other hand Anguttara, i.53, has six bodhyangas (mindfulness being
omitted); and Bhavya tells us that certain masters place the brahmavihāras (compassion,
etc.) among the bodhyangas.
The "Bodhivakso (vṛkṣa ?)" of Taishō 14, no. 472, is perhaps the Bodhipakṣanirdeśa of
Mahāvyutpatti, 65.57 and of Kanjur, Mdo, 16.
423. Reading of the Vyākhyā. Hsüan-tsang has tuan
D = to cut off = prahāṇa; but
= effort = prayatna, utsāha, vīrya, vyavasāya.
Paramartha exactly translates ch'in
The Tibetan version has spon ba = prahāṇa. All the Sanskrit sources (Lalita, p. 33, etc.) give
prahāṇa.
424. Hsüan-tsang digresses from the original. He has:
The path is also called bodhipākṣikāḥ dharmāḥ. How many are they and what is the
meaning of this word? The Kārikā says:
The bodhipākṣikas are thirty-seven, namely the four smṛtyupasthānas, etc.; Bodhi is
kṣaya and anutpāda; as they are favorable to it, they are called bodhipākṣikas.
The Bhasyam says: The Sūtra teaches that there are thirty-seven bodhipākṣikas: four
smṛtyupasthānas . . . eight mārgāṁgas. The two consciousnesses of kṣaya and of anutpāda
are called Bodhi. There are three types of Bodhi: śrāvakabodhi, pratyekabodhi, and anuttara
bodhi. These two consciousnesses are called Bodhi because the anusayas are completely
destroyed, because the saints know in truth that he has done that which should have been
done and that he has nothing more to do. The thirty-seven dharmas are favorable to Bodhi
and are as a consequence called bodhipākṣikas. Are each of these thirty-seven different in
their nature? No. The stanza says: . . .
425. On these two jñānas, vi.50, vii.1, 4b, 7.
426. The prajñā of a Pṛthagjana or of a Šaikṣa is not called bodhi because it is not delivered
from the totality of ignorance relative to the Three Dhātus.
427. The task is accomplished: duḥkhaṁ me parijñātam; there will be nothing more to
accomplish: duḥkhaṁ me parijñātaṁ na punaḥ prahātavyam.
The two jñānas suppose sharp faculties. [Let us correct: the second jñāna supposes . . .]
428. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 496b18: Why are they called bodhipākṣikas? … . . Kṣaya and
anutpādajñāna are called Bodhi because they include the complete intelligence (budh) of the
Four Truths. If a dharma is favorable to this complete intelligence . . . it is called
bodhipākṣika.
1Footnotes 1081
Definition of Bodhi in the Yogācāra sources, Bodhisattvabhūmi, I, vii. Cambridge MSS,
fol. 37 (analyzed in Muséon, 1911, p. 170). Samantapāsādikā, i.139, explains the different
uses of the word, arahattamaggañāṇa, sabbaññutañāṇa, etc.
Buddha is understood to be the Śrāvakas, the Pratyekabuddhas and the Anuttarasamyak-
sambuddhas (Deva, Catuḥśatikā, 498): all three possess Bodhi as Vasubandhu defines it
here. Kośa, i.1, English trans. p. 55.
Bodhi = pure prajñā, p. 1028.
429. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 496a23, three opinions, ten, eleven, twelve things, see p. 178-179.
Mahāyāna, nine things, because samyaksaṁkalpa is prajñā.
Samkalpa is closely connected to vāc, karmānta, ājīva, p. 1025 See the definition in
Digha, ii. 312: sammāsaṁkappa = nekkhamma, avyāpāda, avihiṁsāsaṁkappa. p. 1028,
1030.
430. Paramārtha has a different order: śraddhā vīrya smṛti samādhi prajñā prīti upekṣā and
praśrabdhi śīla saṁkalpa, which can give us: śraddhā vīryaṁ smṛtiḥ śāntiḥ (?) prajñā prītir
upekṣaṇam (?) / praśrabdhiḥ śilasamkalpau.
431. This has been explained above p. 927.
432. From the "intentional" point of view (abhiprayavafat), there is nothing wrong in
therefore dividing morality into two. But if one takes into consideration the things
themselves (mukhyavṛttyā), one will have sixteen things, morality counting for seven
(avijñapti, etc.).
433. For example the smṛtyupasthānas are principally prajñā, but they are also virya, etc.
Prajñā is the principal element in this, the essential factor, because the other qualities are
present by its force.
Qualities arisen from cultivation, not “innate" qualities (upapattilabhya).
434. Vyākhyā: sarvagunasaṁpattilakṣaṇā ṛddhis tasmin samādhau pratiṣṭhitā, thus samādhi
= rddheḥ padaḥ = rddheḥ pratisthā.
On the ṛddhipādas, Majjhima, i.103, Samyutta, v.254, Anguttara, iv.309 (survives in
Kofa, ii. 10a, English trans. p. 168); Vibhanga, 216; Sātrālamkāra, sviii.51; Madhyamakāvat-
āra, iv.1 (trans. in Muséon), Mahävyutpatti, 40, Dharmasaṁgraha, 46.
The formula is classical (Dīgha, iii.221 = Mahävyutpatti, 40) chandasamādhiprahāṇa-
saṁskārasamanvāgata ṛddhipāda... [The Pāļi has padhāna and vimamsā.] The Sūtra says:
chandam capi bhikṣavo bhikṣur adhipatiṁ kṛtvā labhate samādhiṁ so'sya bhavati
cchanda-samadhiḥ / cittam... vīryaṁ . . . mīmāmṣāṁ cāpi bhikṣavo bhikṣur adhipatim
kṛtvā labhate samādhiṁ so'sya bhavati mīmāṁsāsamādhiḥ. Childers, p. 364b, 390b.
For Vasubandhu ṛddhipādāḥ = ṛddhihetavaḥ; the absorptions are the causes of ṛddhi;
and the absorptions themselves proceed from chanda, vīrya, etc. On ṛddhi, Kośa, vii.42.
435. See vii.42. anekavidham ṛddhivişayam pratyanubhavati / eko bhūtvā bahudhā bhavati.
..brahmalokaṁ käyena vaše vartayata iti iyam ucyata ṛddhiḥ / (Mahāvyutpatti, 15,
Anguttara, iii.280, Dīgha, i.77) ṛddhipādāḥ katame / chandasamādhiḥ / vīryasamādhiḥ /
cittasamādhiḥ / mīmāṁsāsamādhiḥ / ima ucyanta ṛddhipādā iti. Hsüan-tsang gives the
essentials of this Sūtra (of which Vasubandhu copies only the first words), and concludes:
"The Buddha says here that ṛddhi is the result of absorption and that its 'feet' are the
samadhis arisen from out of chanda, etc."
436. Saṁghabhadra (TD 29, p. 727a13) refutes Vasubandhu.
Here the Santrantika (=Vasubandhu) says: There are some other masters who say that
ṛddhi is samādhi; that the feet of ṛddhi are chanda, etc. These masters should admit that the
bodhipākṣikas are, in their nature, thirteen things, by adding chanda and citta. Furthermore,
they contradict the Sūtra which says: "I explain to you the ṛddhipādas. Ṛddhi, that is to say:
he 'experiences' different ṛddhivisayas . . . ; the pāda, that is to say, the four samādhis of1082 Chapter Six
chanda, etc." The Buddha says that the result of samādhi is ṛddhi, and that the samādhi
engendered by chanda, etc., is pāda.
The criticism [formulated by Vasubandhu] does not hold. For the masters in question
maintain that samādhi is ṛddhi and that it is also ṛddhipāda. If chanda, citta, etc., are called
pāda, this is in order to indicate the four types of samadhi of which they are the cause: one
designates the samādhi, effect, from the name of its cause, chanda, etc. Samādhi is of two
types: that which dominates (pradhānībhavati) in the stage preparatory to the roots of
good; and that which dominates in the state of fullness (nișpatti) of the said roots. The first
is called ṛddhipăda, the second ṛddhi. This is why the Sūtra says: “Samādhi is called
chandasamādhi when the Bhikṣu obtains it under the predominating influence (adhipatim
kṛtvā) of chanda”: this refers to the samadhi of the preparatory stage. The Sūtra then says:
"He produces chanda . . . he masters, he fixes his mind for the non-production of bad
dharmas . . ." (Anguttara, i.39): this refers to the samadhi of the stage of fullness of the
roots of good. The expression cittaṁ pragṛhṇāti indicates prajñā; the expression cittam
praṇidadhāti indicates samādhi, for this is the characteristic of the samādhi of mastering
and fixing. The Sūtra says moreover:. . .
437. Vyākhyā: tadvipakṣabhūtair antarā samudācārād indriyāṇy avamṛdyante /na tv evam
balāni.
Aśräddhya is opposed to fraddhā; kausīdya to viryā; muṣitasmṛtitā to smṛti; vikṣepa to
samādhi; asaṁprajanya to prajñā.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 726b16. Indriyas, because they produce good dharmas; balas, because
they break up bad dharmas; indriyas, because they can be moved, etc.
Atthasālini, 124: akampiyaṭṭhena balam veditabbam... assaddhiye na kampatīti
saddhābalam, kosajje na kampatīti viriyabalam . . . (The list and the explanations do not
agree, moreover, with the Abhidharma).
438. Vyākhyā: ādikārmikanirvedhabhāgīyeṣv iti pañcāvasthā ima uktāḥ / bhāvane darśane
ceti dve avasthe iti saptasv avasthāsu sapta vargā yathākramaṁ prabhāvyante vyavasthā-
pyante pradhānīkriyante vā.
If we were to follow the version of Paramārtha word for word, we would have
adikprabbavitab (?) bhāva này ẩm ca dị si ca saptavar gà yatbakramam ||
439. According to Hsüan-tsang: "The smṛtyupasthānas exists in the beginning state,
because prajñā, capable of knowing the body, etc., is essential to it."
440. After the Head, one no longer cuts off the roots of good (vi.23a). The samādhis, when
one is in this state, become the support of success (samṛddher āśrayībhavanti). This is why
the ṛddhipādas are placed in the Head.
441. Mārga in the world consists (prabhāvita) of progress: mārga, “because one goes by
means of the marga": or rather “because it goes." As one says: this path (panthan) goes to
Pāṭaliputra. Darśanamārga is more characterized (prabhāvita) by progress than is
bhāvanāmārga, because it goes quickly (tasyāśugāmitvāt). One who possesses it (tadvān)
also goes quickly by means of it: one goes by the bhāvanāmārga during a long period of time,
for it prolongs itself from sphere to sphere.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 497a4. The meaning of "part of the Path" is "searching out" (mäārga)
and "to progress." The Path of Seeing, rapid, without which the mind is interrupted, has the
sense of "joyful progress." The parts of the Path are thus essential to it. The meaning of
"part of Bodhi" is "to understand." These parts are thus the essential parts of the Path of
Meditation which, by its nine stages, repeatedly understands.
442. We can understand either kāmasaṁkalpa, or anubhūtaviṣayasmṛtisaṁkalpa.
Gardhāśrita = tṛṣṇāśrita; Mahāvyutpatti, 245.1145 has gredha.
443. The satipattbānas, Digba, i.290, Majjbima, i.56: sattānam visuddbiya . ; Dīgha,Footnotes 1083
iii.141, dittbinissayanam pabānāya; Anguttara,]iv.457, sikkbādubbalyānam paba này.
444. bhāvanāparipuri = bhavana và paripurib
Compare, rather distant, Majjhima, iii.85.
445. Kośa, i.4la-b. We know through Vasumitra that the schools are not in agreement
whether "worldly” samyagdṛṣṭi exists or not.
446. Paṭisambhidāmagga, ii.160.
447. viii.22.
448. For, says the Vyākhyā, sukhādhigamyaṁ cittaṁ prīņāti netarat.
449. Vyākhyā: samkalpo vitarkaḥ.
450. Paramărtha: "Excepting morality and the preceding two, in three Ārūpyas.”
451. This line is quoted in the Abhisamayālaṁkārāloka which observes: "This rule concerns
the Śrāvakas who are lacking upāyakausalya; but the Bodhisattvas cultivate bhāvanāmārga
in Kāmadhātu."
452. Yaśomitra examines how käyasmṛtyupasthāna is possible in Bhavägra, a problem
neglected, he says, by all the commentators (vyākhyākara). The mind of a being in Bhavägra
can, he says, take for its object the anāsravasaṁvara (iv.13c) of a lower sphere, which is
từ pa
453. We see p. 1033 the meaning of the expression avetyaprasāda.
Vyākhyā: "There are four anetyaprasādas: the avetyaprasāda relating to the Buddha,
those relating to the Dharma and the Samgha, and the precepts dear to the Saints"
(buddhe'vetyaprasādo dharme saṁghe ca āryakāntāni ca śīlāni).
These are the four angas of the Saikṣa (see p. 1033), Dīgha, iii.227, Anguttara, iv.106,
etc.: . . . buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti . . . dhamme ... samghe...;
ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti . . . [Variant with the usage of laymen, Samyutta,
iv.304, where the fourth point becomes: "moral and virtuous (silavanta and kalyāṇad-
hamma) we shall give all that we have of things to give (deyyadhamma).”] Hsüan-tsang:
"The Sūtra says that there are four avetyaprasādas: relating to the Buddha, the Dharma, the
Samgha, and the aryaśīla."
Childers; Majjhima, i.37, Saṁyutta, i.232, v.384, Petavatthu, 48; Avadānaśataka, ii.92,
Aṣṭasāhasrikā, 60; Dharmaskandha, iii. (Takakusu, JPTS, 1905, p. 112); Mahāvyutpatti, 245,
419; Madhyamakavṛtti, 487. Wogihara quotes the expression buddhasāsane aveccappa-
sanna, and the gloss of Haribhadra (ad Aṣṭasāhasrikā, 59): avetyaprasādaḥ = avagamya
gunasambhāvanāpūrvakaḥ prasādaḥ.
454. Hsüan-tsang says: “The Sūtra says that there are four avetyaprasādas: relating to the
Buddha, the Dharma, the Saṁgha, and āryaśīla.” One can say that there is avetyaprasāda
relating to morality, sīla, for prasāda = purity (see below note 459). But Paramārtha and the
Tibetan show that our Karikā should not be understood: obtaining of avetyaprasāda
relating to the precepts and the Dharma . . . ”
455. These three truths are Dharma; they are neither Buddha, nor Saṁgha; therefore the
Seeing of these Truths does not confer the two other prasādas.
456. The Truth of the Path is Buddha and Samgha.
Prasāda in the Buddha is to recognize that he is the Tathāgata, Arhat, the
Samyaksambuddha vidyācaraṇasaṁpanna . . .
The Buddha does not form part of the Samgha (see note ad vii.28); the Bodhisattva and
the Pratyekabuddhas do not form part of the Samgha: for they are above leaving the world
in solitude; there needs be four persons in order to make up a Saṁgha. (According to the
Sung-chu of Yuan-hui).1084 Chapter Six
457. Dharma, in the formula of the refuges, dharmaratna, signifies phaladharma, Nirvāṇa
(iv.32, vii.38).
Here Dharma is the first three Truths; the pure path of the Bodhisattva in the state of
Śaikṣa; the path of the Pratyekabuddha in the states of Saikṣa and Aśaikṣa. The paths of the
Buddha and the frāvakas (Saṁgha) are not included under the term Dharma, for, when one
understands these paths, what is obtained is prasāda with respect to the Buddha and the
Samgha.
Hsüan-tsang translates: The Dharma, the object of prasāda, is twofold: having a general
sense, and a special sense. In the general sense, Dharma is the Four Truths; in the special
sense, Dharma is three Truths plus the paths of the Pratyekabuddha and the Bodhisattva.
Therefore when one sees the Four Truths, one obtains prasāda relating to the Dharma. The
precepts dear to the Aryans come with the Seeing of the Truths.
458. In fact, when one understands the Truth of the Path, one understands that part of the
Dharma which consists of the paths of Pratyeka and of Bodhisattva.
459. Here prasāda signifies “purity,” and not “faith.”
460. The prasāda of the mind is threefold: samyaksambuddha vata bhagavān /
svākhyāto'sya dharmavinayaḥ / supratipanno’sya śrāvakasaṁghaḥ /
461. Samgītiparyāya, section of the ten dharmas. This is the list of the asekhiya dharmas of
Anguttara, v.222 (alluded to in Saṁgutta, iii.83), where samyagjñāna precedes samyagvi-
mukti. The samyagjñāna of Mahāvyutpatti, 199.64 is not a cause.
462. Compare Pațisambhidāmagga, ii. 143.
463. Vyākhyā: adhimokṣaḥ saṁskṛtā vimuktir iti dhātvarthaikatvāt.
For Vasubandhu, adhimokṣa is not deliverance, but is chanda, vīrya, etc., which is
discussed below note 467.
On adhimokṣa, Koſa, ii.24 (English trans. p. 189, where adhimukti is a mistake), viii.30.
464. The two vimukti, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 486a28, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 16c24; Puggalapañ-
ñatti, 27, 35, 62; Mahāvastu, ii.139.6.
On prajñāvimukta, above vi.64a.
Definition of the liberated mind, vii.lld (Hsüan-tsang, vii.18 and following, T. 29, p.
235c.)
The brahmavihāras defined as cetovimutti, Anguttara, i.38, Vibhanga, 87, etc.
The heretics of the Kathāvatthu, iii.4, think that the ascetic is liberated by the dhyāna of
a "deliverance consisting of the disturbance of the defilements” (vikkhambhanavimutti);
thus liberated, the mind, at the moment of the Path, is delivered (liberatur) by a
"deliverance consisting of the cutting off of the defilements" (samucchedavimutti).
465. The Vyākhyā enumerates the five skandhas which correspond to the dhammakkhand-
has of Digha, iii.229, 279, Itivuttaka, 104: sīla, samādhi, paññā, vimutti, vimuttiñāṇadassana.
These are the lokottaraskandhas of Dharmasamgraha, 23, the asamasamāḥ skandhaḥ of
Mahāvyutpatti, 4 (to which according to the Buddhabhūmisūtra there is added the
expression dharmadhātuviśuddhi), which are also called anāsravaskandhas; the jinaskand-
has (rgyal-ba'i phun-po) of the Triglotte.
466. Opinion of Vasubandhu (Vyākhyā).
467. The Sūtra (Samyukta, TD 2, p. 148c17) begins thusly: "Oh Vyāghrabodhayanas! There
are four essential factors of purification: essential factor of the purification of morality,
the essential factor of the purification of absorption . . . of views, . . . of deliverance."
catvārīmāni Vyāghrabodhāyanāḥ parisuddhipradhānāni / katamāni catvāri /
silaparisuddbiprad bà nằm sa madbiparisuddbiprad bà nam distiparisuddbiprad bà nam
vimuktiparisuddhipradhanaṁ ca... katamac ca Vyāghrabodhāyanā vimuktiparifuddhiFootnotes 1085
pradhānam / iha bhikṣo rāgāc cittam viraktam bhavati vimuktam dveṣān mohād viraktam
bhavati vimuktam ity aparipūrṇasya va vimuktiskandhasya paripūraye paripūrṇasya
vānugrahāya yaś chando viryam ...
Three questions, three responses: (1) vimukti is liberation from rāga, etc.; (2)
vimuktiparisuddhi is the paripūri and the anugraha of vimukti; (3) vimuktipariśuddhiprad-
hāna is chanda, etc.
Anguttara. ii.194, where Ananda explains to the Vyagghapajjas the pārisuddhipadhā-
niyangas, presents some variations.
Same text quoted Kośa, viii.1.
468. And the purity of the mind does not differ from the mind, ghṛtamaṇḍasvacchatavat.
469. The 'arising' mind is of the future. On āvaraṇa, āvṛti, Kośa, ii. English trans. p. 223,
vi.64a-b, 65b-d.
470. a. Nyāyānusāra (TD 29, p. 733a8, utilizing Vibhāsā, TD 27, p. 140b25, and quoted by
Saeki, Kośa, xxv, 18a): The Śāstrācāryas (=the masters of the Abhidharma) say: "It is the
detached (virakta) mind which obtains deliverance." The Vibhajyavādins say: “It is the
non-detached (sarāga) mind which obtains deliverance. As one takes away the impurities
from a dirty (samala) vase, and as crystal takes up different colors by reason of the diversity
of the colors of the body which it covers, so too the pure mind, soiled by craving (rāga), etc.,
is called 'endowed with craving' (sarāga) and later becomes again liberated (hou huan
chieb-tuo FUND ). Scripture (āryadeśanā) says that the mind, in its original
nature, is pure (hsin pen hsing ching At¥#· ); sometimes it is defiled by
defilements (klesa), by adventitious dust (āgantuka).” This opinion is not correct, for the
dharmas perish from moment to moment. One does not get rid of the impurities of a vase,
for the impurities, along with the vase, arise from moment to moment.
The Andhakas of the Kathāvatthu, iii.3, are of the same opinion as the Vibhajyavādins:
it is the defiled mind which is delivered from defilement. "As a dirty piece of clothing, being
washed, is freed from the dirt, so to the mind endowed with craving is liberated from this
craving" (sarāgaṁ cittaṁ sarāgato [frequently rāgato] vimuccati.
b. Compare Anguttara, i.10 (i.255, 257, iii. 16): pabhassaram idaṁ bhikkhave cittaṁ taṁ
ca kho āgantukehi upakkilesehi upakkiliṭṭham ….. pabhassaram idaṁ bhikkhave cittaṁ tam
ca kho āgantukehi upakkilesehi vippamuttam. This can be understood: The mind is pure in
and of itself; sometimes it is defiled by adventitious defilements, and sometimes it is freed
from these defilements. The Mahāsāṁghikas (Ekavyavahārikas), according to Vasumitra,
affirm the existence of a "pure mind"; according to the Tibetan version (from which the
Chinese translators deviate, Taisho 49, no. 2032), they make this their ninth asaṁskṛta
(Correct, on this point, the notes on p. 65, 186, of my Nirvāṇa). Kośa, v. English trans. p.
768. Bodhicaryavatāra, ix.106.
Buddhaghosa (Atthasālinī, 140) says that the mind is pure (parisuddhaṭṭhena
pandaram) to the extent that it is the bhaganga, that is to say the "subconscious
life-continuum" of Mrs. Rhys Davids. Any mind, even bad, is pure because it leaves
(nikkhanta) bhavanga. On bhavanga, Visuddhimagga, passim, Compendium, 9, 266,
Nettipakaraṇa, 91, Milinda, 300, sources mentioned and criticized by Mrs. Rhys Davids,
Quest Review, 1917, Oct. p. 16, Buddhist Psychology, 171, 178 (1914), 233 (1924), trans. of
Dhammasangaṇi, 3, 132, 134. Nirvāṇa (1925), 39, 66.
There is a close relationship between the "pure mind" of the Anguttara and the
tathāgatagarbha of the Lanka, which is pure, similar to a jewel covered by impurities, and
which transmigrates, whereas the manas does not transmigrate.
471. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 118b28. A note in Nirvāṇa (1925), p. 162-163.
472. When one wishes to distinguish; but virāga signifies “abandoning.” bhedavivakṣāyām
evam ucyate / abhedavivakṣāyām tu yo virāgas tat prahāṇam apy ucyate.
Opinions differ (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 149b18). For example, for Ghoșaka, prahāṇadhātu1086 Chapter Six
is abandoning of the defilements, virāgadhātu is disconnection from objects, and
nirodhadhātu is the putting down of the burden. For some others, we have, in this order,
abandoning of sensation which is disagreeable, agreeable, and indifferent. Or abandoning, in
this order, of the three sufferings (vi.3), of the Three Dhātus, of the defilements of the
past-present-future. Pārśva understands nirodhadhāatu as the nirodha of the series.
This chapter of the Vibhāṣā quotes the Sūtra where Ananda asks what are the dharmas
that the monk should practice in his meditations in order to be termed a Sthavira. Two
dharmas, śamatha, calm, and vipaśyanā, insight or intelligence; for the mind perfumed by
Samatha can obtain vimukti by means of vipaśyanā. An explanation of the Three Dhātus
follows.
473. See v.60 and following, ii. English trans. p. 281.
474. What he obtains is not abandoning, which has already been realized by a worldly path,
but anāsravā visaṁyogaprāpti, the pure possession of disconnection (vi.46). But the
"detached" ascetic necessarily abandons by means of anvayajñānakṣāntis and anvayajñānas,
since no worldly path bears on Bhavāgra (vi.45c).
475. Nor any longer by means of the ānantaryamārgas of the perfectioning of the faculties,
etc. (vi.61).}VOL. 4
VASUBANDHUI POUSSIN I PRUDEN
ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYAM
AHP
AEDU/MA
KOSA
BHASYAM
OF
VASUBANDHU
TRANSLATED INTO FRENCH BY LOUIS DE LA VALLÉE POUSSIN
ENGLISH VERSION BY LEO M. PRUDENAbhidharmakośabhāṣyam
Volume IVAbhidharmakośabhāṣyam
of Vasubandhu
Volume IV
Translated into French by Louis de La Vallée Poussin
English Version by Leo M. Pruden
ASIAN HUMANITIES PRESS
[An imprint of Jain Publishing Company]
Web Site - www.jainpub.comASIAN HUMANITIES PRESS
Asian Humanities Press offers to the specialist and the general reader alike the best in
new translations of major works and significant original contributions to enhance our
understanding of Asian religions, cultures and thought.
Vasubandhu.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
[Abhidharmakośabhäşya. English]
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam / [translated] by Louis de La Vallée Poussin; English
translation by Leo M. Pruden. Berkeley, Calif.: Asian Humanities Press, 1988-
1990.
4 v.; 23 cm.
Translation of: Abhidharmakośabhāṣya.
Includes bibliographies.
ISBN 0-89581-913-9 (set).
1. Vasubandhu. Abhidharmakośa. 2. Abhidharma. I. La Vallée Poussin,
Louis de, 1869-1938. II. Title.
BQ2682.E5P78 1988
294.3'824-dc19
87-71231
AACR 2 MARC
Copyright 1991 by Asian Humanities Press. All rights reserved. No part of this book may
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the written
permission of Asian Humanities Press except for brief passages quoted in a review.Translator's Introduction
This volume is the fourth and the last volume of an English
translation of Louis de La Vallée Poussin's French translation of
Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam. This volume contains
translations of Chapter VII ("The Knowledges", jñāna-nirdeśa),
Chapter VIII ("The Absorptions", samāpatti-nirdeśa), and Chapter IX
("Refutation of the Pudgala", pudgala-pratişedha). This volume also
contains a full Index to the text of the Kośabhāṣyam, as well as to
significant entries in the Footnotes to the various Chapters.
Chapter VII deals with the type and nature of the Knowledges, and
how they differ from the Patiences and from Seeing; with the
characteristics and aspects of the Ten Knowledges; how the knowledge
of the mind of another takes place; the differences between a defiled
mind and a good or concentrated mind; the role of emptiness and
non-self in the Knowledges; the Path of Meditation; the qualities and
powers that accompany the Knowledge of Destruction, and related to
this, the powers and assurances of a Buddha; the difference between
(ordinary) compassion and the great compassion of a Buddha; the
nature of the Buddha's knowledge, his methods of conversion, and his
supernormal powers (ṛddhi).
Chapter VIII is concerned with dhyana both as a state of
absorption, and as states of existence in the realms of Rūpadhātu and
Ārūpyadhātu. This Chapter discusses dhyāna versus samadhi; whether
rūpa or physical matter exists in Ārūpyadhātu; the origin of physical
matter from the mind; the component parts of each dhyāna; the role
of happiness in the Third Dhyāna; the role and nature of faith; which
absorption can arise after which absorption; the mental object of the
absorptions; the prefatory or threshhold absorptions (sāmantakas),
and the prefatory absorptions as contrasted with dhyānāntara. The
nature of samadhi is discussed with reference to its containing vitarka
and/or vicara; discussed also are the absorptions of emptiness, the
absorption of the absence of characteristics, and the absorption of the
absence of intention; the types of samadhi; the Four Immeasurables(called in other traditions the Four Brahmavihāras); and details
how a beginner should cultivate the visualization of goodwill. This
Chapter concludes with a short discussion on how long the
Saddharma will last, and the definition of the Saddharma as
consisting of agama (the teaching) and adhigama (its cultivation
and realization). Three Kārikās then conclude the basic text of the
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam.
Chapter IX has long been regarded as an appendix to the
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam, since the text of the Ninth Chapter
contains no Kārikās, and its presentation is devoted to a single
theme, that of refuting the idea of a pudgala or soul. Since this
Chapter is quoted or referred to twice (pages 650, 818) in the text
of the Kośabhāṣyam, this work was evidently known to the author
of the Kośabhasyam, and so was perhaps composed prior to
Vasubandhu's composition of the Kośabhasyam (as was perhaps
his Karmasiddhi-prakaraṇa) to answer objections to the non-soul
teaching of the Buddhists.
This Chapter is concerned with refuting the soul (here
pudgala) theories of one sect of Hinayana Buddhism, the
Vātsīputrīyas (also identified with Sāṁmatīyas); later in the
Chapter the author refutes the theories of the Vaiseșikas, one of
the orthodox schools of Hindu Philosophy. In this Chapter,
Vasubandhu concerns himself with explaining memory and
recognition: how does one account for memory and recognition in
the absence of an unchanging substratum to human experience?
The existence of such a substratum becomes the concern of the
Yogācāra school of Mahāyāna Buddhism.
I should like to thank Mr. Ken Johnson for his unstinting work
on the Index of the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam; he has done a fine
job of serving on numerous occasions as my editor and advisor.
Much remains to be done in Kośabhāṣyam studies. At present
the Bangladeshi Bhikkhu, Ven. Lokananda, and I are working on
publishing a Romanized edition of the text of the Kośabhasyam,
and in the compilation of a dictionary to the Sanskrit text of the
work. It would be a great source of joy to see an eventual
translation of Yaśomitra's commentary on the Kośabhasyam, his
Sphutartha-abhidharmakośa-vyakhyā, a work quoted liberally in deLa Vallée Poussin's Footnotes. It will also be necessary someday to
investigate the filiation of Vasubandhu's thought into that of the
Mahāyāna, a task already carried out in many of Kyokuga Saeki's
Footnotes to his edition of the Kusharon, his Kandō-bon Kusharon.
Leo M. Pruden.CONTENT S
Chapter Seven: The Knowledges
I. The Relationship Between the Patiences,
the Knowledges, and Seeing
II. The Characteristics of the Ten Knowledges
A. The Ten Knowledges
1. Pure and Impure Knowledge
2. Conventional Knowledge
3. The Knowledge of the Mind of Another
C.
D.
B. The Knowledge of Destruction and the
Knowledge of Non-Arising
1. How Are They Obtained
2. How Are They Views
How Are There Ten Knowledges?
A Knowledge of the Dharmas and Inferential
Knowledge: Their Influence on Various Spheres.
III. The Aspects of Ten Knowledges
A. The Different Aspects of the Ten Knowledges
B. Pure Knowledge and the Sixteen Aspects
1. Discussion: What is Sarāga Mind?
C. The Sixteen Aspects
IV. The Ten Knowledges: An Analysis
A. Their Natures, Spheres; the Persons
B. The Ten Knowledgfes and the Four
Foundations of Mindfulness
C.
The Spheres of the Ten Knowledges
1. The Ten Knowledges Are Conditioned
by Which Knowledge?
2. The Spheres of the Ten Knowledges
3. The Sphere of Conventional Knowledge
D. The Ten Knowledges and the Ascetic's
Cultivation
1087
1088
1088
1089
1089
1091
1093
1094
1095
1095
1097
1098
1098
1099
1100
1108
1117
1117
1119
1120
1120
1121
1121
1122E. The Ten Knowledges as Innate or
Cultivated Knowledge
1. The Ten Knowledges on the Path of Seeing
2. The Ten Knowledges on the Path of
Meditation
3. The Ten Knowledges in the Stage
of the Asaikṣa
4. The Ten Knowledges in Other Stages
a. Qualities of the Ten Knowledges
5. Innate and Cultivated Pure and Impure
Dharmas; the Meaning of Cultivation
6. The Four Types of Cultivation
a. Six Types of Cultivation:
the Vaibhāṣikas of the West
V. The Eighteen Qualities Unique to a Buddha
What are the Eighteen Qualities?
A.
B. The Ten Powers
1. The Power of the Buddha's Mind
2. The Power of the Buddha's Body
a. Definition of Terms
C. The Four Absence of Fear
D.
The Three Foundations of Mindfulness
E. Great Compassion
F. Do the Buddhas Resemble One Another
G. The Threefold Perfection of the Tathāgatas
1124
1124
1136
b. Refutation: the Vaibhāṣikas of Kaśmir 1136
VI. Qualities the Buddhas Have in Common with
Ordinary Persons and with Saints
A. General Remarks
B. Qualities the Buddhas Have in Common
with Saints
1. The Samadhi Absence of Contention
2. The Knowledge Resulting from Resolution
a. Does this Knowledge Exist in
Ārūpyadhātu?: Opinion of the
Vaibhāṣikas
1128
1133
1134
1134
1135
1135
1136
1136
1137
1137
1139
1140
1141
1142
1143
1145
1146
1148
1148
1148
1150
1150
11513. The Four Unhindered Knowledges
a. A Variant Order
b. Various Opinions
Footnotes
1154
4. The Fourth Dhyana as Prāntakoţika Dhyana 1155
C. Qualities the Buddhas, Saints, and
Ordinary Persons Have in Common
1. The Six Supernormal Knowledges
a. Discussion: Do These Six
Supernormal Knowledges Exist in
Nonmaterial Spheres
b. How Are the Supernormal
Knowledges Obtained?
c. Moral Quality of the
Supernormal Knowledges
2. The Three Aśaikṣa Wisdom
3. The Three Methods of Conversion
4. The Meaning of Ṛddhi
5. The Results of Ṛddhi
a. Displacement
b. Creation: The Mind Capable of
Creating Fictive Beings
6. Empowerment
7. A Variant List of Rddhi
8. Divine Sight and Divine Hearing
9. Is Rddhi Innate
Chapter Eight: The Absorptions
I. General Introduction
A. The Four Dhyānas
1. Application of the Mind on a Single Object
2. Definition of Dhyana
3. The Moral Value of Dhyāna
4. Characteristics of the Four Dhyānas
B. The Four Arūpyas
1151
1154
Discussion: Is there rūpa in Ārūpyadhātu?
1157
1157
1159
1161
1163
1164
1166
1168
1168
1168
1170
1173
1176
1176
1178
1181
1215
1215
1216
1217
1218
1218
1219
12202.
1. The Names of the Four Ārūpyas
The Parts of the Pure Dhyānas
a. Happiness
b. Faith
c. Joy
3. The Parts of Defiled Dhyāna
a. Disturbed Dhyāna
b. Vedana in the Dhyānas
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
c. Eye Consciousness in the Dhyānas
Acquisition of the Absorptions
What Absorption Arises After
What Absorption?
Many Absorptions
The Objects of the Absorptions
Which Absorptions Destroy
the Defilements?
The Prefatory Absorptions
a. Differences Between the Prefatory
1244
a. Reciprocal Generation of the Absorptions 1248
b. What Beings Manifest How
9. The Three Samadhis
a. Their Moral Value
10. The Four Cultivations of Absorption
11. The Immeasurables
a.
Definition
b. Their Objects
c.
The Spheres in Which They
Are Produced
i. How the Beginner Cultivates
Goodwill
1226
1227
1231
1236
Absorptions and the Intermediate Dhyāna 1254
i. The Categories of
Intermediate Dhyāna
12. The Deliverances
1237
1238
1239
1239
1240
1241
a.
In Ārūpyadhātu
b. The Absorption of Extinction
C.
Their Objects
1250
1251
1252
1253
1255
1256
1258
1262
1264
1265
1265
1267
1269
1271
1271
1273
1274d. The Deliverances and the
Third Dhyana
13.
The Dominent Ayatanas
14. The All-Encompassing Ayatanas
15. How an Absorption Arises
II. Concluding Remarks
B.
C.
Footnotes
A. The Nature of the Good Law
1. Its Duration
This Present Treatise
Concluding Stanzas
Chapter IX: Refutation of the pudgala
I. General Statements
II. Refutation of the Vātsīputriya Theories
A. Refutations from Reasoning
1. The Provisional Existence of the Pudgala
a. Discussion: The Relationship of
B. Refutations from Scripture
1. Synonyms
2. Scriptural Quotations
a, Discussion: The Authority of Texts
Fire and Fuel
1315
2.
The Pudgala as the Totality of the Skandhas 1318
The Support of the Pudgala
3.
1318
4. The Pudgala as Cognized by the Vijñāna
1318
1321
1324
1324
1324
1326
1327
C. Refutation of Vätsiputriya Arguments
"}
1. "In the past, I was. . .'
a. Discussion: The Omniscience of
1275
1276
1277
1279
the Buddha
2.
The Bearer of the Burden
3.
Apparitional Beings
4. A Single Self or Soul
5. Unanswerable Questions
1281
1281
1281
1282
1282
1283
1313
1314
1314
1315
1327
1328
1330
1330
13326.
7.
8. "Then I was..."
A False Opinion
A Subject that Transmigrates
9. Three Wrong Beliefs
10.
Memory and Recognition
Definition of Memory
a.
b.
To Whom Does Memory Belong?
III. Refutation of the Soul Theory of the Grammarians
A. General Arguments and their Refutation
B. Specific Refutations
1.
3.
4.
What Does it Signify to Say "A Person
Walks"?
2. How Consciousness Knows an Object
The Non-determined Sequence of
3.
Consciousnesses
4. Conclusion
IV. Refutation of the Soul Theories of the Vaiśeşikas
A. General Arguments and their Refutations
B. Specific Refutations
1. A Substrate
2.
The Result of Action
a. Cause of the Idea of "I"
b. Definition of Pleasure and Pain
c. Who Has Pain or Pleasure?
d. The Agent of Action
e. Past Causes and Future Results
Cause and Result in Non-Human Life: A
Seed and Its Fruit
A Retributive Result versus an
Out-flowing Result
a. Discussion: Why a New
Retribution is not Generated
from the Retributive Result
5. Concluding Statements
Preliminary Notes
Footnotes
Index
1336
1337
1337
1338
1339
1339
1341
1342
1342
1342
1342
1343
1344
1345
1346
1346
1346
1348
1349
1350
1350
1350
1351
1352
1352
1354
1354
1355
1356
1359
1381CHAPTER SEVEN
***Footnotes 1181
1. This Chapter is divided into two parts. The first deals with 1. the distinction between
patience (kṣānti), knowledge (jñāna), and seeing (dṛs) (Kārikā 1); 2. the characteristics of
the ten knowledges (2-9); 3. the aspects of the ten knowledges (10-13b); 4. different
questions, praśnanirdeśa (13c-27); and the second deals with the qualities (guna) which
consist of knowledge (jñānamaya (28-55). (This is according to the gloss of the Japanese
editor, Kyokuga Saeki.)
Among Vasubandhu's sources, the Prakaraṇapāda, xiii. 10, fol.14: definition of the ten
jñānas; darśana which is not jñāna; object of the jñānas (14b11); reciprocal inclusion (15a3);
why? (15a8); which jñāna is sāsrava, anāsrava, sāsravapratyaya, saṁskṛta, etc. Pāļi sources,
Samyutta, ii.57, Dīgha iii.226-227. Paṭisambhidāmagga, Vibhanga, 306-344, especially 328.
2. On jñānadarśana, see vii. 27c. Prajñā (that is to say the caitta described in ii.24 which
accompanies all minds) is either pure (anāsrava) or impure (sāsrava).
i. Pure, prajñā is "knowledge" (jñāna) or "patience" (kṣānti).
a. “Knowledge” signifies a consciousness of certitude, free from doubt (niścita; jñānaṁ
niścitarūpeṇa utpadyate).
Knowledge can be "pure contemplation" (paratyavekṣaṇamātra; below note 6); such as
ksṣyajñāna and anutpādajñāna (vi.67a-b).
It can be accompanied by saṁtīraṇa, by parimārgaṇāśaya; in other words, it can be an
upanidhyānapūrvaka manasikāra (i.41c- d): in this case it is darśana a "view" or seeing. This
knowledge includes the desire to instruct itself; it is preceded by reflection; let us say then
that it is "consideration" or examination. Nevertherless the Western equivalents are
insufficient, for they do not refer to a "discursive" consciousness, but to a consciousness
which can last only one moment, which is produced in the states of absorption free from
vitarka and vicāra.
b. Patience is not free from doubt, since it has for its end the production of knowledge
through the expulsion of doubt. It does not arise as certitude (niścaya), but as "consent"
(kşamaṇarūpeṇa). Perhaps we can render this nuance by saying that the ascetic, in the state
of patience, thinks, “The dharmas are doubtless transitory . . .," and, in the state of
knowledge, "The dharmas are transitory . . ." The pure patiences are thus śaikṣī samyagdṛṣṭi
(i.4a). They are produced in fact in the course of the Path of Seeing and as a consequence
they belong to the Saiksa. And they are darfana.
ii. Impure, prajñā is associated either with the five sense consciousnesses (eye
consciousness, etc.), or with the mental consciousness (manovijñāna).
In the first case, it is knowledge (jñāna); it is never “seeing.”
In the second case, it is knowledge (saṁvṛtijñāna, vii.2b); and it is “seeing": a. when it is
bound to bad opinions (satkāyadṛṣșți, etc., i.41a), b. when it is good (kuśala), that is to say
associated with right views (samyagdṛṣṭi). However it happens that it is, improperly,
termed "patience": the third nirvedhabhāgīya (vi.18c) is in fact a "knowledge”, even though
it is termed "patience."
3. Prakaraṇa (xxiii.10, 10b3) quoted in the Vyākhyā ad vii.7.
4. saṁtīraṇātmakatvāt = upanidhyānasvabhāvatvāt (Kofa i.41; below note 6 and viii.1).
The impure kşāntis (for example vi. 18c) are jñāna, or more precisely saṁvṛtijñāna (vii.
note 40). Vyakhyā: amalā eva kṣāntayo na jñānam ity avadhāraṇāt sāsravāḥ kṣāntayo
jñānam ity uktaṁ bhavati.
5. See vii.4b. Dhī = prajñā, dṛś = dṛṣṭi = darśana. The prajñā or consciousness which consists
of the knowledge of the destruction of the defilements (kṣayajñāna), of the knowledge of no
new arising of the defilements (anutpādajñāna), is not dṛṣṭi, or darśana.
6. As long as the ascetic has not done what he should do (kṛtakṛtya), he reflects1182 Chapter Seven
(dhyāyati), he inquires (parimārgayati) into the subject of the Truths. When he has done
that which he should have done, he only contemplates (pratyavekṣaṇamātra) the Suffering
which is known, etc., and he no longer inquires. [Compare Samantapāsādikā, 168, Milinda
338 (note trans. ii. p. 240), paccavekkhaṇañāna].
7. Hsüan-tsang here enumerates the ten jñānas: saṁvṛti, dharma, anvaya, duḥkha,
samudaya, nirodha, mārga, paracitta, kṣaya, and anutpādajñāna; an enumeration which, in
the original, is given later on page 12. This is not the order of the Sästra, below note 32.
8. See vii.3a, 7a, 8, 10b, 12a-b, 18c, 20c-21. Vyākhyā: saṁvṛtau bhavaṁ sāṁvṛtam, and
below: svabhāvataḥ saṁvṛtir jñānaṁ saṁvṛtau vā jñānaṁ saṁvṛtijñānam.
See below vii.21.
The Madhyamikas distinguish between lokasamvṛtijñāna and yogisaṁvṛtijñāna (see for
example Bodhicaryāvatāra ix.2). The latter corresponds to the laukika jñāna pṛṣṭhalabdh,
Kośa, vi. trans. p. 141-2; and vii.12a-b (pṛṣṭhaja), 20c.
9. Samvṛtisadvastu, vi.4; Sūtrālaṁkāra, i.12, Kathāvatthu, v.6.
10. Pure jñāna is the consciousness of the general characteristics of the dharmas; it is called
dharmajñāna when it bears on the dharmas of Kāmadhātu, anvayajñāna when it bears on
the dharmas of the two higher Dhātus, vi.26.
11. The Andhakas (Kathāvatthu, v.6) say: saṁmutiñāṇaṁ pi saccārammaṇam eva:
Conventional knowledge has for its object only the Truths (according to Aung and
Rhys-Davids).
12. See vi.44d, 50a, vii.1, 7, 12a-b.
13. Paramārtha: "when they are not by nature aśaikṣi samyagdṛṣṭi.” We have seen (vi.50d)
that all the Arhats possess "correct view proper to the Aśaikṣas”; this samyagdṛṣṭi is by its
nature darśana; it consists of dharmajñāna and anvayajñāna.
14. Kṣayajñāna and anutpādajñāna necessarily have Bhavāgra from whence the Arhat is
about to deliver himself for their object. When a person dies from a poisoned wound, the
poison, after having spread over all the body, concentrates itself, at the moment of death, in
the wound; in this same way the ascetic's jñāna concentrates itself on the object to be
abandoned, namely the skandhas of Bhavägra; it bears on Suffering (yena pidyate) and its
Arising.
15. Vyākhyā: duḥkhākārair anityādibhiḥ/ samudayākārair vā hetvādibhiḥ . . . Paramārtha:
"under six aspects of duḥkha and samudaya (Gloss of the Japanese editor: anitya, duḥkha,
hetu samudaya, prabhava, pratyaya: two aspects of suffering, four aspects of its arising. See
below vii. 12a-b, which justifies the correction of Hsüan-tsang).
16. The consciousness of another's mind, in principle, is conventional knowledge,
saṁvṛtijñāna. But when another's mind is a pure mind, that is to say a mind forming part of
the pure path (darśanamārga or bhāvanāmārga), the consciousness which I have of this
mind should be pure; it embraces mārgajñāna, pure knowledge relative to the Path; the
following margajñāna which is relative to Kāmadhātu or to the higher spheres is either a
dharmajñāna or an anvayajñāna. Therefore the knowledge of the mind of another
(paracittavid) contains four jñānas.
17. See vii.11a-d and the Balas, Abhijñās, etc.
18. The text has: Paracittajñāna by the lower does not know the higher: it does not know, by
the Anāgāmin path, the path of the Arhat ...
19. He begins the preparatory cultivations from the time that he sees that the ascetic is
about to enter into darśanamārga; this cultivation is accomplished when he sees the mind of
another occupied in the duḥkha of Kāmadhātu, in duḥkha as part of dharmajñāna.Footnotes 1183
20. On the paracittajñāna of the Pratyekabuddhas, see Vibhāṣā TD 27, p. 515a18, p. 515c7,
and elsewhere. Four opinions according to Samghabhadra, namely the two opinions
mentioned by Vasubandhu, and also: “The Fratyekabuddha knows moments 1, 2, 8, 14”,
"The Pratyekabuddha knows moments 1, 2, 11 and 12." The third opinion is the correct
one: for if he knows moment 8, it is because his preparatory cultivation with its
consciousness as part of anvayajñāna lasts only 5 moments; thus during moments 9-13 he
could prepare himself for the consciousness of moment 14.
21. Nettippakaraṇa, 15: khīņā me jātīti idaṁ khaye ñāṇaṁ nāparaṁ itthattāyā ti pajānāti
idam anuppäāde ñāņaṁ.
22. Paramartha, “According to the Abhidharma." This is the text of the Prakaraṇa, TD 26,
p. 694a8 (Hsüan-tsang's translation); see also Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 1021c.
23. Omitted by Paramārtha; given by the Prakaraṇa and Hsüan-tsang.
24. The Vyākhyā explains tad upādāya as tat puraskṛtya. See p. 1108.
Hsüan-tsang translates tad upādāya as yu-tz'u
, "by reason of this" (Gloss of the
editor: "the jñāna which grasps these aspects: Suffering is known . . ."); Paramārtha has
i-tz'u- i ¼H “taking this meaning into consideration"; the Prakaraṇa has
yu-tz'u-erh-ch'i ame
25. We have, Nettippakaraṇa, 54: cakkhu, vijjā, buddhi, bhūri, medhā, aloka. Compare Kośa,
vi.54d.
26. In fact pure jñāna bears on duḥkha, on the dharmas and their general characteristics, and
not on a "self" knowing the duḥkha, a self which implies the formula duḥkham me
parijñātam. All knowledge which envisions a “self” is saṁvṛtijñāna, conventional, impure
knowledge.
27. The specific (viseșa) characteristic of the two pure jñānas, which are nirvikalpa, is
known by inference (anumīyate) by reason of the two samvṛtijñānas which are their
outflowing (nisyanda). Below vii. 12a-b.
28. According to the gloss of the Japanese editor: pāścāṭyaśramaṇasautrāntikādayaḥ.
According to these masters, there are some pure aspects outside of the sixteen recognized by
the Vaibhāṣikas (see below vii.12c).
29. See ii. trans. p. 263, iv. trans. p. 701.
30. The Sastra is quoted in the Vyākhyā: yat tāvaj jñānam darśanam api tat/ syāt tu
darśanam na jñānam aṣṭāv ābhisamayāntikāḥ kṣāntayaḥ. According to the note of the
Japanese, the Jñanaprasthana, TD 26, p. 957c2, and the Prakaraṇapada, TD 26, p. 694c5.
31. Paramartha adds: "Furthermore, in order to indicate that the darśanas here differ from
the drstis discussed above."
32. Same order in the Prakaranapada, TD 26, p. 693c22. The order differs in Hsüan-tsang
(above note 7) and Mahāvyutpatti, 57.
33. This question is absent in Paramārtha and in the original. The original has tatra . . .
"Among these jñānas, saṁvṛtijñāna constitutes . . ."
34. Vyākhyā: saṁvṛtijñānaṁ saṁvṛtijñānam eva svabhavāsaṁgrahataḥ/ ekasya ca
paracittajñanasya bhäga ekadeśaḥ/.
35. The part which presents the aspect “Duḥkha is known by me . . .”
36. The Vyākhyā does not give the Sastra's definition. Prakaraṇapada, TD 26, P.
694a3:
lokasamvṛtijñānaṁ katamat/ sāsravā prajñā.1184 Chapter Seven
37. Definition of the Sastra, quoted in the Vyakhyā and which corresponds to Prakarana,
TD 26. P. 693c23:
dharmajñānaṁ katamat/ kāmapratisamyukteșu saṁskāreṣu yad anāsravaṁ jñānam/
kāmapratisamyuktānāṁ saṁskārāṇāṁ hetau yad anāstravaṁ jñānam/ kāmapratisamyuk-
tānāṁ saṁskārāṇāṁ nirodhe yad anāsravam jñānam/ kamapratisamyuktānāṁ saṁskā-
rāṇāṁ prahāṇāya mārge yad anāsravaṁ jñānam idam ucyate dharmajñānam/ api khalu
dharmajñāne dharmajñānabhūmau ca yad anāsravaṁ jñānam idam ucyate dharmajñānam.
anvayajñānam katamat/ rūpārūpyapratisaṁyukteṣu saṁskāreṣu yad anāsravam jñānam . . .
See vi.26, anvetīty anvayajñāna.
38. Correct sāsravahetuka vi, note 11, line 11.
39. Vyākhyā:nirodhamārgas hy adhātupatitau/ tāv adharāv api na hīnau vyavasthāpyete/
duḥkhasamudayasatye tv adharabhūmike nihine/ na tadālambanaṁ dharmajñānaṁ
rūpārūpyadhātupratipakṣa ity avagantavyam. Nirodha and märga do not form part of the
Dhātus. To consider nirodha with respect to Kāmadhātu (nirodhe dharmajñāna) is to also
combat the klesas of the higher spheres.
In the state of darśanamārga, it is the anvayadharmakṣāntis which expell the anusayas of
the higher spheres.
40. Vyākhyā: şodaśākāram uṣmagatādiṣu/ svasāmānyalakṣaṇādigrahaṇād iti svalakṣaṇagra-
haṇāt sāmānyalakṣaṇagrahaṇāc ca/ ādiśabdena bhuṁkṣva tiṣṭha gacchety evamākāraṁ ca/
na hy ete svalakṣaṇākārāḥ kiṁ tarhy evamākārā eva.
In the uşmagatas, etc. (vi.17c), saṁvṛtijñāna grasps the sixteen aspects of the Truths.
Samvṛtijñāna grasps their general characteristics (for example, impermanence), their
unique characteristics (for example, the specific characteristic of rūpa); and it also grasps
the aspect which is expressed by the words "Eat! Go! . . .": such a saṁvṛtijñāna does not
have for its aspect a unique characteristic, and one can only say that it is evamākāra, “of such
an aspect."
41. According to Paramartha: svasvasatyākārataś catuṣṭayam.
42. Paramartha: paramanojñānam api tathāmalam. Cetopariyaye ñāṇa or paricce ñāņa
(=paracittajñāna) is not sammatiñāṇa (Vibhanga, 330). The Andhakas think that it bears
solely on the mind, Kathāvatthu, v.7, and wrongly maintain that a Śrāvaka can, through this
ñāṇa, know when others attain a result, v.10.
43. See note 42.
44. See note 42.
45. The Vyākhyā quotes the Sūtra: sarāgaṁ cittaṁ sarāgaṁ cittam iti yathābhūtaṁ
prajānāti/ vigatarāgaṁ cittam vigatarāgaṁ cittam iti yathābhūtaṁ prajānāti/ yathā
sarāgaṁ vigatarāgam evaṁ sadveșaṁ vigatadveșaṁ samohaṁ vigatamohaṁ saṁkṣiptam
viksiptam līnam pragṛhitam uddhatam anuddhatam avyupaśāntaṁ, vyupaśāntam
asamāhitaṁ samāhitam abhāvitaṁ bhāvitam avimuktam vimuktam iti yathābhūtaṁ
prajānāti.
According to the glosses of the Bhāṣya, one should add the two pairs amahadgata and
mahadgata, sa-uttara and anuttara before avyupaśānta: in all twelve pairs. However these
two pairs are missing in the Sūtra quoted in the Vijñānakāya (TD 26, p. 534a1-a5) and in
the edition of the Sūtra quoted by the Vyākhyā below vii.42a-d.
According to Saeki, the list of the Ekottara (TD 2, p. 776b20) includes some eleven
parts, that of the Madhyama (TD 1, p. 553b19) has ten, by omitting uddhata-anuddhata and
avyupaśānta-vyupaśānta, and by adding sadoṣa-adoșa; that of the Samyukta (TD 2, p. 150a6)
has ten pairs.
Păli sources, for example Samyutta, v. 265, Anguttara, iv.32, Vibhanga, 329,
Visuddhimagga, 410 (whose explanation diverge from those of the Abhidharma). We have1
Footnotes 1185
only eight pairs: sarāga-vitarāga, sadosa-vītadosa, samoha-vītamoha, saṁkhitta-vikkhitta,
mahaggata-amahaggata, sauttara-anuttara, asamāhita-samāhita, and avimutta-vimutta.
46. Vyākhyā: yathā yadā vastram iti paricchinnākāraṁ vijñānam utpadyate na tadā malam
grhṇāti and vice versa. See i, trans. p. 67.
47. That is to say "associated with rāga, rāgasaṁprayukta. All this paragraph is according to
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 950a24, quoted by Saeki, xxvi.8a.
48. These two explanations will be commented upon and refuted above page 1105 and
following.
49. That is to say any mind defiled (kliṣṭa) but not associated with rāga; any neutral mind;
any good (kufala) worldly (laukika) mind. The supramundane mind, a mind forming part of
the Path, is not säsrava. See page 1105 line 14.
50. There are three opinions.
First masters: A mind associated with rāga is sarāga; a mind opposed to rāga is
vigataraga.
Second masters: A mind united with rāga, which can be understood in two ways, as
above note 49, is sarāga.
Third masters: A mind associated with rāga is sarāga; a mind not associated with rāga is
vigataraga.
According to the Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 950a24 and following), the second opinion is the
best one. Vasubandhu adopts the third opinion.
51. Paramārtha: “because its object is small.”
52. In the Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 950c8), lüeh ("abbreviated, reduced"), in Hsüan-tsang,
chü
("concentrated").
53. Ibid. an atilina mind is kosajjasahagata, kosajjasaṁpayutta.
54. Ibid. The atipaggahita mind is uddhaccasahagata uddhaccasampayutta. In Divya,
pragrhita = "elevated, high” (as a mountain palace, etc.).
55. The "great person" par excellence is the Buddha. This paragraph is according to the
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 950c20: The defiled mind is small because it is cultivated (sevita) by a
svalpajana (?hsiao-sheng, "a small person"); the good mind is great because it is
cultivated by a mahājana.
Objection: Do we not see that an immeasurable number of beings cultivates the bad, that
a small number of beings cultivates the good? How can one say that the defiled mind is
cultivated by svalpajana?
We do not say "small" because the category is small in number; that which has few pure
dharmas is called small.
56. Bhāvanā = pratilambha, acquisition. According to the principle: kufalasaṁskṛtā dharmā
bhāvayitavyāḥ (iv.127c). “These are the good saṁskṛta dharmas which one acquires in a
future state." See below vii.25d.
57. Paramārtha: “past and future”.
58. On sa-uttara, iv.127d, v. trans. p. 818.
59. It is not released when it is good-impure (kusalasāsrava) and when it arises in a series
where the kleśas have not been cut off. On deliverance of the mind, see vi.76c.
60. For saṁkşipta, Paramārtha has lüeh,
Paramartha: she
Hsüan-tsang, chü;samnirodha,
(=samgraha), ch'ih # (dhar), Hsüan-tsang: chih I‡ (śamatha).1186 Chapter Seven
Saeki observes that, according to the Sautrāntikas, vipaśyana and śamatha are excluded.
Saṁyutta, v.279: katamaṁ ca bhikkhave ajjhattaṁ saṁkhittaṁ cittam/ yaṁ bhikkhave
cittaṁ thīnamiddhasahagataṁ thinamiddhasampayuttam/ idam vuccati …../ katamaṁ ca ……..
bahiddhā vikkhittaṁ cittam/ yaṁ . . . cittaṁ bāhiddhā pañca guṇe ārabbha anuvikkhittam
anuvisaṭam/ idam vuccati ...
61. Hsüan-tsang translates: “In fact we do not admit (pu-hsü T = na pratijñāyate)
that a defiled mind, associated with langour, is distracted." The same for Paramartha: "We
do not establish (pu-li √ )….”
Vyākhyā: kim iti kṛtvā vikṣiptatvam atra na pratijñāyate/ kim middhasahagate citte
vikṣiptatvaṁ nāstīti na pratijñāyate āhosvid vidyamānam api vikṣiptatvaṁ saṁkṣiptatvenā-
vasthāpitatvān na pratijñāyate/ ubhayathāpi vyācakṣate/ kecid vyācakṣate/ middhasahaga-
tāt kliṣṭād yad anyat kliṣṭaṁ tad vikṣiptaṁ pratijñāyate middhasahagataṁ tu kliṣṭam
akliṣṭaṁ vāvišeṣeṇa saṁkṣiptam eveti/ apare punar vyācakṣate/ yan middhasaṁyuktaṁ tat
saṁkṣiptam eva na vikṣiptam/ yat tu viṣayeṣu visṛtaṁ tad eva vikṣiptam ity ato'tra
middhasamprayukte citte [vikṣiptatvaṁ] na pratijñāyate.
62. Vyākhyā: abuddhokyam abhidharmaśāstram ity abhiprāyaḥ. Compare Kofa, i3, iii.32.
63. The defilement, kliṣṭatva, of the first minds is not differentiated: it consists of
association, samprayoga, with the kleśas which are found in all defiled minds; the goodness,
kusalatva, of the second minds consists of association with the dharmas which are found in
all good minds, ii.25, 26.
Vyākhyā: sarvāṇi tāni kliṣṭāny uktānīti/ kliṣṭatvalakṣaṇam eṣāṁ vikṣiptādīnām
avimuktāntānam/ Kliṣṭatvam punaḥ kleśamahābhūmikaiḥ saṁprayogaḥ/ sam
ksiptapragrhītādīnāṁ cābhinnalakṣaṇavacanān nārthavićeșa ukto bhavati.../ kusalatvam
eşām abhinnam/ kim punaḥ kuśalatvam/ kuśalamahābhūmikaiḥ saṁprayogaḥ.
"
64. Vyākhyā: sūtre hi styānamiddhasahagataṁ saṁkṣiptam uktam/ styānayogena yat
kliṣṭaṁ middhasaṁyuktaṁ tat saṁkṣiptaṁ na kuśalaṁ styānasya kleśamahābhūmikatvāt.
65. The Vaibhāṣikas are of the opinion that: yad eva līnaṁ tad evoddhatam, “a līna mind is
an uddhata mind.” We draw this conclusion from their definition: līnaṁ cittaṁ kliṣṭaṁ
kausidyasamprayogāt; uddataṁ cittam kliṣṭaṁ auddhatyasamprayogāt. (Below note 70, for
another version).
66. If līna and uddhata were identical, the Sūtra would say: "When the mind is līna it is not
the time to cultivate praśrabdhi ... prīti. When the mind is uddhata it is not the time to
cultivate praśrabdhi . . . prīti.” Or rather: “When the mind is līna or uddhata it is not the
time to cultivate praśrabdhi... prīti."
67. The cultivation of the seven parts of Bodhi is simultaneous.
68. With regard to smrti, the Blessed one said: smṛtim khalv ahaṁ sarvatragatāṁ vadāmi.
69. Hsüan-tsang: “But we are not in contradiction with the Sūtra! Even though a defiled
mind is both līna and uddhata, the mind in which kausīdya predominates is termed līna in
the Sūtra; the one in which auddhatya predominates is called uddhata in the Sūtra. But,
considering their constant association, I say that they are one in nature."
70. A defiled mind is līna through association with kausīdya; a defiled mind is uddhata
through association with auddhatya. Compare ii, trans. p. 194.
71. Vyākhyā: Ācārya āha nābhiprāyikaṁ yāvat sūtre tu nāyam abhiprāya iti.
72. A Śaikṣa has, at the present time, a pure mind, for example the thought of
impermanence; but there remains in him the possession of the rāga of Kāmadhātu if he is
not an Anägāmin ...
73. Anuśayānarāgālambanatvāt, see v.17.Footnotes 1187
74. The thoughts of the Arhat which form part of the Arhat are never impure, for these
thoughts are pure by definition and are not the object of the "active" defilements of another,
v.18a-b; but these conventional thoughts (samvṛtijñāna), like his body, are impure (säsrava)
in the sense that the defilements of another can become active with respect to them (i.4b).
See viii.25c.
We observe that Paramārtha translates very clearly: "If a thought is sarāga by the fact
that it grasps rāga as its object; . . . yuan yü wei ching chieh
**T
75. The second masters, above note 50.
76. "Even though they have a real thing for their object."
77. See above page 1094 line 19.
78. See above page 1094 line 11.
79. "Arising is extinguished by me": that is to say: arising is abandoned; this is to see the
Truth of Arising under four aspects (vii.13a); "The religious life is cultivated": four aspects
of the Path; "That which should be done is done": four aspects of Extinction; "I do not see
any
further existence": two aspects of the Truth of Suffering, impermanence and suffering.
Among the commentaries on this fourfold formula, Samantapāsādikā, i.168. Some remarks,
of which I should like to be more confident, in Nirvana (1925), p. 60.
80. The Vyakhya explains: asty etat sthānam ity asty etal lakṣaṇam ity arthaḥ/ asty etad
vastv ity ayam betur ity arthaḥ/yogavihitato vijānīyād ity aviparītato vijānīyād ity arthah/.
According to Saeki, this is an excerpt from the Vijñānakāya, TD 26, p. 559c29 and p.
565a16. This formula and the formula of wrong views (page 1109 line 20) are repeated to
repletion (with some variants) in the Vijñānakāya, on the subject of the multiple types of
thoughts: "Does a thought belonging to Kāmadhātu know 1. the dharmas of Kāmadhātu, 2.
the dharmas of Rūpadhātu, 3. the dharmas of Ārūpyadhātu, 4. the dharmas not included in
the Dhātus, 5. the dharmas of Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu . . .?” This thought is good, bad,
neutral, to be abandoned through the Seeing of Suffering, etc. The way in which a thought
sees these different dharmas depends on its nature and on the nature of these dharmas.
I do not find the passage where the Vijñānakāya explains the manner in which a
thought "not included in the Dhātus" sees the dharmas of Kāmadhātu. But it explains itself
with respect to the thoughts of the Śaikṣa and the Aśaikṣa (which are two types of thoughts
not included in the Dhātus), p. 565a16. Its text is identical to that quoted by Vasubandhu,
with the difference that the formula asty etat sthānam asty etad vastu is preceded by the
words asty eso hetuḥ (?), asty eṣa utpāda (?).
The mind of the Saikṣa or Asaikṣa only knows the dharmas of Kāmadhātu under the
aspects of the first two truths (anitya . . . pratyayatas); a good mind of Kāmadhātu however
knows the dharmas under the aspects that Vasubandhu has specified (vi.49d) as
characteristics of the "worldly path": audārikatas, duḥkhilatas, āvaraṇatas, and even salyatas,
etc.
81. The Seeing of the Truths at least partially dispells rāga, dveșa, māna, and moha. A
thought to be abandoned through the Seeing of the Truths would contain rāga, etc.; the text
therefore says rajyeta, etc. This thought is not free of satkāyadṛṣṭi, so it considers the
dharmas as ātman and ātmīya; it is not free of antaghrāhadṛṣṭi, and so considers the
dharmas as destined to perish (uccheda) or as eternal (śāśvata) …..
We have this formula throughout the Vijñānakāya, TD 26, p. 559c29, p. 563b20, p.
578b8, and elsewhere.
82. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 408c9, and the Samyuktābhidharmahṛdaya, TD 28, p. 918a19.
The akāras of the Vimokṣamukhas, viii.24.1188 Chapter Seven
The specification of the ākāras of the Abhidharma are not found in the Abhidhamma
(see for example Pațisambhidāmagga, i.107, 118, 241, Visuddhi, 494); it is not canonical:
Anguttara, i.38 (list of saññās), and iv.422 where the ascetic considers the Amatādhātu as
fanta, panīta, etc., and the things of his stage as dukkha, roga, gaṇḍa, etc. We have seen
(vi.49), the ākāras of the worldly path: we have to observe that Vasubandhu gets his
inspiration from the Vijñānakāya, fol. 59b, line 18 and elsewhere.
83. It results from this that abhisamaya is anupūrva, vi.27.
84. On the meaning of märga and pratipad, vi.65b-d, 66a, vii.28c.
85. See Samyutta, iii.66, for variants.
86. Compare v.27, trans. p. 820.
87. Compare vi.60a.
88. Hsüan-tsang: "going, entering into the city of Nirvāṇa." Compare vi68: pratipan
nirvāṇapratipādanāt.
89. These explanations are according to the glosses and the context. Vyākhyā: chandamū-
lakā iti chandahetukā ity arthaḥ, tṛṣṇāparyāya iha chandaḥ. chandasamudayā iti
chandasamutkşamā (?) ity arthaḥ (read samutthānā?). chandajātīyā iti chandapratyayā ity
arthaḥ.
i,
Paramārtha translates jätiya by sheng , "to arise," and prabhava by yu , bhava,
"existence"; Hsüan-tsang has respectively lei , "species," and sheng , "to arise."
Samyutta, iii.100, Majjbima, iii.16: pancupadanakkbandbà kim mūlaka ...cbandamilaka.
In another context, Anguttara iv.400: taṇhāmülaka.
We have Pațisambhidāmagga, ii.111: jarāmaraṇaṁ kiṁnidānaṁ kiṁsanudayam
kimjātikaṁ kimpabhavam.
90. Vyākhyā: prabhavaśabdaḥ kevalam paścāt pathitavyah/ ābhidhārmikair iti vākhyādhyā-
hāraḥ/ sūtrānusaraṇam hi kartavyam ity abhiprāyaḥ. The Abhidhārmikas, in the list of the
aspects of this Truth, should place the prabhava aspect after the pratyaya aspect, for one
should be guided by the Sūtra.
91. The five upādānaṣkandhas are thus said to have this type of chanda for their mūla or
hetu.
92. On vīrya, vipāka and prabhāva of a fruit from the earth as food, or of a drug,
Sarvadarśanasaṁgraha, 16.22, Kandalī, 130, Suśruta, i.1 and 40.
93. Paramartha: "According to the Sūtra of the tṛṣṇāvicaritas, there are two groups of five,
and two groups of four." All that follows to page 1114 line 30 is omitted.
Our text is closely related to Anguttara, ii.212, on the eighteen taṇhāvicaritas, where the
readings are uncertain, and to Vibhanga 392-400, where they are more certain but remain
difficult to interpret (Mrs. Rhys Davids had the kindness to communicate to me the text of
the Sammohavinodani and the Manorathapūraṇī; see the following note).
We can compare the list: “Did I exist in the past? . . .,” Kośa, iii.22c, Majjhima, i.8, i.111,
Visuddhimagga, 599, Madhyamakavṛtti, 593.
According to chapter ii trans. p. 282, chanda is relative to the future.
94. The Vibhanga, in place of sad asmīti and asad asmīti has 1. asʼasmīti (=nicco'smi . . .) and
2. sātʼasmīti or sat’asmi (=ucchissāmi na bhaviṣsāmi). The commentary says: atthīti asa/
niccass'etam adhivacanam. Mrs Rhys Davids remarks: as = asa = asan = asanto "bad,"
Jataka, iv.435: satam vā asan (accusitive singular). We would have: “I am bad, I am good."
The Manorathapuraṇī explains sata by sīdati in the sense of anicca: this is the explanation
that we have encountered for satkāya, Kośa, v. p. 873. The commentary of the Vibhanga
understands syām as "Shall I be?"Footnotes 1189
95. On pravṛtti, ii.6. Perhaps vaṭṭūpaccheda = vartmopaccheda that I think we must read in
Mahāvastu, ii.285, iii.200, quoted in Kośa, ii. trans. note 395.
96. According to Saeki, Samyukta 17.16; see also TD 2, p. 66b14.
97. In his shorter treatise, Saṁghabhadra takes into consideration this explanation in order
to prove that the "aspects" are indeed sixteen in number.
98. Vyākhyā: nityaṁ sukham ātmīyam ātmeti ca dṛṣṭiś caritam eṣāṁ ta ime nityasukhātm-
iyatmadṛṣṭicaritāḥ.
99. See v.26, trans. note 98; iii.50a.
100. The meaning of pratyaya is discussed in Kośa, iii.28.
101. 13b-d. On ākāra, see ii.34b-d, trans. note 173.
102. This explanation is satisfactory, for we indeed conceive that prajñā—the discerning
consciousness (ii.24)—grasps the "aspects", that is to say grasps things (ālambana) in a
certain manner (as impermanent, etc.). Furthermore this explanation takes into account the
word ākāra:
One takes the sound ā from ālambana, the final kāra from prakāra, and one has ākāra by
cancelling -lambanagrahaṇapra-.
103. On the dharmas “which have an object", Kośa, ii.34b. Kathāvatthu, ix.3-7; Vibhanga,
428, Dhammasangani, 1185, 1508. The Madhyamakavṛtti, 84, quotes the Agama: sālambanā
dharmāḥ katame/ sarve cittacaittāḥ.
104. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 408c25: There are three systems: 1. Prajñā is ākāra, grāhaka, and
grhya; the cittacaittas associated with prajñā are grāhaka and gṛhya; what is concomitant
(sahabhü) with prajñā and what is cittaviprayukta is grhya. 2. All cittacaitta is äkāra,
grāhaka, gṛhya; all other dharmas are gṛhya. 3. All dharmas are ākāra; but the samprayuklta
dharmas are ākāra, grāhaka and gṛhya and the viprayuktadharmas are ākāra and gṛhya (The
meaning of ākāra is quite different here).
105. In the Sastra, dharmajñāna begins the list.
106. We can understand why a being in Ārūpyadhātu cannot manifest the dharmajñāna
which has for its object suffering, its arising, etc. of the sphere of Kāmadhātu, but why are
beings in Rūpadhātu incapable of it? We have seen that a person manifests this jñāna by
entering into the dhyānas (which are Rūpadhātu) (vii.14c). Some say: “Dharmajñāna has
for its end the detesting (vidūñaṇā) of Kāmadhātu; now a person in Rūpadhātu has
abandoned Kāmadhātu by the very fact that he has transmigrated to a sphere of detachment
[from Kāmadhātu]; therefore the dharmajñāna does not have to arise. The case of a person
detached from Kāmadhātu [and who has entered into a dhyāna due to this detachment] is
different: he can manifest the dharmajñāna because his existence in Kāmadhātu is not
exhausted."
Samghabhadra explains differently why dharmajñana can only be manifested by beings
in Kāmadhātu: tatsamāpattivyutthānacittānāṁ kāmadhātāv eva sadbhāvāt/ anuparivarta-
kāfrayābhāvād vā/ dharmajñānānuparivartakasya hi śīlasya kāmāvacarāṇy eva bhūtāny
aśrayā dauḥfīlyasamutthāpakaklefaprāptivibandhakatvāt prātipakṣikatvāt/ tāni ca tatra na
santīti dharmajñānaṁ kāmadhātvāśrayam eva: “Because it is only in Kāmadhātu that the
thoughts of departing from the absorption [in which one realizes dharmajñāna] is possible;
or rather because, in the two higher spheres, the elements (bhūtas) which can serve as the
support (äfraya) of the type of morality (fila) which necessarily accompanies dharmajñāna
are missing. This morality is opposed to the kleśas which produce immorality (dauḥśīlya);
immorality exists only in Kamadhātu; the elements susceptible of supporting morality
which are opposed to this therefore exist only in Kamadhātu.1190 Chapter Seven
107. See iv.13c.
108. This preamble is missing in Paramartha.
109. According to Hsüan-tsang. Paramārtha literally translates his original which is
rendered in Tibetan by: chos bcu dag ni sbyar bar bya: "Ten dharmas should by placed in
relationship", and he adds the Bhāṣya: “In order to determine the object of the jñānas, one
should establish the relationship of the ten jñānas with the ten types of dharma. What are
these ten types of dharmas?...'
110. On one hand pratisaṁkhyānirodha or Nirvāṇa, on the other hand apratisamkhyāni-
rodha and ākāśa.
111. Märge dharmajñāna bears on the Path; the morality which is anāsravasaṁvara, that is
to say rūpa (iv.13c) forms part of the Path.
112. Hsüan-tsang: Is there a moment of knowledge which grasps all the dharmas for its
object?
This appears to be the beginning of the discussion of Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 43a2, quoted by
Saeki: "Is there a jñāna which knows all the dharmas? No. What is it that the jñāna, which
knows that all the dharmas are not an ātman, does not know? It does not know itself; it does
not know the dharmas which are associated with it or which coexist with it. By saying that it
does not know itself, one refutes the thesis of the Mahāsāṁghikas; by saying that it does not
know the dharmas associated with it, one refutes the thesis of the Dharmaguptas
(fa-mi-pu *** ); by saying that it does not know the dharmas which coexist
with it, one refutes the thesis of the Mahīśāsakas; by saying that jñāna knows, one refutes
the thesis of the Vātsīputrīyas [which attribute consciousness to the Pudgala?]."
Compare Kathāvatthu, v.9, where the Andhakas quote a text: sabbasaṁkhāresu aniccato
ditt besu tam pi hà nam aniccato dittham boti. The Vyākbyā quotes the Sūtra: ibāsmā kam
bho gautama upasthānaśālāyāṁ saṁniṣaṇṇānāṁ saṁnipatitānām evaṁrūpo'natarākathā-
samudāharo'bhūt/ śramaṇo gautamaḥ kilaivam āha/ nāsti sa kaścic chramaṇo vā brāhmaṇo
vā yaḥ sakṛt sarvaṁ jānīyāt sarvaṁ paśyed iti/ tathyam idam bho gautama/.
113. Bodhicaryavatāra, ix.18: na cchinatti yathātmānam asidhārā tathā manaḥ. This is a
common position in Indian philosophy; nevertheless the Sautrāntika-Vijñānavādins say
that the lamp illumines itself. By a curious contradiction, the Vaibhāṣikas who deny that the
mind knows itself, admit that sensation (vedanā) is felt not by another sensation, but by the
very fact that it is present (iv.49).
114. Paramārtha omits the last phrase ("If it were otherwise . . .”) and translates: "When it
is a jñāna in Kāmadhātu it is a prajñā of hearing and reflection; when it is a jñāna in
Rūpadhātu, it is only a prajñā of hearing, not of meditation, for this last type of prajñā
always has a determined sphere for its object."
Vasubandhu follows the Samyuktābhidharma-hṛdaya, TD 28, p. 953c21: “This jñāna is a
prajñā of hearing, and reflection, but not of meditation; for the prajñā of absorption has a
delimited object."
Vyākhyā: tasya vyavacchinnabhūmyālambanatvād iti/ yasmād bhāvanāmayaṁ
rūpāvacaraṁ saṁvṛtijñānaṁ vyavacchinnām eva bhūmim ālambate/ kāmadhātuṁ vā
prathamam vā dhyānaṁ yāvad bhavāgraṁ vā/ kim kāraṇam/ änantaryavimuktimārgānāṁ
adharottarabhūmyālambavatvād yathoktam yathākramaṁ śāntādyudārādyākārā uttarādha-
ragocara iti vacanāt (vi.49) yadi ca tat sarvabhūmyālambanaṁ syāt sarvato yugapad
vairāgyam syāt/ prayogaviseṣamärgayor yathäsambhavam kā cid eva bhumir alambanam/
katham/ nirvedhabhāgiyaprayogamärgasamgrhītasya hi yasya kāmadhātur ālambanam na
tasyetarau dhātū/ yasyetarau dḥātū na tasya kāmadhātur ālambanam/ aśubhāpramāṇābhi-
bhvāyatanādividūṣaṇaviśeṣamārgasa ṁgṛhītasya kāmadhātur evālambanaṁ netarau dhātū.
According to Yasomitra, a faithful interpreter of Vasubandhu who is, on this point,Footnotes 1191
approved of by Saṁghabhadra, it is solely through a prajñā of meditation (bhāvanā) that
one obtains detachment (vairāgya). The prajñā of hearing and reflection, which is in
Kāmadhātu, cannot bear on the dharmas of all the spheres: it is not enough to become
disgusted with it: the prajñā of bhāvanā is more powerful (iv.123c). Based on this,
Vasubandhu concludes that the universal consciousness of "the absence of self" of the
dharmas belongs to Kāmadhātu, for if it belonged to Rūpadhātu (that is to say arising from
bhāvanā, and being obtained in the dhyānas) it would produce detachment from all of the
spheres. Sam habhadra contests this reasoning, for the prajñā cultivated in dhyānas
(impure prajñā, since it is a saṁvṛtijñāna) never includes disgust for the higher sphere to
which it wishes to deliver itself (vi.49)
Let us note here that Hsüan-tsang translates the two pādas 18c-d (TD 29, p. 138a22) by
three pādas: "Samṁvṛtijñāna, by excluding its group, together has all the dharmas for its
object, by comprehending them under the aspect of non-self", and he adds a fourth pāda: "it
arises from hearing and reflection."
Saṁghabhadra, in his second treatise, the Prakaraṇaśāsana (TD 29, p. 952a10) corrects
the kārikās where Vasubandhu departs from correct Vaibhāṣika doctrine; the version of
Hsüan-tsang (p. 138a23) gives, in the fourth pāda: “It arises from hearing, reflection and
meditation." Samghabhadra thinks in fact (in his first treatise, the Nyāyānusāra, TD 29,p.
742c18 and following): “This jñāna is only in Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu, but not in
Ārūpyadhātu . . .
... It is a prajñā of hearing, reflection, and meditation (bhāvanā): for these
three prajñās are capable of having all the dharmas for their object with the exclusion of
themselves and their group. It is true that the Sautrāntika (=Vasubandhu) says: "This jñāna
is not a prajñā of meditation . . .' But this is false. In our system the prajñā of meditation of
the sphere of the dhyāna takes for its object the sphere in which it is found, namely, the
higher sphere; it produces disgust with respect to the lower sphere, and joy with respect to
the higher sphere: thus it does not produce detachment with respect to the higher sphere.
The argument of the Sauträntika is therefore null and void."
It appears that, according to what Yaśomitra says here, we should consider as
višeşamārga (vi.65) the disgust (vidūṣaṇa) which includes [the qualities, guṇa, namely]
aśubhā (vi.9), the apramāṇas (viii.29) and the abhibhvāyatanas (viii.35a). All these qualities
are višeșa (v.10a, trans. p. 785); they are acquired through prayoga, ānantarya,
vimuktimārga, and are prolongued in višeșamārga (vi.65); see vii.25d.
115. Hsüan-tsang: In the states or moments which do not include any augmentation of the
number of jñānas (3rd, 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 15th moments of abhisamaya),
he possesses the jñānas of the last previous moment which does include augmentation.
Therefore, at the beginning of bhāvanāmārga (16th moment), he necessarily possesses
seven jñānas.
116. This last phrase has been added by Hsüan-tsang.
117. Vyākhyā: iha dvividhā bhāvanādhikṛtā pratilambhabhāvanā niṣevaṇabhāvanā ca/
pratilambhabhāvanā prāptitaḥ/ niṣevaṇabhāvanā sammukhībhāvataḥ.
"Cultivation" is understood here as the acquisition or taking possession, and
manifestation. (See vii.27).
118. Yathotpannāni bhāvyante = yāni yāny utpannāni tāni tāni bhāvyante (bhävyante =
bhāvanāṁ gacchanti). Bhāvyante signifies "are acquired", since it refers to future kṣāntis
and jñānas.
119. The kṣānti or jñāna produced are sabhāgahetu (ii.52a)—a cause whose result resembles
it-of a future kṣānti and jñāna of the same species.
120. The question does not refer to the kṣāntis because there are no kṣāntis in1192 Chapter Seven
bbava nămanga.
Vyākhyā: bhāvanāmārge tu punaḥ sarveṣāṁ jñānānāṁ sabhāgavisabhāgānāṁ
tadākārāṇāṁ ca saṁmukhībhāvāt sarveṣāṁ hetavo labdhā bhavantīti tadviśiṣṭā jñānākārā
bbāvanăm gaccbanty anāgatab/
121. Above page 1135.
122. Darśanamārga is all pure (anāsrava) and the ascetic who cultivates it does not produce
a saṁvṛtijñāna in the course of his practice. But he takes possession in moments 4, 8, and 12
of the samvṛtijñāna relative to each Truth: leaving the Path of Seeing, he possesses, and will
be able to manifest, a conventional, worldly (sāṁṛrta, laukika) consciousness of the Truths,
which is called pṛṣṭhalabdha, see vii.2b.
123. We have seen above (vii.7, note 25) that the "patiences" produced in the course of
abhisamaya are called ābhisamayāntika.
Mahāvyutpatti, 54.20 (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 188c9): abhisamayāntikaṁ kuśalamūlam
(translated into Tibetan as mnon par rtogs pa'i lam mtha’ las 'byun ba and mñon par rtogs
pa'i 'jug pa las 'byun ba = abhisamayamārga-anta-udbhava, abhisamaya-avatāra-udbhava),
followed by 54.21: kṣayajñānalābhikaṁ kuśalamūlam = roots of good (or qualities) obtained
at the moment of kṣayajñāna (vii.26c); and 245, 486.
124. But all persons, in the course of saṁsāra, have understood Suffering, its Arising and its
Extinction by the worldly path (Vyākhyā).
125. In fact Arising should again be abandoned by the Seeing of Extinction and the Path,
and again by the Path of Meditation, whereas all Suffering is perfectly known (parijñāta) by
the Seeing of Suffering. But the Arising which should be abandoned by the Seeing of Arising
is found to be already abandoned. (Paramārtha's translation).
126. The Vaibhāṣikas think that the sixteenth moment belongs to bhāvanāmārga (vi.28c);
some other schools include it in darśanamārga.
127. Vyākhyā: vayaṁ hi bhāvanāmārgaparivāro'pi tad iti brūmaḥ.
128. This paragraph is missing in Hsüan-tsang. The Vyākhyā furnishes a different
explanation: darśanamārgalabhyaṁ tat tasya kathaṁ bhāvanāmārga saṁmukhībhāvo
bhavisyati/ darśanamärge cotpattyanavakāśo'syāsti iti tad anupattidharmakam iti
varṇayanti Vaibhāṣikāḥ.
129. On āșraya, see iii.41, i. p. 78, ii. p. 285, iv. p. 593, 613, 649, v. P.
771.
130. Vyākhyā: gotraṁ tadutpādane samartho hetuḥ/ tatra bhavaṁ gautrikaṁ saṁvṛtijñā-
nam. On gotra in the sense that we have it here (sabhāgahetu), see i. p. 78, vii. p. 1124.
131. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 18c28.
132. From Kārikā 22 to Kārikā 26c Hsüan-tsang departs from the original (which
Paramartha faithfully translates) both for the Kārikā and the Bhāṣyam.
133. Namely anvayajñāna and mārgajñāna, because mārge’nvayajñāna is, by its nature, these
two jñānas.
134. Not samvṛtijñāna, because it has been acquired formerly (labdhapūrvatvāt); see vii.27.
Not paracittajñāna, because the ascetic is not vītarāga.
135. Therefore in the four types of paths of the eight stages of bhāvanāmārga where one
abandons the first eight categories of klesas of Kāmadhātu, and also as long as one has not
abandoned the ninth. On these four types of paths, see v.61, vi.65b, (46d, 61d), vii. 18c, 25d.
136. Namely the śāntādyudārādyākāro bhāvanāmārgah, see vi.49.Footnotes 1193
137. See vi.61b.
138. See vii.5c.
139. Everyone agrees that samvṛtijñāna is not cultivated in the ānantaryamārgas of the
perfecting of the faculties (vii.24c).
140. Of dharma, anvaya, and the Four Truths.
141. Vyākhyā: dvayos tv abhijñāvimuktimārgayor iti/ divyaśrotradivyacakṣurabhijñāvimuk-
timārgayor avyākṛte śrotracakṣurabhijñe iti vacanāt (vii.42) tadvimuktimārgāv avyākṛtau/
na cāvyakṛtasya dharmasyānāgatabhāvanasti. See above note 56.
We understand by this that, by realizing these Abhijñās, one does not take possession of
the same future Abhiñāas.
142. The three Abhijñās are rddhi, pūrveniväsa and cetaḥparyaya.
143. An ascetic detaches himself from Kāmadhātu by a worldly path which has for its
support (samniśrayeṇa, that is to say "is cultivated in”) anāgamya (introductory stage of the
First Dhyāna) and, through this detachment, he obtains the First Dhyāna; at the moment of
the ninth vimuktimārga of this detachment, he cultivates a saṁvṛtijñāna of the sphere of
the anāgamya or of the sphere of the First Dhyāna; and so on until: he detaches himself
from akincanyāyatana through the worldly path practiced in the samantaka (preparatory)
stage of naivasaṁjñānasaṁjñāyatana, he obtains a saṁvṛtijñāna of the sphere of the
sämantaka or of the sphere of the naivasaṁjñānasaṁjñāyatana. Saṁvṛtijñāna is cultivated
under the same conditions when the ascetic detaches himself from Kāmadhātu through the
path cultivated in pure (anāsrava) anāgamya.
But if the ascetic obtains the first pure dhyāna by practicing the pure path in the First
Dhyāna, the samvṛtijñāna that he obtains is of the sphere of the samantaka of the Second
Dhyana which is opposed to the first ... to the ninth category of the defilements (kleśas) of
the First Dhyāna-for this the first time that this ascetic obtains the first pure dhyāna.
And, in the ninth vimuktimārga of the path by which he obtains the first pure dhyāna, he
cultivates, in the future, a saṁvṛtijñāna of the second dhyāna (Vyākhyā).
144. An ascetic takes his support from the second pure dhyāna and, in this manner, detaches
himself in the Third Dhyāna: the pure jñāna which is cultivated is of the sphere of the Path,
that is to say of the Second Dhyāna; it is moreover in the ninth vimuktimārga of
detachment, of the sphere in which he detaches himself, namely the Third Dhyāna; it is also
of a lower sphere, namely of the First Dhyāna, of anāgamya. For it happens that the
preparatory path is of a lower sphere: the jñāna of a lower sphere will therefore be able to
be cultivated.
But when an ascetic detaches himself from the Second Dhyana by taking as his support
the samantaka of the Third Dhyāna, neither in the ānantarya nor in the vimukti paths can a
pure jñāna of the sphere of the sāmantaka be cultivated: in fact there is no pure jñāna in this
sāmantaka (viii.22a). The cultivated jñāna will be inferior to the Path: of the Second
Dhyāna, of dhyānāntara, of the First Dhyana, or of anagamya.
145. Hsüan-tsang: "Only in the first kṣayajñāna does he cultivate all of the impure qualities
of the nine spheres." With the gloss: "In the first kṣayajñāna, that is to say in the ninth
vimuktimārga of detachment from Bhavāgra, and in the ninth vimuktimārga of the five
perfecting of the faculties” (TD 29, p. 139c25).
146. Et cetera refers to abhibhvāyatana, kṛtsnāyatana, etc.
147. Peḍā, Divya, 251.4, 365.8, a bag holding jewels or alamkaras; phelā, ibid. 503.24,
Mahāvastu, ii.465 (phela, phelika); Bloch, Marathe, 370; classical, peta, peṭā, peti; Pāļi: pelā.
Hsüan-tsang and Paramārtha: “as, when their bonds are cut, beings who were bound
and strangling, now breathe."1194 Chapter Seven
The meaning is that, at the moment of kṣayajñāna, there is produced the possession of
all the qualities to a great degree of excellence.
148. Compare the first Cakravartin King, Kośa, iii. 96c.
149. Hsüan-tsang (p. 139c16) adds a pāda: "Arisen above he does not cultivate the lower":, a
thesis developed in the Vyākhyā: When one obtains the quality of Arhat (that is to say
kṣayajñāna) in Kāmadhātu, the aśubhās, etc., of the Three Dhātus are "cultivated"
(bhāvanām gacchanti); when one obtains the quality of Arhat in Rūpadhātu, or in
Ārūpyadhātu, the same qualities are cultivated belonging to these Dhātus. The same with
respect to the different bhūmis of these Dhātus; one who obtains the quality of Arhat in
naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana cultivates only the qualities belonging to this bhūmi.
150. a. Vyākhyā: yad vihīnaṁ punar labhyate sammukhikriyate saṁsārocitam na tad
anāgatam bhavyate bhävitotsṛṣṭatvāt saṁsāre/ yad evätra dhyānāpramāṇādy anucitaṁ
saṁsāre višiṣṭam anāsravānuguṇaṁ tatsaṁmukhībhāve tajjātīyam evānāgataṁ višiṣṭaṁ
bhāvyata ity ācāryo darśayati. It is some vulgar qualities, encountered in the course of
transmigration, that one manifests, and that one abandons. These qualities are not the
object of "cultivation,” that is to say “are not possessed in a future state." But when one
actualizes the distinguished qualities, the Dhyānas, the Apramāṇas, etc., rare in the course of
transmigration, and which are favorable to the acquisition of pure qualities, one takes
possession of them for the future. This is what Vasubandhu intends to say.
This explanation depends on Vasumitra's thesis that there is cultivation of some
distinguished qualitiies, saṁsārānucatvāt,but not of others.
b. Hsüan-tsang: "The dharma previously acquired and then lost, and now acquired anew,
is not 'cultivated' because of this, because one reacquired it without effort. One manifests the
dharma not previously acquired with effort, and it is thus 'cultivated in the future, because
its force is great. Produced after having been acquired, it is not cultivated in the future,
because its force is small, being produced without much effort." This version is based on the
explanation of Samghabhadra.
c. Samghabhadra (in his Nyāyānusāra, TD 29, p. 745b18; see also his Prakaraṇaśāsana,
TD 29, p. 954c9, which does not exactly correspond) is quoted by the Vyākhyā:
ācāryasamghabhadro'py etam evārthaṁ vyäcaṣṭe/ labdhapūrvaṁ na bhāvyate/ yat
pratilabdhavihinam punar labhyate na tad bhävyate/ arthäd gamyate yad alabdhapūrvam
labhyate tad bhāvyate/ yatnābhimukhīkaraṇāt/ apratipraśrabdho hi mārgo yatnenābhi-
mukhikriyata iti tadävedhabalatvād anāgato bhāvanāṁ gacchati/ pratilabdhapūrvas tv
ayatnena sammukhībhavati bhāvitapratiśrabdhatvāt kṛtakṛtyadattaphalatvāc ca vegahīna iti
tatsaṁmukhībhāvād anāgato na bhāvyata iti/ yo'nāgato yatnena janyate sa bhāvyata ity
abhiprāyaḥ/
The Vyākhyā continues: tad evaṁ sati yad uktaṁ saṁvṛtijñānaṁ tāvad iti vistareṇņa tad
āryasamtānapatitam eva grhyate.
That is to say: if this is the case, what is said of the cultivation of saṁvṛtijñāna should
also be understood of the samvṛtijñāna of the Āryan. The Vyākhyā then mentions the
opinion of Vasumitra, and the objection of the Vaibhāśikas: saṁsārānucitatvād iti
ācāryavasumitreṇātra likhitam/ atra kila vaibhāṣikā āhuḥ/ naitad evam/ kutaḥ/ yasmād
alabdham eva tad bhavati tyakyatvāt tasmād bhāvitotsṛṣṭasyāpi punarlābhe bhavaty eva
bhāvaneti/ katham tad apūrvam bhavati yāvatālabdhapūrvam iti/ na hy evamvidham loke
prasiddham iti/.
Finally, one can understand "what has not been obtained” (alabdhapūrva) as what has
not been obtained in this life: apare punar vyācakṣate ekaṁ janmedam abhikṛtyoktam na
janmāntaram/ yad vihīnam asminn eva janmani punar labhyate na tad bhavyate
bhävitotsṛṣṭatvät/ janmäntare tu yal labhyate tad bhavyate.
151. See Kośa, vi. 1, note 2; vii, p. 1104, Atthasālinī, 163.Footnotes 1195
152. Bhāvanā which consists of taking possession of a future dharma. In the same way
niṣevaṇabhāvanā consists of nișevaṇa.
153. Pratipakṣabhāvanā signifies the bhāvanā which consists of pratipakṣa, “opposition":
pratipakṣo mārgo yathoktaṁ sûtre bhävitakāyo bhāvitacitta iti bhāvitakāyacittapratipaksa
ity arthaḥ/ kayapratipakṣaḥ punaś caturdhyānavairāgyāya yo margaḥ/ tathā hy uktam
bhävitakayo bhikṣur ity ucyate bhävitacitto bhävitafilah/ katham bhävitakāyo bhavati/
kāyād vigatarāgo vigatatṛṣṇo vigatapipāso vigatapremā vigataniyantiḥ (?)/ atha vā yo'sau
rūparāgakṣayānantaryamārgah/ so'nena vigatarāgo bhavatīty āgamaḥ. Saṁyutta, iii.7, 11,
190, iv.111; Anguttara, iii.106; Majjhima, i.237.
How the mind is termed bhāvita, above vii.p. 1102.
154. Vinirdhāvanabhāvana is the cutting off of possession of the defilements, klesaprāptic-
cheda.
155. The order of thẹ pra(d)hānas differs in the Mahāvyutpatti, 39; see vi.2c, 67.
Hsüan-tsang omits this reference to the pradhānas.
156. Indriyabhāvanā, Majjhima, iii.298; indriyasaṁvara, Samyutta, i.54, Anguttara, iii.360,
Majjbima, 1.269, 346, etc.
157. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 76b2: ṣaḍ imānīndriyāṇi [susaṁvṛtāni subhāvitāni . . .]
Indriyasaṁvara or saṁvarabhāvana is, by its nature, memory and attention: sa punar
indriyasamvaraḥ smṛtisaṁprajñānasvabhāva uktaḥ.
158. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 647a3 (a paraphrase), Majjhima, iii.90; Saṁyutta, iv.111;
Sikṣāsamuccaya, 228, Madhyamakavṛtti, 57, etc.
159. Vibhāvanābhāvanā, or kāyabhāvanā is nothing other than the expulsion (vinirdhā-
vana) of the defilements of which the body is the object.
160. According to Hsüan-tsang. The original has: We have explained in general that the
Arhats, whoever they are, take possession of the "qualities” at the moment when they
produce the "consciousness of the destruction of the asravas.” (vii.26c) There are eighteen
qualities which belong to the Buddha ...
Kathāvatthu, iii.1-2: the “forces" do not belong to the Buddha (thesis of the Andhakas).
Pațisambhidāmagga, i.7, sixty-three ñāṇas of which six belong to the Buddha; Milinda,
285.
161. On avenika, the definition of avidyā āveṇikī (Vyākhyā, ad v.12, 14, ii.29) which is
quoted and translated by Burnouf, Lotus 648: samparko venir ity ucyate/ na venir aveṇiḥ
pṛthagbhāva ity arthah/ evaṁ hy uktam aveņir bhagavān aveṇir bhikṣusaṁgha iti pṛthag
bhagavan prthag bhikṣusaṁgha ity abhiprāyaḥ/ aveṇyā caraty āveṇņikī nānyānuśayasahacă-
rinīty arthaḥ. Anguttara, v. 74. The Samgha does not divide . . . na āveni kammāni karonti
no äveni pātimokkham uddisanti (=na pṛthak karmāṇi . . .)
There are five qualities which belong exclusively to women (äveṇīya and āveṇika),
Divya, 2.3, 98.22, etc.; Burnouf, Introduction, 169.
The good that I have done is my āveņiya riches, Jātaka, iv.358.
162. a. This is the list of Divya, 182.20, 268.4.
b. Yaśomitra says: Such is the doctrine of the Vaibhāṣikas. Some other masters admit
eighteen āveņikas distinct from these, namely: nāsti tathāgatasya skhalitam, nāsti ravitam
(=sahasā kriyā), nāsti dravatā (=krīḍābhiprāyatā), nāsti nānātvasaṁjñā (=sukhaduḥkhā-
duḥkhāsukheṣu viṣayeṣu rāgadveṣamohato nānātvasamjñā), nāsty avyākṛtamanas, nāsty
apratisamkhyayopekṣā, nāsty atīteșu pratihataṁ jñānadarśanam, năsty anāgateșu
pratibatam jñānadarśanam, năsti pratyutpanneșu pratihataṁ jñānādarśanam, sarvaṁ
kāyakarma jñānānuparivarti, sarvaṁ vākkarma jñānānuparivarti, sarvaṁ manaskarma
jñānānuparivarti, nästi chandahāniḥ, nāsti vīryaḥāniḥ, nästi smṛtiḥāniḥ, nāsti samadhihānih,1196 Chapter Seven
nāsti prajñāhāniḥ, nāsti vimuktijñānadarśanahāniḥ. This contradicts iv.12, vi.59.
This list, with some close variants, is found in Mahāvyutpatti, 9 (an extract, according to
Wogihara, from the Tsa-chi
of Sthiramati) which is quoted here by the Japanese
editor of the Kofa. We will find in Madhyamakāvatāra (vi.213, p. 322-337) a commentary
extracted from the Dāraṇīśvaraparipṛcchā. Very close too are the lists of Mahāvastu, i.160
(see the note p. 505) and the Pāļi sources, Abhidhānappadīpikā and Jinālaṁkāra (Burnouf,
Lotus, 649, Kern, Geschiedenis, i. 272, Milinda, 285).
The particularity of Yaśomitra's list is in the first terms: nāsti skhalitaṁ nāsti ravitam
nāsti dravatā; the Mahāvastu and the Mahāvyutpatti have: nāsti (s)khalitam nāsti ravitam
nāsti mușitasmṛtitā; the Jinālaṁkāra gives: natthi davă (commented upon as
kicchābhippāyena kiriyā, a bad reading for khiḍḍābhippāyena), natthi ravă (commented
upon as sahasā kiriyā). Note the close relationship with the glosses of Yasomitra: dravatā =
krīḍābhiprāyatā, a = sahasā kriyā (=Tibetan ca co, “outcry" = Chinese: "defect of the voice").
For dravată, Mahāvastu-Mahāvyutpatti have, we would say mușitasmṛtitā (which has,
perhaps a double use with the ninth declension: nāsti smṛter haniḥ), but Candra Das (p.
511) has a variant mușitā or muditā, which suggests the idea of krīḍā.
Apratisamkhyayopekṣa is an upekṣā or indifference, which does not result from the
consciousness, due, we would say, to apathy, not to wisdom (see vii.8).
c. The Bodhisattvabhūmi (iii.4) admits 140 äveņikas (see Muséon, 1911, 170): 32 and 80
marks, 4 "omniform” (sarvākāra) purities, 10 balas, 4 vaiśaradyas, 3 smṛtyupasthānas, 3
ārakṣaṇas (compare the 4 ärakṣyas of Mahāvyutpatti, 12), mahākaruṇā, asaṁpramoşadhar-
matā, vāsanāsamudghāta, sarvākāravarajñāna (compare sarvathājñāna, Kośa, vii. p. 1146).
d. The aveņikas of the Bodhisattva, Mahāvyutpatti, 29, and Madhyamakāvatāra, vi.212.
163. Lotus, 343, 781, Spence Hardy, Manual, 380 and other works quoted in Dharmasaṁ-
graha, p. 51; Mahāvyutpatti, 7 (according to the Yogaśāstra).
Pāļi list in the Jinālaṁkāra of Buddharakṣita; the ancient "Sanskrit” source is the
Mahāvastu, i.159 (a valuable commentary by the editor, p. 502-505); on the other hand,
Pațisambhidā, ii.174, Vibhanga, 335.
The Buddha is daśabala, Mahāvagga, i.22.13; “Dasabala" is the title of a vagga of the
Samyutta; see however the observations of Rhys Davids, Milinda, ii. 134. the ten balas of the
Bodhisattva, Mahāvyutpatti, 26.
The balas are explained, according to the Dhāraṇīśvaraparipṛcchā in the Madhyamakā-
vatāra, Tibetan translation, p. 369-395.
If the balas belong to the Śrāvakas; if the first nine balas are pure or aryan
"knowledges", Kathāvatthu, iii. 1-2.
164. A different list in the smaller Vyutpatti, 5 (Minayev, 1887). The Vyākhyā quotes the
Sūtra: dasayusmantas tatbāgatabalani/ katamānidasa/ ibâyusmantas tathāgatab sthân ám ca
sthānato yathābhūtaṁ prajānāti/ asthānaṁ cāsthānataḥ/ idaṁ prathamaṁ tathāgatabalaṁ
yena balena samanvāgatas tathāgato'rhan samyakşambuddha udāram ārṣabhaṁ sthānaṁ
pratijānāti brāhmaṁ cakraṁ pravartayati parṣadi samyakṣiṁhanādaṁ nadati// punar
aparam āyuşmantas tathāgato'tītānāgatapratyutpannāni karmadharmasamādānāni sthanato
hetuto vastuto vipākataś ca yathābhūtaṁ prajānāti yad āyuşmantas tathāgataḥ pūrvavad
yāvad vipäkataś ca yathābhūtaṁ prajānāti idaṁ dvitīyaṁ tathāgatabalam yena balena...//
Punar aparam ayuşmantas tathāgato dhyānavimokṣasamādhisamapattināṁ saṁkleśavyava-
dänavyavasthanaviśuddhim yathābhūtaṁ prajānāti yad āyuşmantas . . . 3.//. . .
Parapudgalānām indriyaparāparatāṁ yathābhūtaṁ prajānāti … . . 4. // … . . nānādhimuktikaṁ
lokam anekādhimuktikaṁ yathābhūtaṁ prajānāti ... 5. //... nānādhātukaṁ lokam
anekadhātukam . . . 6. //. . . sarvatragāminīṁ pratipadam . 7. // . . . anekavidham
pūrvanivāsam anusmarati/ tadyathaikām api jātim dve tisraś catasraḥ pañca șaṭ saptāṣṭau
nava daśa vimśatim yāvad anekān api saṁvartavivartakalpān anusmarati/ api nāma te
bhavantaḥ sattvā yatrāḥam āsa evaṁnāmā evamjātya evaṁgotra evamāhāra evaṁsukhaduḥ-Footnotes 1197
khapratisamvedi evaṁdirghāyur evamcirasthitika evamäyuşparyantaḥ/ so'ham tasmat
stbänāc cyuto'mutropapannaḥ/tasmãd api cyuta ihopapannaḥ/ iti sākāraṁ sanidānam
soddeśam
yadãyuşmantas...8.//... divyena
cakṣuşā visuddhenätikrantamanusyakeņa sattvän paśyati cyavamänān apy upapadyamänän
api survarṇān durvarṇān hīnān praṇītān sugatim api gacchato durgatim api yathākarmopa-
gan sattvän yathābhūtaṁ prajānāti/ ami bhavantaḥ sattvāḥ kayaduścaritene samanvāgatā
vägmanoduścaritena samanvāgatā āryāṇām apavādakā mithyādṛṣṭayo mithyadṛṣṭikarmad-
harmasamādānahetos taddhetu tatpratyayaṁ kāyasya bhedāt paraṁ maraṇād apāyadurgati-
vinipātaṁ narakeşüpapadyante/ ami punar bhavantaḥ sattvāḥ kāyasucaritena samanvāgatā
samyagdṛṣṭikarmadharmasaṁpādanahetos (?) . . . sugatau svargaloke deveșūpapa-
dyante/ yad...9.//... āsravāṇāṁ kṣayād anāsravām cetovimuktim prajñāvimuktim dṛṣṭa
drsta
eva dharme svayam abhijñāya sākṣāt kṛtvopasampadya prativedayate/ kṣiṇā me jātir uşitaṁ
brahmacaryaṁ kṛtaṁ karaṇīyaṁ nāparam asmād bhavaṁ prajānāmīti yad āyuşmantas
tathāgataḥ... 10. //
anekavidhaṁpūrvanivāsamanusmarati/
165. This first jñānabala is by nature ten jñānas. Sthānāsthāna is divided into 1. saṁskṛta,
which is eightfold; 2. saṁprayukta (associated with the mind), of four types—Kāmadhātu,
Rūpadhātu, Arūpyadhātu, and anasrava; 3. viprayukta (disassociated from the mind), the
same; and 4. asaṁskṛta, which is either morally good or neutral.
Sthānāsthānabala as saṁvṛtijñāna bears on these ten things; as dharmajñāna on five; as
anvayajñāna on.seven . . .
How are these ten things sthānāsthāna? See the Sūtras: "There is the sthāna
(possibility, sambhava) that a male realizes Buddhahood (buddhatvaṁ kārayiṣyati); there is
the asthāna (impossibility, asambhava) that a female . . .; there is the possibility that a male
becomes Brahmā (brahmatvaṁ kārayiṣyati); there is the possibility of the destruction of
suffering...
Definition of this bala, Vibhanga, p. 335.
166. Action and its result are in fact included within the Truths of Suffering and Arising, not
in the Truths of Extinction or the Path.
167. We have Four Dhyānas (viii.1), Eight Vimokṣas (viii.32), Three Samādhis (śūnyatā,
etc., viii.24), Two Samāpattis (asaṁjñi and nirodha, ii.42) and Nine anupūrvavihārasamā-
pattis (dhyānas, ārüpyas, nirodha). The same in Vibhanga, 339.
168. That is indriyaparopariyatta, Vibhanga, 340, Pațisambhidā, i.121. Indriya is rendered in
the stanza by akṣa; the Buddha knows if the faculties of beings (faith, etc.) are weak, etc,
(parāpara). (Vibhanga is more developed).
169. Adhimukti = adhmokṣa = ruci (i.20); the Buddha knows the aspirations of beings, their
likes.
170. Samghabhadra explains: pūrvābhyāsavāsanāsamudāgata āśayo dhātur iti; the Buddha
knows the mental dispositions which result from former habits and practices. On vāsanā,
vii.30c, 32d; on āśaya, iv. note 375, and p. 663, vi.34, Vibhanga, 340. The Vibhanga differs
and places the consciousness of āśaya, anuśaya, etc., in the seventh bala.
171. The knowledge relative to nirodha is only included in the knowledge of the Path
(pratipad) if one understands pratipad as pratipatphala; in fact pratipad is not the cause of
nirodha even though it is the cause of the realms of rebirth.
The Vibhanga (p. 339) does not envision the pratipad of nirodha; the Pațisambhidā-
magga takes it into consideration.
172. On the expression jambuṣaṇḍagata, see iii.41 at the end.
173. This is the story recounted in the Sūtrālaṁkāra of Aśvaghoșa, trans. Huber, p. 283.
Saeki refers to the Sutra of the Wise and the Foolish, TD 4, no. 202) where the story is much1198 Chapter Seven
more detailed, see TD 4, p. 376b2-p. 380a10; Dsanglun of Schmidt, 107-128. See also
Zapiski, vii.281, 286, and Histoire des Religions, 1903, i.323. According to a note by P.
Pelliot, the hero is called Śrīvṛddhi. Saeki also mentions Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 530c19 and
following.
The Vyākhyā explains: Śāriputra searches in vain to see in the series of this person a
root of good "which could produce deliverance" (mokṣabhāgīya, iii.44c, iv.124, vi.24c,
vii.34), and as a consequence refused to admit this person into the Samgha. But the
Bhagavat saw this root of good and confered pravrajyā upon him. On this occasion the
Bhagavat, questioned by the Bhikṣus, said: “He did an action so that he obtained the state of
Arhat. For actions do not mature in water... and the rest." And it says: Mokşabījam aham
hy asya susūkṣmam upalakṣaye/ dhātupāṣāṇavivare nilīnam iva kāñcanam// (Quoted in
Vyākhyā, i. p. 5; translated by Burnouf, Lotus, p. 340).
174. Paramartha: "It is related also of the pigeon chased by the hawk that Śāriputra was not
capable of knowing the beginning and the end of his rebirths [as a bird?]."
The Vyākhyā has: upapattyādiparyantājñānaṁ ceti/ adifabdena cyutiparyantājñānam,
that is to say: [There was also ignorance on the part of Sãriputra] concerning the limit of
births and deaths [of the pigeon . . . ].
175. Yogasutra, iii.24, on the acquisition of the power of an elephant, etc.
176. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 155a8: As the Sūtra says, the body of the Bodhisattva has the force
of Nārāyaṇa. What is the measure of this force? There are those who say, "The force of
nineteen bulls is equal to the force of one hao-niu 4 (Couvrier: a bull which has
long hair down to the joints of his legs) . . ." There are some who say: "This measure is too
small. In the body of the Bodhisattva, there are eighteen great joints: each has the force of
Nārāyaṇa . . .” The Mahābhadanta says: “This measure is too small. In the same way that
the force of the mind is infinite, so too the force of the body. How do we know this?...
When the Bodhisattva undertakes the resolution: “I shall not get up before I have attained
Bodhi...," the great chiliocosm moved in some six different ways, but the very hairs of the
Bodhisattva did not stir...”
177. This is an explanation of the opinion of others. Vyākhyā: saṁdhiṣv anya ity uktam/
asthisaṁdhivišeṣopanyāsaḥ/ nāgagranthir iti vistaraḥ/ nāgagranthasaṁdhayo buddhāḥ/
nāgapāśo nāgagranthiḥ/ śaṁkalāsaṁdhayaḥ pratyekabuddhāḥ/ śańkusaṁdhayaś cakravar-
tinaḥ.
178. On the Mahānagnas, see Divya, 372, Burnouf, Introduction 363, Lotus, 452. Cāṇūra is
an enemy of Kṛṣṇa.
179. In Mahāvyutpatti, 252 (which relys on the Kofa), varānga precedes praskandin.
180. Paramārtha replaces ten with one hundred.
181. The original has yathā tu bahutaraṁ tathā yujyate. Paramārtha adds: "Why? Because
the force of the Buddha is without measure." The Vyākhyā says: "The author defends the
first opinion, for the reason that, otherwise, the body of the Buddha would not be able to
support the force of infinite knowledge."
182. Five opinions in Vibhāṣā (see TD, p. 154b8 where the discussion begins; the theories
are given p. 154c24-p. 155a7), and four in Samghabhadra's Nyāyānusāra (TD 29, p.
748b12-b20).
183. The Sūtra (Ekottara, TD 2, p. 645b27), quoted in the Vyākhya, is very close to
Anguttara ii.8 (vesārajja): catvārīmāni śāriputra tathāgatasya vaiśāradyāni yair vaiśāradyaiḥ
samanvāgatas tathāgato'rhan samyaksambuddha udāram ārṣabham sthanam pratijānāti
brahmam cakram (Kośa, vi.54) pravartayati parṣadi samyak siṁhanādam nadati/ katamāni
catvāri samyakṣaṁbuddhasya vata me sata ime dharmā anabhisaṁbuddhā ity atra māṁFootnotes 1199
kaścic chramaṇo vā brahmaṇo vā saha dharmeṇa codayet smārayet/ tatrāham nimittamapi
na samanupaśyāmi evaṁ cāhaṁ nimittam asamanupaśyan kṣemaprāptaś ca viharāmi
abhayaprāptaś ca vaiśāradyaprāptas ca udāram ārṣabham... Same text quoted in the
Vijñānakāya, TD 26, p. 544a6, which has: chramaṇo vā brahmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā
brahmā vā...
In Majjhima, i. 501, the vesārajjas are attributed to all Arhats; compare Mahāvagga,
i.6.32. In a fragment of the Samyukta, JRAS, 1907, p. 377, the Householder Śrona is
vaiśāradyaprāpta (an epithet of the Srotāpanna).
The young lion (kiśora) possesses vaiśāradya, Bodhicarya, vii.55.
The vaiśāradyas of the Bodhisattva, Mahāvyutpatti, 28, Daśabhūmi, viii, Madhamakāvat-
āra, 320.
Etymology of the word vaiśāradya, Wogihara, Bodhisattvabhūmi (Leipzig, 1908), p. 41.
184. The readings of Mahavyutpatti, 8, differ a little: ... 3. antarāyikadharmānanyathātvanić-
citāvya-karaṇa. . . 4. sarvasampadadhigamāya nairyāṇikapratipattathātva-vaiśāradya.
185. Paramartha differs: As these absences of fear are realized by jñāna, the jñāna is called
vaiśāradya. What is the reason for the four vaiśāradyas? They are useful to oneself and to
others. The first two are useful to the Buddha himself; the last two are useful to others. Or
rather the four are useful to others, for they expel all defilement both in the speaker and in
his discourse.
186. The Vibhāṣā remarks: These three smṛtyupasthānas are included within sthānästhānaj-
ñānabala, and within the six satatavihāras (see iii.35d, at the end).
187. When the disciples have the contrary attitude, tathāgatasya nāghāto bhavati nākṣāntir
napratyayo na cetaso'nabhiraddhiḥ.
Compare Majjhima, iii.221 (very close) and i.379; Mahāvyutpatti, 11.
For utplävitatvam, see Bodhicaryāvatāra, p. 13, note 3; manasa utplavaḥ in Śikṣāsamuc-
caya, 183.6.
188. See Asanga, Sūtrālaṁkāra, xvii.43; Divya, 359 (the kṛpā of the Śrāvaka); compare the
stanzas in Divya, 96, 125 and Huber, Sūtrālaṁkāra, p. 284.
189. The pāramitās of giving, the precepts, and patience are the provisions of merit; the
pāramitā of prajñā is the provision of knowledge.
The paramita of absorption or dhyāna gives rise to merit, as it is the cultivation of the
Four Apramāṇas (viii.29), and it gives rise to knowledge as it is the cultivation of the
thirty-seven "adjuncts of Bodhi" (vi. p. 1022).
The pāramitā of energy or vīrya is also doubly useful: na hi vinā vīryeṇa dānaṁ dīyate
filam samādīyate kṣāntir bhävyata iti punyasambhārabhāgīyam vīryam bhavati/ tathā
nāntareņa vīryaṁ prajñā bhavati ...
Same doctrine in the Mahāyāna (where it is explained that the pāramitās are pāramitās
by the fact of prajñā), in Bodhicaryāvatāra, ix.1.
When and how the Bodhisattva practices the pāramitās, Kośa, iv.111.
190. On akaraṇa, ii.34b, vi.18a.
191. An excellence which results notably from saṁskāraduḥkhatākāra and prajñāsvabhā-
vatā.
192. In this formula, one undertakes, along with the First Dhyāna, Anāgamya and
Dhyānāntara. Compassion is of the six bhumis.
193. "Śrāvakas, etc." refer to the Pratyekabuddhas and Pṛthagjanas.
194. By karunā, the Śrāvakas have simply compassion (karuṇāyante); they experience
commiseration, affliction; they do not protect one from the fear of saṁsāra. But the1200 Chapter Seven
Bhagavat, having compassion along with mahākaruṇā, protects one from the great terror of
saṁsāra.
195. a. Differences between Buddhas, Kośa, iv. 102, trans. p. 685, Bodhisattvabhūmi, I.vii,
Muséon 1911, 173 (life, name, gotra, body); Wassilieff, 286 (314). Kathāvatthu, xxi.5:the
Theravada admits differences, vemattatā, for the body (sarīra), the length of life and light
(pabhā); the Andhakas admit other differences. Milinda, 285 (differences between
Bodhisattvas, family, time period, length of life, stature). Below note 197.
b. Vasubandhu groups together, vii.28-34, the elements of a Buddhology. Interesting
from this point of view are the following passages of the Kośa:
i. 1. Difference of the wisdom of the Buddha and that of other saints; omniscience (also
Kośa, ix). The Buddha and the Bodhisattvas are Bhagavats.
ii.10. Abandoning of the ayuḥsaṁskāras; victory over the Four Māras.
ii.44, vii.41d, 44b. All the qualities (guṇa) acquired through detachment and actualized at
his will.
ii.44, vi.24a. The conquest of Bodhi in thirty-four moments.
ii.62. Knowledge of the future.
iii.94. Time period of the appearance of Buddhas.
iv.12. Avyākṛta mind, "non-absorbed" mind; the Nāga.
iv.32. The cult of the Buddha.
iv.32. The Dharmakāya, refuge; the Rūpakāya.
iv.73. Accepts the gifts made to Stūpas. iv.102. Retribution of his former actions.
iv. 102. Schism.
iv.109. The marks of the Bodhisattvas, the objects of their minds.
iv.109, vii.30, 37, 42. The memory of the Buddha.
iv.121. The cult of Caityas.
vi.59. Falling away from the joys of the absorptions.
viii. 28. Conquest of Bodhi through the Fourth Dhyana.
c. On the Bodhisattva, and in particular, the future Buddha Śäkyamuni.
iii.94, iv.108-112. Origin, vows, and practice of the pāramitās (iv.117), duration of his
career (because the Bodhisattva is naturally charitable, iii. 94a), development of the marks.
iv. 106. Death of the Bodhisattva.
vi.23. Change of vehicle, animal births of the Bodhisattva.
Last birth, iii.9, jarāyuja and why (relics); 13a, in the form of an elephant; 17a, conscious
at conception, etc.; 41, a Pṛthagjana until sitting under the Bodhi Tree; 53d, the Vajrāsana;
85a, free from premature death. [According to the Kāraṇaprajñāpti, Cosmologie, p. 327,
explanation of the marks; 331, rain of flowers; 332, 334, life in the womb; 333, miracles at
his birth; 335, why he has a son, why he is of good family, why he is not born in such a
continent, etc. On the mother of the Bodhisattva, death on the seventh day, 331, 337; when
pregnant, sheltered by fire, etc.].
196. Vyākhyā: anāsravadharmasaṁtāno dharmakāyaḥ/ āśrayaparivṛttir vā: “The
Dharmakāya is a series of pure dharmas (Kośa, iv.32) or a renewing of the psycho-physical
organism, the personality (āśraya).” Some examples of the renewing of the personality,
iv.56, trans. p. 631; see viii.34d.On the dharmakāya of the mother of the Buddha, of an
Upāsaka who has entered the Path, see Huber, Sūtrālaṁkāra, 217, 390.
Dīgha, iii.84 (Ajjaññasutta): Tathāgatassa hetam Văseṭṭha adhivacanaṁ dhammakayo
iti pi brahmakayo iti pi dhammabhūto iti pi brahmabhūto iti piti (Fragment of the
commentary in Dialogues, iii.81.
Frequently dharmakaya = the body of scriptures the second ratna, Divya, 396,
Przyluski, Açoka, 359, etc.; Bodhicaryāvatāra, i.1.
For the Mahāyāna, we quote only the Abhisamayalamkāra, vi.2 - 11; JRAS, 1906, 943;
Burnouf, Introduction, 224; Si-yu-ki (= Hsi-yu-chi), end of book iv.Footnotes 1201
197. The word ādi is not in the Sanskrit or Tibetan Kārikās. Paramārtha: "the word et cetera
indicates the duration of the Law, the destruction or the non-destruction of relics, etc. Such
are the differences due to the time period when the Buddhas appear."
The time of the seven Buddhas, their cast, gotra, length of life, tree, etc., in
Mahāpadānasuttanta, Dīgha, ii.1 and Dīrgha, TD 1, p. 1c19. The Law of Kāśyapa lasts eight
days; that of Sākyamuni lasts one thousand years (see viii.39). Kośa, iii.93a.
198. "Perfection" is a term more useful than exact. The Kośa's presentation is frequently
clarified by the theories of the Mahāyāna which we find notably in the Bodhisattvabhūmi
(for example First Part, Chap. V, on prabhāva, Musé on, 1911, p. 155).
199. Sarvaguṇajñānasaṁbhārābhyāsa: the qualities (guṇa) are by their nature five
pāramitās; the knowledges (jñāna) are the prajñāpāramitā. Abhyasa, exercise = punaḥ
punaḥ prayogaḥ.
200. Dīrghakālābhyāsa: tribhir asaṁkhyeyair mahākalpaiḥ (Doctrine summarized, iv. P.
691-2). Ananda thinks that to become a Buddha through meditation for six years is to
become a Buddha quite easily ... (Chavannes, Cinq cents contes, ii.100).
201. Vyākhyā: sarvathā jñānam iti sarvaprakārāvabodhanār:hena.
However, according the the gloss of the Japanese editor who follows Fa-pao, sarvatra
jñāna is to be understood as the consciousness of common characteristics (sāmānyalakṣaṇa),
impermanence, etc.: from this point of view any Arhat knows all thing (see Vyākhyā, i.15, p.
73: no salvation for one who does not know all dharmas); and sarvathā jñāna is the
consciousness of self characteristics, which is āveṇika, proper to the Buddha (see the stanza
on the tail of the peacock, Vyākhyā, i. p. 6, and Kośa, Chapter IX, trans. Hsüan-tsang, TD
29, p. 157c23; compare p. 155al).
The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 382c23, teaches that the Buddha possesses both sarvatra jñāna
and sarvathā jñāna relative to the twelve āyatanas; whereas Śāriputra possesses only the
First Dhyāna, which he owes to the teaching of the Master.
202. Vāsanā, above P. 1143.
203. We have: apūrvabāhyaviṣayotpādana = nirmāṇa; aśmādīnāṁ suvarnādibhāvāpādana =
pariņāma; dīrghakālāvasthāna = adhiṣṭhāna. On nirmāṇa and adhiṣṭhāna, see vii. 49 and
following.
204. See Kofa, ii. trans. p. 165.
Ekottara, TD 2, p. 639a14: The Buddha asked Śāriputra, "Why do you not remain a
kalpa or more?" Śāriputra answered, “I hold that the life of the Bhagavat himself is very
short. The longest life does not go beyond one hundred years; and as the life of beings is
short, the life of the Tathāgata is also short. If the Tathāgata continues to live a kalpa, I too
shall continue to live a kalpa... "How can Śāriputra speak thusly? Beings are not capable of
knowing whether the life of the Tathāgata is long or short. Säriputra should know that
there are four incomprehensible things about the Tathāgata. (Compare the four acinteyyas
of Anguttara, ii.80, Sumangalavilāsinī, i.22).
205. Compare the power of samkṣepa-prathana, a Mahāyāna text, JRAS, 1908, 45; also
Dīgha, ii.109
206. a. Vividhanijāścaryadharmasaṁpad. This is the sahajaprabhāva of the Bodhisat-
tvabhūmi, Muséon, 1911, 161.
The Vyakhya quotes the Sutra: dharmataiṣā buddhānāṁ bhagavatāṁ yat teṣām
gacchatāṁ nimnasthalaṁ ca samībhavati yad uccaṁ tan nīcībhavati yan nīcaṁ tad
uccībhavati andhāś ca dṛśiṁ pratilabhante badhirāḥ śrotram unmattāḥ smṛtim . . .
These are, almost identically, the citrāṇy āścaryāṇi adbhutadharmāḥ of Divya, 250-251.
Compare the quotation in Milinda, 179.1202 Chapter Seven
b. Hsüan-tsang adds here: "Or rather conversion of those difficult to convert; the
solution of difficult questions; the teaching that leads to salvation; to defeat Māra, Tīrthikas,
etc."
207. On adhigama, see viii.39a.
208. Actions involving necessary retribution (iv.50) are alanghaniya, “insurmountable."
209. According to Hsüan-tsang. Paramārtha: “Anyone who, having come into this world,
plants a small amount of merit in the Buddha, after having taken up heavenly births,
certainly obtains an immortal dwelling." But the Vyākhyā has: kārān ity upakārān
pājādikān. Therefore Vasubandhu quotes here the stanza of the Divya, p. 166: ye'lpan api
jine kārän karişyanti vinayake/ vicitram svargam agamaya lapsyante'mṛtam padam. (On
Divya, xii, Levi, T'oung Pao, 1907, p. 107).
210. Rana = kleśa Raṇayati kleśayatīty arthaḥ. Araṇāvihārin in Divya and in the Pāļi sources
(JPTS, 1891, 3).
a. See Kośa, i.8 where the Bhāṣya: raṇā hi kleśā ātmaparavyābādhanāt is explained: ye by
ātmānaṁ parāṁś ca vyābādhante te raṇā yuddhānīty arthaḥ.
There are three raṇas, skandharaṇa, vāgraṇa, and kleśaraṇa.
To the reference in Kośa, i. trans. note 37, add: “Maitrī and Araṇā,” Séances Ac. de
Belgique, April 1921; Kośa, iv.56; Bodhisattvabhūmi, fol. 37b and 83a; Sūtrālaṁkāra, xx.45;
Sarad Chandra Dās, 1164.
b. The Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 898b23) enumerates the five means by which the Arhat
avoids producing defilement in another: 1. purity of attitude (walking, etc.); 2. Knowledge
of what he should say and should not say . 5. before entering into a village to beg, he
examines whether a man or woman could, because of him, produce any defilement.
c. The doctrine of the Mahāyāna, for example the Mahāyāna-saṁgraha (9.2) differs
from that of the Kośa: The Pratyekabuddha only arrests savastuka defilements, whereas the
Buddha arrests all the defilements ... The Buddha creates nirmitas or fictive beings . . . '
(TD 31, p. 151c).
"
d. The araṇā of the Śrävaka and the Buddha are defined in Abhisamayālaṁkāra, vi.7:
śrāvakasyāraṇā draştṛnṛklefaparihāritā/
tatkleśasrota-ucchittyai grāmādiṣu jināraṇā//
The araṇāsamadhi of a Śrävaka: "May there be no arising of any defilement in anyone
who sees me! (māsmaddarśanāt kasya cit kleśotpattiḥ syāt)." But, for the Tathāgatas: "He
roots out, in the villages, etc., the process of the defilements in all persons."
211. He who kills an Arhat commits a "mortal sin," even if he does not know that this is an
Arhat, iv.103; the monk who insults a junior monk who is an Arhat is reborn five hundred
times as a slave.
212. An Arhat causes another person to have no hatred with respect to himself, without
however rooting out hatred in another; he can only cause another person to not have
satkāyadṛṣṭi, “the idea of a personality," with respect to himself; for if another person has
satkāyadṛṣṭi, he has satkāyadṛṣṭi with respect to all persons.
213. Abhisamayālaṁkāra, vii.8: anābhogam anäsangam avyāghātaṁ sadā sthitam/
sarvapraśnăpanud bauddhaṁ praṇidhijñānam iṣyate//On praṇidhijñāna, see ii.62a, p. 300,
vi.22c, p. 938, Chap. IX (Hsüan-tsang, xxix.9a); Mahävyutpatti, 48.52.
214. I interpret the Bhāṣya according to the Vyākhyā, which says simply: ārūpyas tu na
sākṣāt praṇidhijñānena jñāyante/ nişyandacaritavišeșāt tu/ karşakanidarśanam cătreti
vaibhāṣikāh.
215. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 897b24: Does pranidhijñāna know the future? Some say that by
reason of the past and of the present he infers (pi-chih
: to compare, to know)Footnotes
1203
the future; the same way that a person infers with certainty from fields or seeds that there
will be a certain fruit. Some say that, if this is the case, pranidhijñāna is an anumāna, an
inferential reasoning, not a pratyakṣa or direct perception. We say that pranidhijñāna does
not know a result through its present cause, nor a cause through its present result: it is
therefore pratyakṣa and not anumāna. (Compare Kośa, ii.62, p. 300).
Anguttara, iv.402, on the fact that the Bhagavat knows that Devadatta is destined for
hell; on the omniscience of the Bhagavat, see Pațisambhidāmagga, ii.194-195.
Explanations of Aryadeva, Catuḥfatikā, 257 (Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,
1914, p. 492):...anāgatarthālambanam yogināṁ praṇidhijñānaṁ/ yathartham...
tättvikayā kalpanayā dṛśyante'nāgato bhāvah.
Kathāvatthu, v.8 (on consciousness or knowledge of the future: Andhakas).
216. Yāvāṁs tatsamādhiviṣaya iti: that is, as a Śrāvaka, the ascetic knows what is of the
sphere of the Śrävaka... (vii.55 and elsewhere).
217. The four Pratisamvids are, it appears, the consciousnesses which make an excellent
preacher. Burnouf, Lotus, 838-842 (pratisamvid = distinct consciousness); Childers, 366;
Spence Hardy, Manual 499; a valuable note in the Appendix of the translation of the
Kathāvatthu, p. 377-382.
Prațisambhidā is to be understood in the very general sense of exact consciousness, for
example: Pațisambhidāmagga.
The four patisambhidās, Pațisambhidāmagga i.119, Vibhanga, 293, 331, Niddesa, 234
(interesting), Visuddhimagga, 440-443; the four pratisamvids, Daśabhūmaka, ninth sphere
(very different definitions); Bodhisattvabhūmi, Third Part; Dharmasaṁgraha, 51,
Mahāvyutpatti, 13, Sūtrālaṁkāra, xviii.34-37, xx.47 (the third is the gift of languages of
different countries).
Artha and dharma are explained vii.39c-d. . . . teșu dharmeṣv arthapratisaṁvedī bhavati
dharmapratisamvedī . . . Vyākhyā, i. p. 56; Dīgha, iii.241. dharmānusārin, Kośa vi.29a-b.
218. a. The Chinese render pratisaṁvid by wu ai chieh
chih
*****
or wu ai
= "unhindered understanding," "unhindered knowledge."
The Vyākhyā (ad 37c-d) has a gloss: avivarti ity aśakyaṁ vivartayitum.
The Bodhisattvabhūmi (below) has asaktam avivartyam.
The meaning of asaktam jñānam is fixed by the definition of Bodhi in the Bodhisat-
tvabhūmi. Bodhi is pure (śuddha) knowledge, universal (sarvajñāna) and immediate
(asangajñāna): a knowledge obtained "by a simple bending of the mind," ābhogamätreṇa,
without this bending being repeated, na punaḥ punar ābhogaṁ kurvataḥ (Bodhisat-
tvabhūmi, I. vii. Muse'on 1911, p. 170).
b. Bodhisattvabhūmi, fol. 100a (I.xvii.7): yat sarvadharmāṇāṁ sarvaparyāyeṣu
yāvadbhāvikatayā yathāvadbhāvikatayā ca (See vi. note 326) bhāvanāmayam asaktam
avivartyam jñānam iyam eṣāṁ [bodhisattvānāṁ] dharmapratisamvit/ yat punaḥ
sarvadharmāṇām sarvalakṣaṇeṣu... iyam eşām arthapratisamvit/ yat punaḥ sarvadhar-
māņām eva sarvanirvacaneșu . . . iyam eṣāṁ niruktipratisaṁvit/ yat punaḥ sarvadhar-
māņām eva sarvaprakārapadaprabhedeșu . . . iyam eṣāṁ pratibhānapratisamvit/
By reason of these four, skandhakauśalam, dhatvāyatanakauśalam, pratītyasamutpāda-
sthānāsthānakauśalam, the dharmas are well known and well preached.
219. Here the dharma is deśanā, the teaching (deśanādharma), as it is said: “I shall teach you
the Dharma, propitious in the beginning, propitious in the middle, propitious in the end, of
good meaning, of good syllables; the single complete, pure, purified brahmacarya, I shall
promulgate it to you." [We have pratipattidharma in the text: "What is the Dharma? The
Eightfold Path." We have phaladharma = nirvāṇa, in the text: "Take refuge in the
Dharma." See iv.31, vi.73c.]
But the word of the Buddha is nāman or vac, see Kośa, i.25, trans. p. 86.1204 Chapter Seven
220. The expression yuttamuttapaṭibhāna in Anguttara, ii.135; explained in Puggalapañ-
ñatti: the yuttapaṭibhāna person, when questioned, answers well, but not quickly; the
muttapaṭibhāna person answers quickly, but not well; the yuttamuttapaṭibhāna person
answers quickly and well. The preacher of Divya, 329,493 is yuktamuktapratibhāna; of
Avadanaśataka, ii.81, yuktamuktapratibhānin and yuktamuktavidhānajñā. [Compare the
asaṁsaktākṣarapada of the Mahābhārata, xviii.6.21, Hopkins, Great Epic, 364?].
I translate mukta by "easy," "without difficulty” according to the Pāļi; Paramārtha has li
chang shih**
free from the defect of any obstacle.
"
221. Above page 1154 line 16.
222. On the meaning of pratibhāna see Mahāvastu, i.511, Avadānaśataka, i.48.10, ii.50.12,
81.
223. When it has voice for its object (vāgālambanā) it is, by nature, duḥkha, samudaya,
dharma, anvaya, kṣaya, anutpāda, and saṁvṛtijñānas.
When it has the Path for its object, it is mārga, dharma, anvaya, kṣaya, anutpäda,
paracitta, and saṁvṛtijñānas.
224. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 904a25: Three opinions. First opinion: it is of Kāmadhātu and the
First Dhyāna; second opinion: it is of Kāmadhātu and the Four Dhyānas; third opinion: it is
of Kāmadhātu and Anāgamya, Dhyānāntara and the Four Dhyānas. P'u-kuang observes that
the first opinion supposes that nāman is bound to the voice, and that the other two opinions
suppose that nāman is bound to the body. Fa-pao does not agree.
p. 203).
225. The Sūtra says: vitarkya vicārya vācaṁ bhāṣate (ii.33,
226. The word ādi includes kāla, kāraka, etc.
227. According to Paramārtha: “Pratibhāna is to speak victorious words of demonstration
and refutation"; according to Hsüan-tsang: "A flow of words without a dike."
228. Mahāvyutpatti, 76.12.
229. Paramārtha: "But, according to other masters
study...
Hsüan-tsang: "In fact, only the
230. Kim cit tadvyatiriktaṁ kevalaṁ prāntakoṭikam iti: "There is a prāntakoţika, distinct
from the preceding ones, called simply prāntakoṭika." According to the gloss of Saeki, this
refers to the prantakoṭika upon which the Saint supports himself in order to reject his life..
. (See Kośa, ii.10a, trans. p. 168; vi.59, note 389).
231. For the Sarvästivādins, only the Fourth Dhyana can be prāntikoţika; according to
Sthiramati (Tsa-Chi, 9.9), all Four Dhyānas and all four ārūpyas are prāntakoṭika. Vibhāṣā,
TD 27, p. 895c6.
232. Mahāvyutpatti, 67.5 and Dharmaśarira.
233. Hsüan-tsang adds: "Prānta signifies 'not passing beyond'; this absorption is called
pränta because another cannot pass beyond it." Hsüan-tsang translates prāntakoți =
pien-chi
(limit-end), Paramartha, yuan-chi
(distant-end).
Compare Yogasūtra, ii.27, prāntabhūmi.
234. Mahävyutpatti, 94.2, bhūtakoti, shih-chi A chen shib chi ÁI*
yan day par mtha' (which appears to signify "the true limit"). Burnouf, Lotus, 309, observes
that bhūtakoți is not the equivalent of Bhavăgra, “the highest stage of existence," since, in
the Lankavatar, bhūtakoti signifies śūnyatā or emptiness.
The gloss of Kyokuga Saeki, “bhūta all the dharmas" appears to be very good. The
Madhyamakāvatara (Tibetan trans. p. 344) says clearly that nirodhasamāpatti =
bhūtakoṭisamāpatti. (It belongs to the Bodhisattva stage of Dūraṁgamā). The ascetic who
9Footnotes 1205
has attained Bhavăgra can penetrate into nirodhasamāpatti (ii.44d. p. 229), which is "the
true end," "the absolute end of existence."
The use of bhutakoți in Mahāyāna writings does not interest us here; let us mention
however Bodhicaryävatāra, ix.2.38, Sikşasamuccaya, 257, Madhyäntavibhāga, i.15;
Commentary on the Nāmasaṁgīti, vi.6: aviparyāsārthena bhūtakoṭiḥ; Madhyamakāvatara.
340.
235. vi. trans. p. 1012.
236. At the moment when he becomes a Buddha by becoming an Arhat, by detaching
himself from Bhavāgra, ii. p. 227.
237. If the Tirthikas possess the five abhijñās, yes, according to the Haimavatas,
Sarvāstivādins, and Vätsiputriyas; no, according to the Mahīśāsakas, and Dharmaguptakas
(according to Vasumitra and Bhavya).
Pūrṇa, who is only a prajñāvimukta (and not a ubhayatobhāgavimukta, vi.64a), is not
able to exercise supernormal powers (ṛddhi) “in common with the Tirthikas"; but he
quickly obtains the six abhijñās (Divya, 44).
238. By reading upapad for upapāda (?).
The bibliography on the abhijñās is infinite. Majjhima, i.34, ii.238, Dīgha, i.8, iii. 110;
Anguttara, iii.245; Visuddhimagga, 202, 373, 406; Compendium, 209 and above all the
Introduction, p. 61 and following; Mahävyutpatti, 14, Dharmasamgraha, 20; Daśabhumi, iii.
(trans. Madhyamakāvatara, p. 57, Muséon 1907); Sūtrālamkāra, vii.1.9; Śikṣāsamuccaya,
243, Bodhicarya, ix.41.
Abhijñā, compare ohiñana in Hoernle, Uvāsaga, trans. p. 48.
For the primitive sense of the word, see Burnouf, Lotus, 820; Kern, Lotus, 131; Rhys
Davids, Milinda, ii.231, Dialogues, i.62, 157; Windisch, Geburt, 9.62. Abhi-jñā is spoken of
with reference to a knowledge of the Truths, vi.54c, 66, ix. (Hsüan-tsang xxix. 14b), etc.
239. On ṛddhi, iv.117d (“an ornament of the mind"). vi.69 (ṛddhipāda), vii.47
(ṛddhiprātihārya), 48 (gamana and nirmāṇa), 53 different types of ṛddhi; viii.35b (āryā
ṛddhi).
a. We have: ṛddhiḥ samādhiḥ/ ṛddhiviṣayo nirmāṇaṁ gamanaṁ ca/ ṛddhiviṣaye jñānaṁ
tasya sākṣātkriyā saṁmukhībhāvah (Vyākhyā).
For the definition ṛddhi = samādhi, vi.69, p. 1024, vii. 48a; Pațisambhiḍāmagga,
ii.205-206.
Mahāvyutpatti: ṛddhividhijñāna; Pāļi: iddhividhā, iddhippabheda; prabheda can be
understood as in prajñāprabheda, viii.27c.
The Pāli sources occasionally includes ṛddhi in the category of the "knowledges";
yamakapāṭihire ñāṇa is the knowledge having the miracle of the water and the fire for its
object; iddhividhe ñāņa (Paṭisambhidāmagga, ii. 125, i.111); pañcābhiññāñaṇa and
atthasamapattiñāṇa (Mahāniddesa, 106).
b. The Sūtra of the Ṛddhyabhijñā is quoted in the Vyākhyā, vi. 69; it presents some
variants to the Pāļi edition (Dīgha, i.77, Majjhima, i. 34, Añguttara, ii.280; commentaries in
Patisambhidāmagga, ii.207, Visuddhimagga, 373-406), and also to the text of the
Mahävyutapatti, 15 (according to the Mahaparinirvāṇa sūtra): anekavidham ṛddhivişayam
pratyanubhavati/ eko bhūtvā bahudhā bhavati/ bahudhā bhūtvā eko bhavati/ āvirbhavati
tirobhāvam apy anubhavati/ tiraḥ kuḍyaṁ tiraḥ prākāraṁ [tiraḥ parvatam] asajjamānah
käye (?) gacchati tadyathākāśe/ pṛthivyām unmajjananimajjanaṁ karoti tadyathodake/
udake'bhidyamánena srotasa gacchati tadyatha pṛthivyäm/ākāśe paryankeṇa kramati
tadyathā śakuniḥ pakṣī/ imau vā punaḥ süryacandramasāv evaṁ maharddhikāv evam
mahānubhāvan pāṇinā āmāṛṣti parimāṛṣti yāvad brahmalokaṁ kāyena vaše vartayata (see
note 293) itīyam ucyata ṛddhiḥ.
Pāļi edition: . . sa evaṁ samāhite citte ānejjappatte iddhividhāya cittam abhinīharati
abhininnāmeti/ so anekavihitam iddhividhaṁ paccanubhoti/ eko pi hutvā . . . Anekavihitam1206 Chapter Seven
iddhividham corresponds to anekavidham ṛddhivisayam. Yaśomitra explains ṛddhivişaya as
"the operation of magical power, the object of the consciousness which realizes the miracle"
and employs the expression rddhiviṣaye jñānam as in the Pațisambhidāmagga, i. 111:
iddhividhe ñāṇam. Rhys Davids-Stede mention Vinaya, iii.67 (Pārājikā, ii.47): “There is no
sin in this magical operation (iddhivisaye) for those who possess iddhi," and Nettippaka-
raṇa, 23: "... impossible to resist at death, if not through the operation of magic (aññatra
iddhivisayā).” [The version "extent of psychic power" is not admissible].
Pratyanubhaviati-paccanubhoti, Lotus, 838 (on Divya, 204); we have ṛddyānubhava in
Avadānaśataka ii.129 (=ṛddhi); ānubhāva = "supernatural power" (Childers).
c. According to Pațisambhidāmagga (ii.207), the miracles of the Sūtra of the
Ṛddhyabhijñā (above b) are one of the ten iddhis, adhiṭṭhāna iddhi [The same
Compendium]. See Kośa, vii.52a; on different manifestations of ṛddhi, vii.38 and following.
Prabhāva is not to be confused with ṛddhi (above page 81). Occasionally we have
ṛddhiprabhāva as ṛddhisaṁpad, ṛddhivafitā, or ṛddhyaiśvarya.
240. The Sūtra continues with a description of divyacakṣus and pūrvanivāsānusmrti.
241. The fifth abhijñā in the Sūtra.
iha bhikṣuḥ parasattvānāṁ parapudgalānāṁ vitarkitaṁ vicaritaṁ manasā mānasaṁ
yathābhūtaṁ prajānāti/ sarāgaṁ cittam sarāgamiti yathābhūtaṁ prajānāti/vigatarāgaṁ...
sadveşam … . . vigatadveṣaṁ ….. samohaṁ . . . vigatamohaṁ . . . vikṣiptaṁ . . . saṁkṣiptaṁ ..
līnam... pragṛhītaṁ . . . uddhataṁ. . . anuddhataṁ ... avyupaśāntaṁ. . . vyupaśāntaṁ
samāhitaṁ. . . asamāhitaṁ. . . abhāvitaṁ . . . bhāvitaṁ . . avimuktaṁ . . . vimuktam cittam
vimuktam iti yathābhūtaṁ prajānāti/ iyam ucyate cetaḥparyāyajñānasākṣātkriyābhijñāa.
Above page 1099 and following.
Explanation of the expression cetaḥparyāya: cetaḥparyāyo višeṣo raktaṁ dvişțaṁ
mūḍham iti vā/ karmo va paryāyaḥ kadā cid raktaṁ kadā cid dviṣṭaṁ mūḍham vā.
Another name of this abhijñā is paracittajñāna, see above page 1098.
242. Abhijñās four, five, and six are the three "knowledges" acquired by the Bodhisattva on
the night of Bodhi; on the three knowledges, see vi.45.c.
243. Vyākhyā: iha bhikṣur anekavidhaṁ pūrvanivāsaṁ samanusmarati iti bahuḥ sūtravad
grantho yāvad iyam ucyate pūrvanivāsānusmṛtijñānasākṣāt kārābhijñā.
Below (ad vii.43.d): . . . amī nāma te sattvā yatrāham abhūvam evaṁnāmā evaṁgotra
evaṁjātir evaṁsukhaduḥkhapratisaṁvedī evaṁcirasthitika evamāyuḥparyantaḥ/ so'ham
tasmac cyuto'nutropapannaḥ/ tasmãd api cyuto'mutropapannaḥ/ tasmac cyuta ihopapanna
iti sākāraṁ soddeśam [sanidānam] anekavidhaṁ pūrve nivāsam anusmaratītīyam …..
(Variants in the Păli edition).
Commentary in the Samantapāsādikā, i.158.
This abhijñā is not to be confused with jātismarată which is one of the "natural powers"
of the Buddhas or Bodhisattvas, vii.55, iv. 109, notes 493 and 494 (the limits of the
consciousness of the past).
244. This is the third abhijñā in the Sūtra. It has two names: Hsüan-tsang calls it
divyacakşus, Paramartha, cyutyupapādajñāna. Mahävyutpatti has cyutyupapatti, the
Sütrālamkāra, cyutopapada.
Kofa, viii.27c, Suttanipāta, 1112, 1136, Samyutta, iii.213.
245. See Pațisambhidāmagga, i.115, the explanation of asavakkhaya as a function of the
three pure indriyas (Kofa, ii.4) and of the results (Srotāpaanna, etc.) [Curious description of
bhavāsava].
246. See page 1164 line 5.
247. According to Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 728a28, reproduced almost literally in the Bhāṣya.Footnotes 1207
248. Vyākhyā: In the same way that the results of the religious life (vi.51), as conditioned
dharmas, are by nature vimuktimārga. See Below note 257, note 270.
249. Samghabhadra: According to the Westerners, six jñānas: for example dharma, anvaya,
duḥkha, samudaya and mārgajñānas, and knowing samvṛta things of the past.
250. What is under consideration here is the consciousness of the mind of another, which is
pure (four of the five jñānas enumerated, with the exception of saṁvṛtijñāna) and impure
(saṁvṛtijñāna and paracittajñāna).
251. See vii.28c.
252. According to the Compendium, 61, the fifth dhyāna is adhiṭṭhānapādakajhāna, that is
to say the dhyāna which serves as the support for the process of volitions which creates the
manifestation of the abhijñā. But Paṭisambhidāmagga, ii.205 considers the Four Dhyānas
the four bhūmis of ṛddhi.
253. Same doctrine in Pațisambhidāmagga, i.113: "Such rūpa has its origin in saumanasyen-
driya …..”
254. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 518c25: Does the preparatory exercise (prayoga) take place through
a memory of "moments” (kṣaṇa) or of sucessive “states” (avastha)? Evidently by a memory
of states, not of moments. If the ascetic proceeds by reviewing moment to moment, death
would come before he had reviewed one half of his life. How does one complete the prayoga
exercise? . . . P'u-kuang: There are three explanations; the second is the best, because the
word "to complete" (in "to complete the prayoga exercises") should not be understood in a
narrow sense (fei pi chü
Couvreur, 1904, p. 244).
255. According to the Sūtra quoted above: . . . sākāraṁ soddeśam . . . (above note 243).
256. According to Paramärtha; Hsüan-tsang: "he no longer considers svacittarūpa."
257. According to Paramārtha. Hsüan-tsang: “ . . . and up to his remembering the moment
before antarābhava. [Gloss of the Japanese editor: “that is to say, the last thought of his
former existence"]. Then the prayoga or preparatory exercise of pūrvanivāsa [anusmṛti] is
achieved." Prayoga is ānantaryamärga; abhijñā is vimuktimārga.
258. Vyākhyā: parasaṁtatyadhiṣṭhānenotpādanam iti/ dhyānasamgrhītaṁ pūrvanivāsā-
nusmṛtijñānam/ tena cārūpyāvacaraṁ cit cittaṁ na gṛhṇātīti/ kathaṁ ca punaḥ
parasamtatyadhiṣṭhänenotpadanam/ samanantaraniruddhān manovijñānāt parakīyān
nimittam udgṛhyeti vistaraḥ (see page 1159 line 25)/ anyeṣām iti ya ārūpyebhyo na
pracyutās teṣām svasaṁtatyadhiṣṭhānenaivot pādanaṁ pūrvanivāsānusmṛtijñānasya
sukaratvāt.
259. The discipline by which the ascetic obtains divine sight (or jñānadarśana) is defined in
Pațisambhidāmagga, i.114. One should cultivate alokasañña day and night (Dīgha, iii.223).
How the ascetic produces trembling of the earth, Dīgha, ii.108. "Lightness," i.10d, 12c.
260. Hsüan-tsang adds: "Furthermore, in the Ārūpyas, vipaſyanā is deficient, famatha is in
excess: now the five abhijñās should be in a sphere where vipaśyanā and śamatha are in
equilibrium. By this very fact, Anāgamya, etc., are also out of the question."
261. Quoted in Vyākhyā ad vii.36.
262. According to Paramartha. Hsüan-tsang is briefer, and places a note here on the
extension of the power of the abhijñā of different saints, a note which Vasubandhu places
above, page 1177.
263. Paramārtha: the abhijñā of the mind of another is included in three smṛtyupasthānas.
264. Paramärtha: ṛddhi, ear and eye are the first [smṛtyupasthāna].1208 Chapter Seven
265. See vii.49.
266. Compare Majjhima, i.22, Saṁyutta, ii.214.
267. There is another knowledge, abhijñāparivārajñāna.
268. Hsüan-tsang's version of the Kārikā has: "The other [abhijñās] are four [smṛtyuupas-
thānas]," and the Bhāṣya: “The other abhijñās are included in the four smṛtyupasthānas,
because they have the five skandhas for their object."
269. See vii.25d, page 1133.
270. All acquisition includes two paths, the path which removes the obstacle, and the path
of deliverance. We have seen that the abhijñās are "prajñā of the path of deliverance"
(vii.42d). According to the opinion presented here an ascetic depends on any of the Dhyānas
for everything that is necessary for the obtaining of the abhijñā of divine sight; but the
obtaining itself is of the First Dhyāna.
271. These are the three knowledges of Majjhima, i.22, 246 (acquired in the three watches of
the night of Bodhi); see viii.27c; Anguttara, vi.211, Dīgha, iii.220, 275.
272. Compare iii.25, 31. In certain sources, we have a list of eight vijjās among which are six
abhiññas, Childers, 571, Visuddhimagga,202.
The Vyakhya quoted the Sūtra: tripițo bhavati trividya iti. Compare tevijja, tevijjaka.
273. Bhagavadviseșa and others explain the formula "in order,” yathākramam, as follows:
One destroys error relative to the past by the remembrance of former existences; error
relative to the present by the consciousness of death and rebirth; and error relative to the
future through the consciousness of the destruction of the asravas (for one says nāparam
asmād bhavaṁ prajānāmi). In fact, the order of the time periods is past, present, and future.
But Samghabhadra (in his Nyāyānusāra, TD, p. 754a14) explains: Remembrance of
former existences puts an end to error relative to the past; the consciousness of death and
rebirth puts an end to error relative to the future; and the consciousness of the destruction
of the asravas puts an end to error relative to the present. This is why these three abhijñās
are vidyās. By the first, one sees the suffering of self and others; by the second, the suffering
of others, and one experiences saṁvega or disgust; thus disgusted, one produces the third,
and one sees the happiness of Nirvāṇa. This is why these three abhijñās are vidyā.
Yaśomitra shows that the thought of Vasubandhu is correctly interpreted by
Samghabhadra.
274. Paramārtha: "Two have the same name, having arisen in its series."
275. Paramartha: "In the Saikṣa, they are not called vidyā because the series is accompanied
by avidyā.” Hsüan-tsang has only one pāda: “In the Śaikṣa, there is obscurity, not vidyā.”
In Samyutta, ii.58, the ascetic in possession of purified dhamma-ñāṇa and anvaya-ñāṇa is
called a diṭṭhisampanna, and sekha ñāṇa and sekhā vijjā are attributed to him.
276. According to Paramārtha.
According to Hsüan-tsang, "There is error-obscurity in the Saikṣa. Thus, even though
the first two abhijñās exist in him, they are not called vidyā, and even though, for a certain
time, they conquer and destroy obscurity, they are again obscure: therefore they are not
called vidyā."
277. We have pāṭihāriya, pāṭihārika, pāṭihera, and pațihira, Senart Kacchāyana, 536;
Childers, 361; Kern, Manual 60; Geiger, Pāļi Grammar 51.
Pāṭihira = a miracle; yamakapāṭihīra in Pațisambhidāmagga, ii.125.
Milinda 309, miracles produced on the tomb of one who has attained Nirvāṇa through
their former adhiṭṭhāna (see Kośa, vii.51), by the adhiṭṭhāna of the gods or of believers.Paramartha and Hsüan-tsang translate tao
At to change-convert, shen-pien
Footnotes 1209
; in Mahāyutpatti, pien-hua
rddhi-change.
278. Dīgha, i.193, 212, iii.220, Añguttara, i.170 (belonging to numerous Bhikṣus), v.327;
Mahāvastu, iii. 116; Burnouf, Lotus, 310, Divya, xii, the Präțihāryasutra.
The prațihāryas are means (upāya) of seduction (āvarjana), Bodhisattvabhūmi, i.6.
279. This phrase is not in Paramärtha. Mahävyutpatti, 146.7, pratihatacitta.
280. Hsüan-tsang: “These three abhijñās, in this order, cause one to take refuge in the
Buddhadharma, to believe in it, and to cultivate it (in the sense of adhigama)."
281. Ṛddhiprātihārya is inferior because one can produce ṛddhi by formulas: Vasubandhu
here records an old opinion, Dīgha,i.213 (below note 283). [But the Buddha cultivates
iddhipāṭihariya, Dīgha, iii.9, and elsewhere]. We should mention Culla, v.8.2 (the story of
Pindola): one who manifests his uttarimanussadhamma iddhipāṭihāriya to householders is
guilty of a dukkața [or better: "he who manifests his magical powers"] [See the remarks of
Rhys Davids on the period of the usage of the term dukkaṭa, Dialogues, iii.3]; compare
Divya, 275, and Przyluski, Açoka, 80.
Dīgha, iii. 112, says that iddhi which is "holy, free from āsava and from upadhi” is
equanimity (upekkhā), and that the iddhi of miracles (eko pi hutvā, etc.) is iddhi which is
"not holy (na ariyā), possessing āsava and upadhi.” See viii.35b.
Anguttara opposes dhamma-iddhi and āmisa-iddhi (i.93); Devadatta only obtained
puthujjanikā iddhi (Culla vii.1.5. and commentary to Dhammapada 17).
The anusasanavidhās of Dīgha, iii. 107, have nothing in common with anuśāsanī.
282. Paramārtha translates vidyāsthāna; Hsüan-tsang has the expression that Eitel
translates "magic incantation" in the words of the Atharva Veda.
The four ādesanavidhās, Dīgha, iii. 103.
283. See Divya, p. 636 at the bottom.
Dīgha, i.213: atthi kho bho gandhārī nāma vijjā/ tāya so bhikkhu anekavihitam
iddhividhaṁ paccanubhoti/ eko pi hutvā . . . / imam kho aham iddhipāṭihāriye ādīnavaṁ
sampassamāno iddhipāṭihāriyena . . .jigucchāmi . . .
[Dialogues, i.278: in Jātaka, iv.498, this vijjā is a charm for making one invisible].
Gāndhārī-Gāndhārī is a vidyādevī (Hemacandra).
It is by the Gandhṣramantra that the hero of Ralstom-Schiefner, Tibetan Tales, p. 288
(Kanjur iv.171) obtains the fruits of the mountain Gandhamādana.
284. Hsüan-tsang, ikdani; Paramārtha, īkḍaṇiks. Below vii.56b. Bodhicaryşvatsra, ix.25;
Samyutta, ii.260, itthi ikkhaniks.
atthi maṇiko (maṇikā) nāma vijjā/ tṣya … parasattānam . . . cittaṁ pi ādisati cetasikaṁ
pi ādisati . . . . . . jigucchāmi/ katamaṁ ca kevaddha anusāsanīpāṭihāriyam . . .
[Dialogues, i. 278, Buddhaghosa identifies the "jewel charm" with cintāmaṇī vijjā; Rhys
Davids refers to Jātaka, iii.504, Sumangalavilāsinī, 265, 267, 271.]
285. Hsüan-tsang: "Anuśāsanīprātihärya can only be realized through āsravakṣayābhijñā,
thus it is avyabhicărin." According to the editor, we should understand: “thus it necessarily
has the results of salvation and happiness."
286. See above note 239.
The ten types of iddhi, of which the last three interest us here (adhiṭṭhāniddhi,
vimubbaniddhi, manomayiddhi), are defined in the Introduction to the Compendium, p. 60
(Paṭisambhidāmagga, ii.205, Atthasālinī, 91, Visuddhi, 202, 373, 766). Mrs. Rhys Davids,
Psychology, 199.
For the limits of the power of iddhi, see Kathāvatthu, xxi.4.
Bodhisattvabhūmi, i.5 (Muséon, 1911, p. 156-164).1210 Chapter Seven
287. Paramārtha: atra ākāśagamanam nirmitam. Hsüan-tsang: "The visaya is twofold,
gamana and nirmita."
Samyutta, v.282, is interesting.
288. "Displacement of adhimokşa," originating from adhimokṣa, ādhimokṣika."
"Rapid displacement like the mind." We have, in Divya, 52-53, the narration of the
journey of the Buddha and Maudgalyāyana through the Maricika universe. They go by
means of Maudgalyāyana's ṛddhi, by using Sumeru as a spring-board: the journey takes
seven days; but they return instantly through the ṛddhi of the Buddha: "What is the name of
this ṛddhi? Manojavā.” Ibid, p. 636 at the bottom, a manojavā vidyā. Rhys Davids-Stede
mentions manojavā as an epithet of horses, Vimānavatthu.
289. See above page 1146-7.
290. Compare Anguttara, ii.80, Divya, 53.
291. Pakkhi sakuno. See the explanations of Visuddhi, p. 396.
292. Pṛthagjanas possess this first gamana (Hsüan-tsang).
293. The Pațisambhidā quoted in Visuddhi, 401: . . . brahmalokaṁ gantukāmo . . . dūre pi
santike adhiṭṭhāti santike hotū ti santike hoti: Desiring to go to Brahmaloka, he creates
adhiṭṭhāna that this may be near or far: "May this be near!" and this becomes near. [This is
the explanation of the Sūtra kāyena vasaṁ vatteti, above note 239b.
294. Four āyatanas, not sound; see page 1173 and vii.51b.
295. Bāhya, external, in the sense of anupātta, not constituting a sense organ in the service
of the mind, Kośa, i.34c.
296. As we have seen i.30b-d.
297. Compare the definitions of the three magical iddhis in Compendium, Introduction, p.
61 and Visuddhi, 405.
298. That is to say, a mind of the sphere of Kāmadhātu through which one creates rūpa of
Kāmadhātu, and a mind of the sphere of the First Dhyāna through which one creates rūpa
of the First Dhyāna. vii.51a-b.
299. Paramartha: "Not higher"; Bhāṣya: “The mind that is capable of creating fictive beings
of a higher sphere is not the result of a mind of a lower dhyāna.” Hsüan-tsang does not
translate this pāda in the Kārikā, but in the Bhāṣya: "[The mind that is capable of creating
fictive beings] does not depend on a lower sphere.”
300. A fictive being created in Kāmadhātu by a mind capable of creating fictive bengs of the
Second Dhyāna, even though it is of the sphere of Kāmadhātu, can appear in the heaven of
the Second Dhyāna. A fictive being created in the heaven of the First Dhyana by a mind
capable of creating fictive beings of the First Dhyāna does not have access to the heaven of
the Second Dhyāna.
301. One obtains the dhyānas through detachment (vairāgya). By becoming detached from
Kāmadhātu one obtains the First Dhyāna. At the same time, one "takes possession" of the
minds capable of creating fictive beings which can exist in this dhyāna.
302. Is there a falling away (vyutthāna) from contemplation at the end of nirmāṇacitta? No.
50c-d. It proceeds from pure dhyāna and from itself; it is followed by the two. After
śuddhaka dhyāna there succeeds an abhijñā of fictive creation. After this abhijñā of fictive
creation there succeeds nirmāṇacitta, the result of this abhijñā. After this nirmāṇacitta there
succeeds innumerable nirmāṇacittas, which do not arise from another citta. Finally after the
last nirmāṇacitta there succeeds an abhijñā of fictive creation. After this there succeeds aFootnotes 1211
fuddhaka dhyāna or a nirmāṇacitta. How is this? If the person who is in the samādhiphala
(samadhiphalasthitasya = nirmāṇacittasthitasya) does not return to the müladhyāna, there
will be no falling away (vyutthāna) from the samādhiphala.
303. Quoted in Vyākhyā, ii.71b.
304. This stanza is commented on in Vyākhyā, i. p. 27 (Petrograd 1918). See Divya, 166,
closely related to the Kośa: yaṁ khalu śrāvako nirmitam abhinirmimīte yadi śrāvako
bhaşate nirmito'pi bhāṣate/ śrāvake tūṣṇībhūte nirmito'pi tūṣṇībhavati/ ekasya
bhāṣamāṇasya sarve bhāṣanti nirmitāḥ/ ekasya tūṣṇībhūtasya sarve tūṣṇībhavanti te//
bhagavān nirmitam praśnam pṛcchati bhagavān vyäkaroti (Read rather: bhagavantam
nirmitaḥ praśnaṁ pṛcchati/ bhagavān vyākaroti/ nirmitaṁ bhagavān praśnaṁ pṛcchati/
nirmito vyākaroti). Compare Dīgha, ii.212. Madhyamaka, xvii.31-32.
On the nirmitas, Kāraṇaprajñapti, xi. Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 45.
305. a. We encounter many times adhiṣṭhāna, adhitiṣṭhati, in the sense of "making last"
(ādhiṣṭhānikī ṛddhi, iii.9; below note 306; ii. page 165, āyuḥsaṁskārān adhitiṣṭhati
(stapayati) = adhiṣṭhānavaśitā; vii. p. adhiṣṭhānaprabhāva.
b. Numerous uses in a little or non-technical sense, for example Bodhicaryāvatāra, ii.45:
"The preacher is adhiṣṭhita (=ātmasātkṛta by the messengers of Yama"; Mahāvastu, iii.376;
Śikṣāsamuccaya, 314: “Beings who do not understand the speech of the Bodhisattvas are
possessed (adhisthita) by Māra." Sikṣāsamuccaya 356: "All good actions are presided over
(adhiṣṭhita) by diligence"; ibid. 285: "The Bodhisattva makes his dispositions (āśaya) well
guarded, purified, taken in hand (svadhiṣṭhita)”; Samyutta, v.278: suggahīta svadhiṭṭhita;
Samyutta, iii.10, 135 (adhiṭṭhānābhiniveśa of the defilements in the mind).
c. Adhitiṣṭhati = "To exercise a certain action on a thing, a person, oneself, by means of
adhimokṣa, 'volition, will,' applied to this thing, etc."
This general sense is specialized, in the Kośa, into the sense of "making last”; [in the
vocabulary of the Pațisambhidāmagga, ii.207, it refers to the miracles of multiplication, etc.;
ii.207; see also Atthasālinī, trans. p. 121 and Compendium]. But it is through rūpādhiṣṭhān-
abala (Śikṣāsamuccaya, 330.11) that flowers place themselves around the head of
Dipamkara (Divya, 251.1); the Buddhas convert through adhiṣṭhāna (= ānubhāva),
Bodhicaryavatāra, i.5.
d. Burnouf translates "benediction" from byin kyi rlabs. It is, he says, through the
benediction of a Thera that a person travels in the Thūpavaṁsa; it is through a benediction
of the Buddhas that the Bodhisattvas form vows to become Buddhas. (See the two
abhiṣṭhānas, of which the second is a consecration, abhișeka, of the Lankāvatāra, Nanjo, p.
100). The eighth bhūmi is the adhiṣṭhānabhūmi (a great variety of Chinese equivalents):
this bhūmi is so called because it cannot be shaken (parāvikopanatvāt).
e. Compare Gītā, iv.6: prakṛtiṁ svaṁ adhiṣṭhāya saṁbhavāmy ātmamāyayā, and Lotus,
xv.3: ātmānam adhiṣṭhaḥāmi sarvāṁś ca sattvān . . . nirvāṇabhūmiṁ cupadarśayāmi . . . na
cāpi nirvāmy ahu tasmi kāle.
306. Divya, 61. maitreyaḥ . . . kāśyapasya bhikṣor avikopitam asthisamghātaṁ dakṣiṇena
pāṇinā gṛhītvā . . . On all the legends relative to Kāśyapa, Przyluski, J.As 1914, ii.524, and
Açoka, 169, 331; Fa-hien (=Fa-hsien), chap. xxxiii.
Kośa iii.9d examines why the Bodhisattva is born from a womb, and not through an
apparitional birth. It is with an end to being able to leave his relics, for the bodies of
apparitional beings disappear at their death. This explanation is given by the masters who
deny the adhisthānikī ṛddhi of the Bhagavat.
307. Dreams provoked by the adhiṣṭhāna of the gods, Vinītadeva ad Nyāyabindu, p. 47
(Tibetan translation in Bibl. Indica).
308. Commentary in Anguttara, i.209.1212 Chapter Seven
309. Manaayatana and dharmāyatana are not capable of being created, because the fictive
being (nirmita) is devoid of mind, as results from the Sastra: nirmitaḥ acintiko vaktavyah/ .
.. nirmātuś cittavaśena vartate (Vyākhyā). This Šāstra is the Kāraṇaprajñāptiśāstra,
analyzed in Cosmologie bouddhique, p. 340-341.
310. See i. 10b. It has been said above, page 1169, that "creation" consists of external
ayatanas.
311. Hsüan-tsang puts Kārikā 54 before Kārikā 53c-d.
312. The ṛddhi that certain beings possess because they belong to a certain category of
beings.
Examples of innate ṛddhi, Mahävagga, i.15.2, vi.15.8, Culla vii.1.4; 2.1. The four iddhis
(beauty, long life, absence of sickness and good digestion, popularity) of the king of the
Mahāsudassanasutta have something of the supernatural about them; but when Ajātasattu
promises to destroy the Vajjyas, however great their iddhi may be, however great their
ānubhāva may be (Mahāparinibbāna), the sense of these expressions remains doubtful. His
minister Vassakara is without doubt a good magician.
313. Ṛddhi produced by "magic," through the power of formulas or herbs.
314. For example, the ṛddhi that certain persons possess from birth, such as Māndhātār, not
because they are humans, but by reason of certain actions; differing thus from innate ṛddhi
(see below note 328).
315. These persons possess eyes and ears "arisen from karma."
316. Hsüan-tsang: What do the expressions "divine sight," “divine hearing" designate? If
they refer to prajñā, consciousness, the expression “eye”, “ear" is improper. If they refer to
the material organs (rūpīndriya), how are the organs Abhijñās? The Kārikā says: “Divine
sight and divine hearing are of pure rūpa … … .'
>>
317. “Pure rūpa” is rūpaprasāda, Kośa, i.9c; the organs are bhautika, “derived matter," i.
trans. p. 100.
Compare Kathāvatthu, iii.7-8.
318. In opposition to divine sight which is innate in the gods.
The divine sight of the gods is defiled by eleven apakṣālas, iii.14a; see vii.55d.
319. According to Hsüan-tsang: "Divine sight sees without omission." It sees in all
directions, before, behind (prsthatas), on the side (pārsvatas), during the day, during the
night, in light, in darkness (see i. p. 90).
320. In the version of Hsüan-tsang, Kārikā 55a-b is placed after Kārikā 43. And the Bhāṣya
is modified: "In respect to the activity of the Five Abhijñās, extended or narrow, in the
universes (lokadhātu) which are their domain, all the Āryans are not similar. The Śrāvakas,
the Pratyekabuddhas and the Buddhas, when they do not make an extreme act of attention,
produce the activity of their mastery in movement (gamana) and in creation (nirmāṇa), the
first in a mahāsāhasra universe, the second in a dvisāhasra universe, and the third in a
trisāhasra universe. When they make an extreme act of attention, in a dvisāhasra universe,
in a trisāhasra universe, and in infinite universes."
321. Quoted in a comentary to the Nāmasaṁgiti (ad vi.18, asangadṛk).
322. On the chiliocosms, see iii.73.
323. The gods of Kāmadhātu and the Anāgāmins in Rūpadhātu possess, by the fact of their
births, these four powers. These powers are absent in Ārūpyadhātu.
324. This is explained iii.14a; above note 318.Footnotes 1213
325. The treatise of the ikṣaṇikas (Manu, ix.258, etc.). Above note 284.
326. Atthasālinī, 91.
327. The five powers (ṛddhyādika) are, for humans, either vairāgyalābhika (= abhijñāphala)
or tarkavidyauṣadhakarmakṛta, not upapattilābhika.
328. Upapattilābhikaṁ hi nāma yad upapattikāla eva sarveṣāṁ nisargato labhyate/ na tu yat
kasya cid evopapattikālād ürdhvam/ yathā pakṣīṇām ākāśagamanam.CHAPTER EIGHT
The Absorptions
Footnotes 1283
1. The Kārikā has samāpattiḥ śubhaikāgryam; but the Sūtra speaks of samādhi. On the
traditional summary of Chapter VIII and of samāpatti-samādhi, see below viii.23 note 128.
2. Paramārtha translates: “dhyāna produced through arising, dhyāna produced through
concentration."
3. Kośa, iii.2c, vi.38a-b, 43 a-b, ii.41d. There are three (or two) stages in the heaven of the
First Dhyāna, etc. On the “dhyāna existences,” see viii.12, 14a, 16c, 19c.
4. Pāļi: kusalacittekaggatā (Visuddhimagga, 84; see index); Majjhima, i.301, Saṁyutta, v.21,
Dhammasangani, 11 (cittassekaggatā) (The translator mentions Yogāvacara's Manual, p.
xxvi); Mrs Rhys Davis, Psychology, 1914, 104 (references to the canonical texts).
samādhi=adhicitta, vi, p. 978; part of the Path, part of Bodhi, vi. 54d, 70; ṛddhipāda, vi.69c-d,
part of the Saikṣa and Aśaikşa, vi.75.
Bodhisattvabhūmi, fol. 82b, quotes viii. 27c-28.
On samadhi, a very "scholastic" text in Majjhima, i.301.
The samadhiskandha embraces three parts of the Path, samyagvyāyāma, samyaksmṛti,
and samyaksamadhi it then follows that one distinguishes: 1. samadhi (=cittassa ekaggatā);
2. the nimittas of the samādhi which are the smṛtyupasthänas; 3. the pariṣkāras of the
samadhi which are the samyakpradhānas; and 4. the cultivation (bhāvanā) of the samādhi
which is the cultivation of the samādhi, the pradhānas, and the smṛtyupasthānas
["cultivation" is understood in the sense of parisuddhi, paripūri].
5. Whoever enters into dhyāna, that is to say whoever possesses the absorption called
dhyāna, necessarily also possesses the mental states and the mind (the four skandhas), the
"discipline of dhyāna” (iv. 2), which is a rūpa.
6. Ekālambanatā cittānām is the definition of the Abhidharma; but one should understand
cittacaittānām: "The fact that minds and the mental states . . .'
7. Defined in Kośa, ii. 24; English trans. p. 190.
8. In the same way that the Vaiśeșika maintains that a piece of cloth is white
śuklaguṇayogāt, through conjunction with the quality of white.
9. All minds contain samādhi, but a mind associated (saṁpraykta) with a weak samādhi is
not concentrated (ekāgra).
10. According to the Vyākhyā, the two definitions in the same Sūtra: adhicittaṁ śikṣa
katama / catvāri dhyānāni. On the three śikṣās, see Anguttara, i.235; ii.194, Kośa, vi.43c, p..
In the same way that adhiśīlaṁ śikṣā is śīta, so too adhiprajñaṁ śikṣā is prajñā, and
adhicittaṁ śikṣā is simply citta. Now the dhyānas are adhicittam śikṣa, and are thus citta; the
dhyānas, moreover, are samādhi, thus samādhi is citta.
In the same way that śīlapariśuddhi is śīla, dṛṣṭipariśuddhi is dṛșți, and vimuktipariśuḍ-
dhi is vimukti. (See Kośa, vi. 76c, p. 1035)
11. The Sarvästivādin answers.
12. Māhāvyutpatti, 245, 1052 1055, upanidhyātavya, nidhyāyati. Kośa, i.41c, where the
Vyākyā explains: saṁtīraṇam . . . viṣayopanidhyānapūrvakaṁ niścayākarṣaṇam.
13. This formula figures notably in the Sūtra of the Five Vimuktyāyatanas quoted in
Vyākhyā ad i.27 (Mahāvyutpatti, 81, Dīgha, iii.241, Anguttara, iii.21); Samyutta, iii. 13:
samabito bbikkhave bbukkhu yathabbutam pajānāti; ii31 samād bùpanisam yatbabbutam
ñāṇadassanam, etc. And elsewhere, Nettippakarana, 66, Anguttara, v.3, Visuddhimagga,
371, etc.
According to all these texts, samăādhi is necessary for the exact knowledge necessary for
salvation. On this point, see Compendium, 55, 75; Kośa, vi. Foreword p., viii.22d.1284 Chapter Eight
14. According to Hsüan-tsang and the glosses of Saeki. According to Paramartha: "Some
other masters say that ting (= samādhi) is dhyāna. What is the meaning of dhyāna?
Through "ting" one obtains knowing, seeing, so it is called dhyana. Why? Because the mind
that obtains ting [=the samāhita mind] truly knows and sees. The word dhyāna signifies
ssu (cintā, cetanā); liang (to measure). Ssu is prajñā. Such is the Siddhānta."
15. As an advance chariot is pulled by two mares bound by a yoke, so dhyāna is bound by
famatha and vipaśyanā. In the Arūpyas, calm is great, intellection small; the opposite in
Anāgamya (viii.22); in the dhyānas, there is equilibrium.
Šamatha = samadhi = absorption; vipaśyana = prajñā.
The editors of the Pāļi Text Society (against several manuscripts) read yuganandha
(Paṭisambhidā, ii.92 and foll.; Visuddhimagga, 149): "Some cultivate vipassana preceded by
samatha; . . . some cultivate samatha preceded by vipassana . . . some cultivate samatha and
vipassana bound together (samathavipassanaṁ yuganandhaṁ bhāveti).” “The dharmas
bound together and which are called samādhi and prajñā do not go beyond one another ...
(samadhipaññāsaṁkhātā yuganandhadhammā aññamaññam anativattamānā. . . )
Bodhicāryāvatāra, viii.4, Śikṣāsamuccaya, 119, Sūtrālaṁkāra, xiv.9. Compendium, 55, 75.
In Tantrism, yuganaddhaka or yuganaddhakrama is the non-distinction of samsāra and
nirvāṇa, of grāhaka and grāhya, etc. (Pañcakrama, p. 46-48).
16. On defiled dhyāna, the story of the monk who believes himself to be a Srotaäpanna of
the First Dhyana, an Arhat in the Fourth, but who in fact remains subject to desire,
Przyluski, Açoka, 390.
Three bad "meditators,” dhyāyin, Kośa, v. 21b-d trans. p. 800 and note 76; Majjhima,
iii. 14.
17. The meaning of vitarka, vicāra, prīti, and sukha, is explained below.
In Niddesa, p. 373, an interesting essay on the classification of the dhyānas.
18. There is a difficulty. How does the author, by saying that the First Dhyāna is
vicāraprītisukhavat, say implicitly that this Dhyana also "contains vitarka”? In fact,
dhyānāntara "contains vicara" and "contains vitarka." The Vyäkhyā explains: yathā
dhyānāntare vicāro na prītisukhavān ity avitarko naivam ayaṁ vicāraḥ / višeṣito hy ayaṁ
vicāraḥ pritisukhasahapathitaḥ / vicāraprītisukhavad iti prītisukhavatā vicāreņa
pritisukhena ca samprayuktam prathamaṁ dhyānam ity arthaḥ.
Vasubandhu does not say vitarkaprītisukhavat, because he wishes to say that the other
Dhyānas lose, in this order, the parts indicated. If one were to define the Second Dhyāna as
without vitarka, then dhyānāntara would be confused with the Second Dhyāna.
19. On the Ārūpyas, see Majjhima, i.2, 164, 410, ii.261 (where the first two are ignored),
Visuddhimagga, III, 336-340; Comm. on the Dīgha, Dialogues, iii. p. 273: ākāsānañcāyatana
is a dhyāna which has the infinity of space for its object; references to the notes of Rhys
Davids, ibid. P. 216.
20. Paramarth translates: "Separation-sphere-lower arises." Hsüan-tsang: "Separation
lower sphere arisen, from whence the division into four.” P'u-kuang (TD 41, p. 418b16)
explains, “It is fourfold because it arises from separation from arising in a lower sphere."
Fa-pao (TD 41, p. 788c3) says, “It is fourfold by reason of separation from arising in a lower
sphere": "separation from arising" signifies "separation from defiled dharmas,” or rather
"to separate oneself and to arise.” One arises above because one separates oneself from what
is below.
21. Kosa iii.3 explains how Ārūpyadhātu, which does not include any places, or stages, is still
fourfold from the point of view of the mode of existence of the gods who arise there:
ārūpyadhātur asthāna upapattyā caturvidhaḥ. The Abhisamayālaṁkārāloka (ad Aṣṭasāhas-
rikā 153, 18), after having quoted this definition, adds a line (borrowed from which
Šāstra?): dhyānād ürdhvaṁ sasaṁsthāno rūpeṣadbhāvo 'tha vā (Sic MSS): "Or rather,Footnotes 1285
placed above the world of the dhyānas (= Rūpadhātu), it includes shape, for there exists
there a small amount of rūpa.” Buddhist cosmology recognizes some heavens superimposed
on Ārūpyadhātu in which there are mansions (kung); see for example Hastings'
Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, article "Cosmology."
Kathāvatthu, viii.8, xvi.9. The Andhakas maintain that some subtle matter exists in
Arūpyadhātu (by reason of the text = vijñānapratyayanāmarūpam, see above p. 1222). See
Vasumitra and Bhavya.
The Mahāsāṁghikas and Mahīśasakas,—and the Vibhāṣā adds the Vibhajyavādins (see
below), admit the existence of rūpa.
Notes of the Japanese editor-Commentary on the Samayabheda: The six types of
consciousness (sad vijñānakāyāḥ) exist in Rūpadhâtu and Arūpyadhātu. But, if rūpa exists in
Arūpyadhāu, why is it called Ārūpyadhātu? Because subtle rūpa exists there, but not gross
Tipa.
Vibhāṣā, (TD 27, p. 431b6): Some say that rūpa exists in Ārūpyadhātu, as do the
Vibhajyavādins ... The Mahāsāṁghikas think that in Ārūpyadhātu there is a rūpa which is
the result of action.
The Säriputrābhidharma says that, in Ārūpyadhātu, there is a rūpa, namely the rūpa that
forms part of the dharmayatana (Kośa, iv. English trans. p. 561).
The Mahāyāna says that in Ārūpyadhātu there is a rūpa which is the result of samādhi.
See Mahādharmabherīsūtra (TD 9, p. 293c10) and the Mahāyāna Parinirvāṇa sūtra (TD 12,
p. 415a17, a25): "The saints of the Two Vehicles cannot know how the gods of
Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana are . . . Only the Buddha knows of those that have life (ayus,
) among the Asamjñin gods; the same for beings in
Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana."
22. Vyākyā: "According to others, we should understand: By virtue of the text: sarvaso
rūpasaṁjñānāṁ samatikramāt, it is proved that there is no longer any rūpa in
ārūpyasamāpatti." The Japanese editor understands: "Because it is denied that there is
anāsrava saṁvara in this samāpatti."
shou-ming
23. See iii.14a. "Transparent" poorly renders the sense of the word accha. This refers to a
rūpa which can pass through other rūpas, a material resembling ether."
24. For "the absorption existences” (upapatti), like the “absorptions” (samāpatti), become
better and better.
25. See ii. 14, iii.3.
26. On saṁsṛṣṭa, vii. p. 1099, and iii.32a-b.
Mahākoṭṭhita converses with Sāriputta on this subject, Majjhima, i.206 (See Kośa, ii.45,
English trans. p. 233).
27. But the two Chinese versions, here and below, read: nāmarūpa-vijñānayor, a reading
confirmed by the Pāli sources.
However the Vyākyā quotes the Sūtra: tadyathāyuṣman śāruputra dve naḍakalāpyāv
ākāśa ucchrite syātām / te'nyonyaniśrite / anyonyaṁ niśritya tiṣṭheyātām / tatra kaścid
ekām apanayed / dvitiya nipatet / dvitīyām apanayed ekā nipatet / evam āyuśman śāriputra
nāma ca rūpaṁ cānyonyaniśritam anyonyaṁ niśritya tiṣṭhati . . . Same comparison in
Samyutta, ii.114; but nāmarūpa and vijñāna, not rūpa and nāman.
28. Argument of the Vibhajyavādins according to the Vibhāṣā, see above, note 21.
29. A very close edition, Samyutta, iii. 53 (trans. of Warren, p. 162).
30. Vyākyā. The stanza: āyur uṣmā’thā vijñānam . . . “When life, heat and vijñāna leave the
body, it remains, deserted, insensible, like a piece of wood" (ii.45a), proves that the Sūtra
refers only to Kāmadhātu, for 1. there is no physical body in Ārūpyadhātu; 2. in Rūpadhātu,1286 Chapter Eight
the body exists, but "does not continue after death": rūpadhātu tu yadi api kāyo’sti tatra
kayanidhanam [according to iii.9].
31. The formula for those beings who spontaneously arise (upādukas) is: vijñānapratyayam
ṣaḍāyatanam, for nāmarūpa are five skandhas which have not yet taken up the state of
ṣaḍāyatana (aniṣpannaṣaḍāyatanāvastha); now ṣaḍāyatana exists from the very begining of
upapāduka beings, Kofa, ii.14, p. 175.
32. This results from the Sūtra of which we have the Pāļi edition in Dīgha ii.63: vijñānaṁ
ced ānanda mātuḥ kukṣiṁ navakrāmed api nu tan nāmarūpaṁ kalalatvāya saṁmürchet / no
bhadanta / vijñānaṁ ced änandāvakrāmya kṣipram evāpakrāmed api nu tan nāmarūpam
itthatvāya prajñāyeta / no bhadanta / vijñānaṁ ced ānanda daharasya kumārasya
kumārikāyā vā ucchidyeta vinaśyen na bhaved api nu tan nāmarūpaṁ vṛddhiṁ vipulantām
ápadyeta/ no bhadanta.
33. The Udayisutra (Kofa, ii. 44d, English trans. p. 229) says: bhedac ca kāyasyātikramya
devān kavaḍīkārāhārabhakṣān anyatamasmin divye manomayakaya upapadyate.
Anguttara, iii.192, compare Dīgha, i.34, 186.
34. Prityähäravacanāt; iii.98.
35. Ye te śäntavimokṣā atikramya rūpāṇy ārūpyāḥ ... viii.32.
36. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 581b19.
37. Compare Udāna, iii.10. Bhava defined i.8c.
See the Foreword to Chapters V and VI, p. xxi. Through the first worldly dhyāna, which
is a certain dhyāna, one cannot rise above the First Dhyāna; and thus following. There is no
bhava by which one can go beyond Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana which is Bhavagra, the
summit of bhava. Furthermore. one cannot encounter a definitive departure from a lower
state in any superior state of existence, for falling is always possible. Thus one leaves bhava
only through the Path which does not from part of the Dhātus, and which is not bhava.
38. Vibhāṣa, TD 27, p. 431b15: Objection of the Vibhajyavādins: If there is absolutely no
rūpa or physical matter in Ārūpyadhātu, then the rupa of beings who die in Kāmadhātu and
Rūpadhātu and who are reborn in Ārūpyadhātu, and who, later, die in Ārūpyadhātu and are
reborn below, will have been cut off for 20,000, 40,000, and 80,000 kalpas. How is their rūpa
produced anew? If, as you suppose, their rūpa, having been cut off, abandoned (prahīņa), is
produced anew, what would prevent us from saying that the saṁskāras, even though cut off
and abandoned upon the obtaining of Nirvāṇa, would reappear later? In order to avoid this
problem, one should admit that rūpa exists in Ārūpyadhātu.
39. Paramārtha: "Because it is perfumed (vāsita) by a former cause which should ripen in
rūpa, the mind has the efficacy to now produce rūpa.”
It indeed appears that the expression vāsanā (Kośa, iv.27d, p. 594, vii.28c,p. 1137, 30c,
32d) is foreign to the Sarvāstivāda. However this may be, Samghabhadra does not use it.
Samghabhadra, in his Prakaraṇaśāsana (TD 29, p 964b26) says, “What is the meaning
of the expression ārūpya? It means that there is no rūpa there. When one dies [in
Ārūpyadhātu] and is born below, the rūpa arises from citta. We maintain that, in this world,
material and non-material (rūpin, arūpin) dharmas are produced in fact in reciprocal
dependence: from the change of the mind there arises the diversity of rupa; when the
material organs are modified, the vijñāna is likewise different. Thus, when a being dying in
Arūpyadhātu arises below, the series of his mind (cittasaṁtati) is found to be favorable to
the production of rūpa, and, by its force, the rupa of a lower existence if favorable to this
arising. However it is not permissible to say that rupa arises solely from the mind. It also
exists by reason of the series-of-mind-accompanied-by-rūpa of a former existence: the rūpa,
destroyed for a long time, is its own seed. We maintain in fact that sabhāgahetu is at one andFootnotes 1287
the same time past and present (ii.52a, p. 262). For the Arhats who have already attained
Nirvāṇa have cut off without residue the series of the skandhas; there does not remain any
cause which could produce the arising of new skandhas: there is no case to which one could
apply the example of a being who dies in Ārūpyadhātu [and takes up a new rūpa]. (See the
argument of the Vibhajyavādins, note 38).
In his Nyāyānusāra (TD 29, p. 757c17), Samghabhadra says, “The āgamas quoted by our
adversary do not prove that rūpa exists in Ārūpyadhātu. His argument from reason has no
value, for, even though there is no ripa in Arūpyadhätu, the rupa of a being of Ārūpadhātu
who has just died and is about to be reborn below comes from the mind. We state that in
this world...
40. iii.3c-d: nikāyaṁ jīvitaṁ cātra niśritā cittasaṁtatiḥ; see ii, 41, 45.
41. Vyākhyā: prayogakāla ākāśādīny ākambanāni. Hsüan-tsang: The ascetic, in his
preparatory exercise, thinks "Space is infinite," "The sixfold vijñāna is infinite," "There is
nothing."
On the ārūpyas, and how one obtains them, see Majjhima, i.164, Sutta 121,
Visuddhimagga, 326 and following.
Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 432c23): “It is not by reason of its nature or by reason of its object,
but by reason of its prayoga that ākāśānantya receives its name. The beginner (ādikārmika)
considers the characteristic of emptiness of the top of a wall, of a tree, of a house; when he
has 'grasped' this characteristic of infinite ākāśa.” In the ārūpyas, the ascetic considers
anitya, pratyaya, etc.
Vasumitra explains how, in ākimcanya (preparatory stage), the notion of subject and
object is dispelled; see above Chap. VII note 323.
42. This is a question as to whether or not there is saṁjñā in the fourth ārūpya, the sphere
of "non-saṁjñā and neither non-saṁjñā.” Añguttara, iv.426; Kathāvatthu, xiii.12;
Vasumitra and Bhavya.
The "absorption of the cessation of saṁjñā and vedană” can be obtained only by an
ascetic who has entered into this ārūpya (ii.44d, English trans. p. 229 and iii.6c). From this
fact, one can conclude that samjñā exists there. (On the subtle-subtle mind, viii.33b).
43. Compare Majjhima, i.435, ii.230; Anguttara, iv.422, Visuddhimagga, 335. This refers to
the samjñās of the lower absorptions. In fact one enters into the fourth ārūpya by being
disgusted with it, by a meditation practiced in the samantaka of the third ārūpya.
44. That is to say “a cause of stupidity” (saṁmohakāraṇa).
45. kasmāt tu tais tad evaṁ gṛhyate, that is to say, according to the Vyākyā : tair iti
tatsamāpattibhis tad iti naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatanam evaṁ gṛhyata iti naiva saṁjñā
nāsaṁjñeti gṛhyata ity arthaḥ /
46. Hsüan-tsang: The maulasamāpattis, dhyānas and ārūpyas, explained above are eight in
number...
Paramārtha: The maulasamāpattis, considered as real dharmas (or dravyas), are solely
eight dravyas: four rūpasamāpattis and four ärūpyasamāpattis.
Vyākhyā: samāpattidravyāṇi maulānīti śākhās teṣāṁ nopanyasyanta ity abhiprāyaḥ. The
Sākhās or "branches" are the samantakas (viii. 22a) and dhyānāntara, or asaṁjñisamāpatti
and nirodhasamāpatti.
47. Here we should give up translating anāsrava by "pure," a translation justified elsewhere
by the synonym amala, nirmala.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 821c17. Anāsrava samāpatti is pure in the proper sense of the word;
why not call it fuddhaka? . . . Some say: The name is established by reason of the difference
of meaning. The samāpatti which is at one and the same time good (kuśaka) and1288 Chapter Eight
possessing-āsravas (sāsrava, laukika), is the first contradiction of the defiled dharmas: it is
called fuddha because the sense of purity is dominant in it. The sense of anasrava is
dominant in the Noble Path.
Suddhaka means kuśala sāsrava; anāsrava is the Path. But the kusala sāsrava absorption
is samala, sakaṣāya, saviṣa, sakaṇṭaka, sāsrava, and sadoșa: how can one call it suddhaka?
Now it is called thus, even though it is not absolutely pure, because it is partially so, because
it is not mixed with kleśa; because it opposes the kleśas; because it favors the anāsrava
absorption which is pure in the true sense of the word; because it is favorable (anuküla) to
the Path; and because it is the escort of the anāsravas.
48. That is to say, “one cannot, having entered into this eighth absorption, meditate on the
Path." Vibhāṣā, 162.11. One cannot practice the Path in Kāmadhātu, nor in Bhavāgra. See
Foreword to Chapters V-VI.
49. Mahāvyutpatti, 85.7: āsvādanasamprayuktadhyāna. Anguttara, ii.126: "A person ...
enters and abides in the First Dhyāna; he tastes it, loves it, and finds therein sensible delight
(tam assādeti taṁ nikāmeti tena ca vittim āpajjati). If he dies without having fallen from it,
he is reborn in the world of the Brahmakāyikas." The same for the other Dhyānas, with
rebirth in the heaven which is suitable to it.
This text is invoked by the Andhakas against the Theravādins in the Kathāvatthu, siii.7.
50. One will find in F. Heiler, Buddhistische Versenkung, 1922, a very complete European
bibliography. The most notable Păļi sources are Vibhanga, 257, Visuddhi, 139. Among the
European works, Burnouf, Lotus, 800, Senart, Mahāvastu, i.552 (forgotten by Heiler). It is
quite evident that the canonical definitions remain obscure, in spite of the efforts of the
Abhidhārmikas-Ābhidhammikas.
51. In the Bhāṣya of the first line, Hsüan-tsang says, “The kārikā designates teng-
ch'ib
(= samādhi) by the word ting (fixed, set): the words differ, but
the meaning is the same. This is why the Sūtra (Samyukta, 28.21; see also Madhyama, TD 1,
p. 788c19) says "The ting (sthiti) of the mind, the teng-ting #
(samsthiti)
of the mind, is what is called samyaksamādhi; it is also called śubhaikāgrya."
In the Bhasya of the third line, Paramārtha says, "By chu
understand śubhaikāgrya, because chu
'What is samādhi? It is the chu
(samyagvişaya), correct condition (avasthā).””
The First Dhyāna: contains vitarka, vicāra, prīti (= saumanasya, agreeable sensation of
the manas, "satisfaction,” ii.8a), sukha (= praśrabdhi, forming part of the saṁskāraskandha,
ii.25, English trans. p. 191), and samadhi.
(sthiti) one should
is another name for samadhi. The Sūtra says,
(fixedness) of the mind in a correct object
The Second Dhyāna: contains adhyātmasamprasāda (=fraddhendriya), prīti (=saumana-
sya), sukha (= praśrabdhi) and samādhi.
The Third Dhyana: contains upekṣā (= saṁskāropekṣā, ii. 25, English trans. p. 192),
smrti, samprajanya, sukha (agreable sensation, vedanā, ii.7c), and samadhi.
The Fourth Dhyana: contains upekṣā (neither-agreeable-nor-disagreeable sensation),
upekṣā-parifuddhi (= saṁskāropekṣā), smṛtipatiśuddhi, and samadhi.
52. Here Paramārtha adds "These five in absorption are capable of bringing about opposing
praśrabdhi."
53. Caturangasenavāt: compare Samantapāsādikā, i.146: “In the same way that one
understands by "army" the parts of the army and no other (yathā senangesu eva
sanāsammuti), in this way one understands by Dhyāna the fine parts and nothing else . . .
The Vibhangha says: “Dhyāna contains vitarka, vicāra, prītisukha, and cittasya ekāgratā”; .
thus cittaikāgratā is also a part.” In this same way the School teaches that dharmapravicaya
is at one and the same time both Bodhi and a part of Bodhi, that samyagdṛṣṭi is both the
IFootnotes 1289
Path and a part of the Path, and that absorption from food is both Upavāsa and a part of
Upavāsa (iv.29, English trans. p. 597).
54. The formula of this upekṣā is given in Vyākhyā, iii. 35: cakṣuṣā rūpāṇi dṛṣṭvā naiva
sumanā bhavati [= nānuniyate] na durmanā bhavati [= na pratihanyate] upekṣako bhavati [=
nābhujati / katham nābhujati kim pratisamkhyāya ahosvid apratisaṁkhyāya iti višeṣayann
āha] smṛtimān saṁprajānan [= smṛtisaṁprayuktayā prajñayā pratisamīkṣamāṇaḥ]. As is
the case of visual consciousness and its objects, so too for the five other consciousnesses.
This sixfold equanimity is the sixfold sātata, satatavihāra. See vii.32, note 186.
This is "majjhatta" of the mind, in the Vibhanga; Visuddhimagga, 659.
Samantapāsādikā, i.150, commentary on upekkhako vihāsim.
55. It is for this reason that it is said that the Buddha is never apratisaṁkhyāya upekṣā. How
one can expell bad upekṛṣā by good upekṣā, iii.35d.
56. Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 412a26): The parts of the dhyānas have eighteen different names;
but how many actual entities are there? Only eleven. In the First Dhyāna, there are five
names and five things. In the Second Dhyāna, the parts are four in number, three as in the
First and adhyatmasaṁprasāda. In the Third Dhyāna, five parts: but the fifth has already
been mentioned; and four new ones. In the Fourth Dhyāna, four parts; the last three have
been mentioned; one adds the first. . .
In the first two Dhyānas, there is praśrabdhisukha, that is, sukha consisting of
praśrabdhi; in the Third, there is vedanāsukha, sukha consisting of sensation. The sukha of
the first two Dhyānas forms part of the saṁskāraskandha; the sukha of the Third is part of
the vedanāskandha...
The unity of the object of the mind (cittaikāgrya) is dhyāna because dhyāna is by nature
samādhi (that is to say cittaikāgrya). The samādhi and the other [dharmas] so enumerated
are parts of the dhyāna.
See Kośa, vi. trans. p. 922.
57. In the Vibhanga, the sukha of the First Dhyãāna is cetasika sukha, cetosaṁphassaja
sukha; this sukha is accompanied by pīti and is thus called pītisukha; pīti is pāmojja .…..
attamanatā cittassa.
On prafrabdhi, ii.17c, 25, English trans. p. 191, iv.48 (saṁskāraskandha).
Vibhāṣā quoted note 56.
Samghabhadra, TD 29, p. 761a2: In our system it is not said that praśrabdhi is sukhendriya
(=agreeable sensation), rather praśrabdhi is the cause of sukha, the sukha part of the first
two Dhyānas... In Scripture, it is not only the vedanā sukhā (agreeable sensation) which is
called sukha; some other dharmas receive this name. Thus it is said that there are three
sukhas, prahāṇasukha, virāgasukha (?), and nirodhasukha; elsewhere it is said that sukha is
fivefold, pravrajyāsukha, vivekasukha, śamathasukha, bodhisukha (see vi.50b, p. 1006), and
nirvāṇasukha. The term sukha thus designates, in the Sūtras, all types of dharmas . . .
58. Vyākhyā ad iii.32c. The sukha of the Third Dhyāna rests only on the manas, not on the
other organs (mana evāśritam). Kāmadhātu has no sukha of the sphere of manas
(manobhūmika sukha).
59. "Agreeable sensation having for its support the five organs made up of the atoms,
sensation associated with the five consciousnesses (visual . . . touch).” ii 25, English trans. p.
191.
60. Beings arisen in the heaven of the First Dhyāna possess visual consciousness, etc.; but
not the persons who have entered into the absorption of the First Dhyana.
61. Vyākhyā: samāhitāvasthāntarālasamudācārāt / dāṛṣṭāntikānāṁ kilaiṣa pakṣaḥ / teṣāṁ hi
na dvibhūmikam eva sukhendriyaṁ kāmaprathamadhyānabhūmikaṁ kiṁ tarhi caturbhūmikam1290 Chapter Eight
(= Sukhendriya not only belongs to the two "spheres", to Kāmadhātu and the First Dhyana,
but also to the Second and to the Third Dhyāna). Ata eva ca vibhāṣāyām bḥadantena
sautrāntikenoktam ābhidhārmikāṇāṁ paramaṭeneva (?) cakṣurvijñānādikam adhastād
ürdhvam ākṛṣyata iti tad evam asyeṣṭam bhavati cakṣurvijñānādikam dvitīyādidhyānabhū-
mikam api bhavatīty api. The Abhidhārmikas think that visual consciousness exists only in
Kāmadhātu and the First Dhyāna (i.46, viii.13a); but they admit that beings in higher
Dhyānas see by means of a lower visual consciousness: "the visual consciousness is drawn
from below to ab
as wit
a machine" (?). In the Vibhāṣā, the Sautrāntika Bhadanta
thinks that it is simpler to admit that the visual consciousness is of the sphere of the Second
Dhyana...
62. How can a mental (caitasika) sensation be felt by the body (käyena)?
63. The Vibhanga (p. 259) here understands sukha as cetasika sukha (as do the
Vaibhāṣikas), and it explains kāya as the three skandhas of saññā, saṁkhāra, and viññāṇa.
Kāyena sākṣātkaroti, vi.43c, 58b, viii.9, 35n. SBE. 45, p.23.
64. Vyākhyā: caturthe dhyane praśrabdhisukham bhuyo bhavati bahutaram bhavati
dhyānāntarebhyaś caturbhasya praśrabdhataravāt / tadbhūyastv 'pi sukhasyāvacanam /
caturthe dhyane sukhaṁ nocyate / tasya sukhasyāvacanād vedanā sukham eva tṛtīya dhyāne
na caturthe sukhā vedanāstīti tatra nocyata ity abhiptāyaḥ.
In the Fourth Dhyāna the sukha which consists of praśrabdhi, “well-being," is greater
than in the lower stages, and yet one does not attribute sukha to this stage: hence it results
that, in the lower stages the part of sukha signifies the sensation of sukha, the sukha of
sensation [and not praśrabdhisukha], and that, in the Fourth Dhyāna, there is no sensation
of sukhā.
65. According to the Vyākhyā. The Bhāṣya only gives the first words of the Sūtra (as we see
in the version of Paramārtha).
a. Hsüan-tsang: Further, because the Sūtra (Saṁyukta, TD 2, p. 123a13) says: yasmin
samaye āryaśrāvakaḥ pravivekajāṁ prītiṁ kāyena sākaṣātkṛtvopasampadya viharati
pañcāsya dharmās tasmin samaye prahiyante pañca dharmā bhavanāparipūriṁ gacchanti
[iti vistaraḥ yāvad bhāvanīyā dharmāḥ katame / tadyathā prāmodyam (?) prītiḥ
praśrabdhiḥ sukhaṁ samādhiś ca.]
Compare the list in Samyutta, iv.76. Anguttara, v.l, etc. (prāmodyādayaḥ).
b. Paramārtha: “Further, because the Sūtra distinguishes praśrabdhi and sukha. As the
Sūtra says: yasmin samaye āryaśravāvakaḥ praśrabdhijāṁ prītiṁ kāyena sākṣātkṛtvā
upasaṁpadya viharati. In the Sūtra praśrabdhi is named separately from sukha. We know
thus that they differ." [The reading praśrabdhijā is perhaps a mistake.]
66. Vyakhā: "Thus, in the first three Dhyānas, sukha is only bodily sukha."
67. Vyākhyā: samādhijasya abahirbhūtasya kāyavijñānasaṁprayuktasya veditasukhasya
samādhyanukülatvāt.
68. Vyākhyā: A touch consciousness of the sphere of Kāmadhātu cannot grasp a tangible of
the sphere of Rüūpadhātu from whence it results that the touch consciousness which grasps
praśrabdhi is of the sphere of Rūpadhātu, and that the agreeable sensation (sukha)
associated with this consciousness can be a "part of dhyāna.”
69. According to Hsüan-tsang: naișa doṣaḥ / praśrabdhipratyayasya vijñānasya utpatteḥ;
according to Paramartha: naiso'rthaḥ svayam praśrabdhivijñānasya utpatteḥ.
The Vyākhyā gives a very satisfying explanation: "The organ of touch of the person in
absorption [even though it is of the sphere of Kāmadhātu], passes into a state such [tām
anasthāṁ gataṁ yad. . .] that it can be the support of a touch consciousness of a higher
sphere.
Samghabhadra, TD 29, p. 761b10. The Vaibhāṣika: Further, it is inadmissible that, havingFootnotes 1291
for its support (āśraya) an organ of touch (käyendriya) of Kāmadhātu, there arises a
consciousness of a tangible of the sphere of Rūpadhātu. Thus one cannot say that the touch
consciousness (kāyavijñāna) of a Kāmadhātu body would grasp a tangible of praśrabdhi
arisen from dhyāna. If one answers us that even though this tangible is produced internally
(by supporting itself on an internal object), it is capable of producing a similar
consciousness [of a tangible of Rūpadhātu] even though this latter is supported on a body in
Kāmadhātu, this response is nothing more than vain words, without reason or texts to
sustain it. What reason or text establishes that a body of Kāmadhātu would grasp a rūpa
which is praśrabdhi, and not another tangible? This thesis contradicts the authorities; only
the doctrine of the Abhidharma is irreproachable. Here the Sthavira says: How do you know
that praśrabdhi is called of sukha?...
70. To the Vaibhāṣikas, praśrabdhi (=the part of dhyāna called sukha) is a saṁskāra which
can be anāsrava. For his opponent, the said part of dhyāna is the sensation associated with
touch consciousness which knows praśrabdhi, a certain tangible.
71. This question is discussed ii.25, English trans. p. 191.
72. Hsüan-tsang adds: “It is said in the Sūtra fifteen dhātus are solely sāsrava”; Kośa,
i.31c-d: English trans. p. 95, in the note; see Vibhāṣā, TD 27, 1
P. 871c11.
73. ii.33, p. 202-4, seei.33, English trans. 97; iv.lld; viii., note 74, 27c-28.
74. The Vhyākhā mentions two readings: vitarkavicārayor ayaugapadyaṁ doṣavacanāc ca
and doṣāvacanāt (= asamavadhānena ca na kaścid doṣa ucyata ity arthaḥ). Paramārtha
follows the second reading.
75. The Sautrāntikas, according to Saeki; above, the Dārṣṭāntikas.
76. Paramārtha (p. 298c24): the ancient masters do not say this. One cannot, according to
their authority, know which dharmas are parts of the Path(? pu sui k'o chih T.).
77. Vyākhyā: yogācarabhūmidarśanena vicāryam etat. Then there follows an exposition of
the doctrine of Saṁghabhadra: tatra kautūhalaṁ pātayety ācāryasaṁghabhadraḥ / ayaṁ
cătrărthasamkṣepo drastavyaḥ.
The dhyānas contain a large number of dharmas: why are certain dharmas considered as
parts (anga)? The dharmas which are pratipakṣāṁga or opposition, anuśaṁsānga or
excellence, and tadubhāyāṁga or both opposition and excellence are considered as parts, [In
the absorptions of Ārūpyadhātu one does not distinguish parts, because the taste of all of
them is calmness, ſamathaikarasată]. In the First Dhyāna: 1. vitarka and vicāra are opposed
to the bad minds (vitarka) of Kāmadhātu (kāma or lust, vyāpāda or injury, and vihimsa or
killing); 2. prīti and sukha are obtained when vitarka and vicāra have expelled their
opposites (vipaksa), and through the fact of the separation from these opposites; and 3.
samādhi or cittaikāgratā, concentration or one-pointedness-of-mind through whose force
the four other parts exist. In the Second Dhyana: the adhyatmasamprasāda is opposed to
vitarka and vicāra; prīti and sukha constitute the part of excellence. In the Third Dhyāna:
upekṣā, smṛti and samprajanya are opposed to prīti; sukha is the part of excellence. In the
Fourth Dhyana: upekṣaparisuddhi and smrtiparifuddhi are opposed to sukha; aduḥkhāsuk-
havedanā is the part of excellence. See Vibhanga, 263.
78. Yogasūtra, i.47.
79. Sraddhā prasādaḥ; ii.25, English trans. p. 191.
Vasumitra (in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 415c28) compares vitarka-vicāra to waves which
trouble the waters; when they have been expelled the mind is samprasanna, like the water
which becomes clear when the waves have been calmed; thus faith (fraddhā) is called
adhyatmasamprasada.1292 Chapter Eight
80. Paramartha omits these explanations.
81. The Vyākhyā gives some examples: paryeşakamanojalpāvasthā vitarkaḥ / pratyavekaşa-
kamanojalpāvasthā vicāraḥ (see Kośa, ii, English trans. p. 203) / vāksamutthāpikāvasthā-
vitarkaḥ / tadanyāvasthā vicāra iti bhagavadviśeṣaḥ / avikṣiptāvasthā samādhiḥ /
praśāntavāhitavasthā cittasyādhyātmasaṁprasāda iti / On the existence of caitasikas
distinct from the citta (and of bhautikas distinct from the mahābhūtas), see ii, English trans.
p. 188.
82. Hsüan-tsang: "However reasonable this may be, this is not my system."
,
83. The Sthaviras, according to P'u-kang (TD 41, p. 424c5) and Fa-pao (TD 41, p. 792c29).
Hsüan-tsang: How does another school maintain that prīti is not saumanasya? It says
that there is a separate prīti, a caitasika dharma; as the sukha of the Three Dhyānas is totally
saumanasya, prīti and saumanasya are distinct.
84. See ii.7c-8a, p. 161, on prīti.
85. Paramārtha (TD 29, p, 299a9) transcribes pi-p'o-li-to ching See also Kośa,
v.9a, Madhyāma (TD 1, p. 695b4), Samyutta, v.213, Majjhima, iii.26, Atthasālinī, 175.
Hsüan-tsang translates: "The Buddha, in the Sutra of the Explanation of the Viparyasas,
teached the gradual disappearance of the five indriyas of sensation, daurmanasya, etc. [In
the First Dhyāna, the destruction of the daurmanasya, in the Second of duḥkha], in the
Third of saumanasya, in the Fourth of sukha. Thus prīti is saumanasya."
86. Definition of the Fourth Dhyāna: sa sukhasya ca prahāṇād duḥkhasya ca prahāṇat
pūrvam eva saumanasyadaurmanasyayor astaṁgamād aduḥkham asukham upekṣāsmṛtipa-
rifuddham caturtham dhyānam.
87. The problem of señjita and aniñjua is examined iv. 46, English trans. p. 621-3,
(vi.24a-b); the apakṣālas, iii. 101. Madhyama, 5.1, Majjihima, i. 454, ii. 261 (āṇañjasappāya-
sutta), Anguttara, v.135 (kaṇṭaka= apakṣāla).
88. Compare iii. 101.
89. See Kośa, i.30b (above p. 1232) and ii. 31 on the dhātus and the caittas which exist in
Rūpadhātu.
90. Hsüan-tsang: "and because mental satisfaction is gross there" [Thus there is sukha of
the sphere of manas there].
91. Saeki adds: “because mental satisfaction is subtle there."
92. See iv.8a.
93. Hsüan-tsang: "Beings arisen in the three higher bhümis (=Dhyānas) produce three
vijñānakāyas (eye consciousness, etc.) and an “informative mind” (vijñapticitta) of the
sphere of the First Dhyāna. See vii.50.
94. See vii.50. Hsüan-tsang: "Beings arisen above produce the dharma from below, for
example nirmāṇacitta."
95. It is through usefulness (prayojanena) that these beings produce a vijñāna of the First
Dhyāna, and not through esteem (bahumāna); furthermore, if this vijñāna is good, it will
contain a retribution which they must create; thus they do not make an effort in order to
manifest a good vijñāna.
96. Triprakāram anyatra nirvedhāgīyāt (see viii.17.)
97. Paramārtha: “In the Vibhāṣā.”
The Vyakha quotes the Vibhāṣā: syāc chuddhakaṁ vairāgyeṇa lābheta, parihāṇyā
}
1
1
iFootnotes 1293
vijahyāt / syāc chuddhakam upapattyā labheta, upapattyā vijahyāt / āhu / syāt / katham ity
āha / hānabhāgiyaṁ prathamaṁ dhyānam.
98. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 822c14. When one obtains the state of Arhat (or kṣayajñāna), one
has already obtained the First Dhyāna, of the anāsrava class at the moment of entry into
samyaktvaniyāma; why say that one obtains it upon obtaining the state of Arhat? The text
should say that one obtains this Dhyāna at the moment of entry into samyaktvaniyāma, and
not upon the obtaining of the state of Arhat.
99. Having entered the First Dhyana the ascetic contemplates the Truths. He possesses the
first anāsrava Dhyāna. If he continues his contemplation (pravāhe) the moment of anāsrava
Dhyana is followed by a moment of anāsrava Dhyāna; if he leaves (vyutthānakāle) this
contemplation, the anāsrava Dhyāna is followed by a pure or śuddhaka Dhyāna.
100. When an ascetic cultivated the mixed absorption (vi.42, vii. 23a) when the anāsrava
and pure (śuddhaka) moments succeed one another, there is an ascending absorption, an
"absorption that passes over certain spheres" (viii. 18c), i.e., the First Dhyana is followed by
the Second or the Third Dhyana.
101. After the Third Dhyāna: 1-2, two of this bhūmi (śuddhaku and anāsrava), 3-6, four, two
of the Fourth Dhyāna, two of ākāśānantya; 7-10, four, two of the First, and two of the
Second Dhyana.
And so on for the Fourth Dhyana and for ākāśānantya.
102. Hsüan-tsang adds: “After [pure] naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana there can arise six types
of absorption: the pure and the defiled of this same āyatana, the anāsrava and the pure of
the Second and Third Arāpyas. Following upon the First [pure] Dhyāna, seven types: the
three of the First Dhyāna; the anāsrava and the pure of the Second and Third. Following
upon akiñcanya, eight; following the Second Dhyana, nine; following vijñānānantya, ten;
following the other pure absorptions, eleven."
103. Up to here the author has spoken of the samāpattidhyānas, absorptions, or states of
contemplation, and their succession; but the kusalasaṁhita, the “good mind of absorption,"
which exists in the upapattidhyānas, that is, in Rüapadhātu (=of dhyāna; brahmaloka, etc.),
and which is acquired through arising (upapattilābhika), is also called pure dhyāna
(śuddhaka dhyāna). When a being in Rūpadhātu dies, this pure dhyāna comes to an end; can
it be followed only by a defiled dhyāna of the same sphere? No: "At death, following upon
the pure, there is a defiled state of some sphere." In fact, death (maraṇabhava) is never
absorbed (samāhita) (iii.43): a being in Rūpadhātu, at the moment when he dies, never
possesses the dhyana of pure absorption. The "mind of reincarnation” (pratisamdhicitta)
which follows "the mind at death” (maraṇabhava) will be defiled, not absorbed.
104. Paramartha translates: "with the exception of the nirvedhabhāgiya."
These four categories are the duppațivijjha dharmas of Dīgha, iii.277. See the source
quoted iv.125, English trans. p. 707, vi.20a, P. 707.
105. Hänabhägīyā succeeds upon hänabhāgiya when there is no progress, sthitibhägiya
succeeds when pure absorption is strengthened and when there is progress (višeṣagamana).
106. Mahävyutpatti, 68.5; see Kofa, ii.44d, English trans. p. 229. Visuddhimagga, 374
(Atthasālini, 187): jhānānulomato jhānapațilomato jhānukkantito.
107. According to Paramārtha. Hsüan-tsang differs: . . . (3) to cultivate the sāsravas and
anāsravas in a mixed and continuous order (that is to go from the First sāsrava Dhyāna to
the Second anāsrava Dhyāna); (4) to cultivate the sāsravas in a discontinuous order (that is
to go from the First Dhyāna to the third . . .); (5) the same with respect to the anāsravas; (6)
to cultivate the sāsravas and anāsravas in a mixed and discontinuous order. The Vibhāṣā
(TD 27. p.835b7) differs: 1. a good mind of Kāmadhātu, 2. sāsrava absorption, to go and1294 Chapter Eight
return, up to Bhavāgra, 3. anāsrava absorption, to go and return, 4. sāsrava by skipping over,
5. anāsrava by skipping over.
108. Hsüan-tsang: 1. for there is no usefulness for a being of a higher sphere to produce a
lower absorption; 2. because his own sphere outweighs this absorption; 3. because the
power of this absorption is weak; 4. because he has rejected this absorption; and 5. because
this absorption is now the object of disgust.
109. See ii.45a-b (English trans. p. 236) ; vi.73a-b; above p. 1228, 1244. Vyākhyā: yāvad eva
saṁjñāsamāpattis tāvad ājñāprativedha iti vacanāt (Anguttara, iv.426).
110. We have seen that the dhyāna “of delight” has for its object dhyāna which is pure
(śuddhaka), not anāsrava. Let us understand then: "It does not bear on the pure dhyāna of a
lower sphere."
111. The Vyākhyā, the text of which is unfortunately unsure, explains: trsnṇāparicchinnatvād
bhūmīnām iti / yā yasyāṁ bhūmau tasyām eva bhūmāv anuśayanāṁ (?) tayā sā bhūmiḥ
paricchinnā bhavati / anyatha hi tasyottaratvaṁ (?) na sidhyed ekabhūmisthānāntaravat /
ata svauttarādharye’pi sthānāntarāṇāṁ trayāṇām trayāṇām aṣṭānāṁ caikabhūmitā sidhyati
tṛṣṇāvyatihārayogāt: It is tṛṣṇā which determines the bhumi. It is thus that the three sthānas
or "places" of the heavens of the first three Dhyānas and the eight sthānas of the heaven of
the Fourth Dhyāna constitute only one bhūmi, even though these places are superimposed
one over the other, because the same tṛṣṇā becomes active and grows in all of the bhūmis to
which is belongs (v.17). See iii.3c, a definition of the Dhātus.
112. Desire for anásrava not thirst, but "desire for the good”. Kośa, v.16, p. 794.
113. According to Paramārtha, Hsüan-tsang: "It has for its object all saṁskṛta of its sphere,
of lower and higher spheres, and asaṁskṛta. Nevertheless the morally neutral asaṁskṛtas
are not the object of an anāsrava absorption.
114. In order to become detached from the Fourth Dhyāna, the ascetic enters into the
sāmantaka of the first ārūpya and considers the Fourth Dhyāna as gross, etc. (iv.49): this is
the anantaryamārga of detachment from the Fourth Dhyāna. See iii.35a, on the sămantaka
of ākāśānantya and the Ārūpyas.
115. Vyākhyā: na hi bhavena bhavaniḥsaraṇam astīti (see above viii. p. 1225).
116. See iii.35d, vii.26a, viii.22c.
117. Consequently prīti and sukha are absent: prītisukhayor ayoga iti.
118. Being paths of detachment, they cannot be associated with delight; thus they are pure.
119. Explanation of the term anagamya, vi.44d, p. 981, note; below, note 125.
Actually the samantakas or prefatory absorptions of all the dhyānas and ārūpyas can be
called anāgamya, because they do not enter the principal absorptions, and because they cut
off the klesas. But Samghabhadra says that the name anāgamya is reserved for the
samantaka of the First Dhyāna in order to show that this sāmantaka differs from the others.
The ascetic produces it before entering any state of absorption and, when he is in one, he
does not experience any delight (āsvādana). The other sāmantakas are produced by the force
of a previous absorption; the ascetic who is in it can experience delight. This does not
appear to be reconciliable with the definitions of Vasubandhu. The Vibhāṣā says, “It is called
anāgamya, because it is produced without one having arrived (an-āgamya) at the principle
sphere (maulabhūmi), for the qualities of the principle sphere are absent from it."
120. By saying that the sāmantaka is the path by which one becomes detached from a lower
sphere: This is according to Paramārtha. The Vyākhyā explains the first phrase of the
Bhāṣya: aṣṭāsv api dhyānārūpyeṣu yasya yat sāmantakaṁ tasya tena sāmantakacittena
)Footnotes 1295
kliṣṭenāsamāhitena saṁdhibandha ity eșa siddhānta ity ata idam ucyate yady api
sāmantakacitteneti vistaraḥ. The first thought of a dhyana existence, upapattibhava (iii.38),
belongs to the sāmantaka of this dhyāna; it is defiled by all of the klesas of the sphere of this
dhyāna.
121. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 719c13. Some say that the samantaka spheres include joy (prīti), for
the Sūtra says that by being supported by joy one abandons sadness (daurmanasya).
According to other sources, the joy of the sāmantaka of the First Dhyāna includes
movement and is not like of the principle dhyāna... The following two sāmantakas include
sukha. Vibhāṣā, 164.5: The Dārṣṭāntikas say that the sāmantakas are only good; it is
explained that they are good, defiled, or neutral.
122. Hsüan-tsang adds: "Because he who does not produce the principle absorption is also
attached to the sāmantaka.” The Vyākhyā says: By reason of the aptitude (pațutva) of the
anāgamya: he can be anāsrava, and he can also be associated with delight. Such is the
intention (of this passage). Samghabhadra explains: maulapratispardhitvād āsvādanasamā-
pattisadbhāvāt.
123. Pāļi sources: Points of Controversy, p.329 (Psychological Ethics, p. 43, 52, Theragāthā,
916, with another pañcangika samādhi) Kośa, viii.2a-b, p. 5, and 23c.
On dhyānāntara and the theory of the Sammitiyas and Andhakas, see Kathāvatthu,
xvii.7.
124. According to Hsüan-tsang. Paramārtha has “This dhyāna is not associated with vitarka.
It is called dhyānāntara, because it differs from the two dhyānas. As it outweighs the First
Dhyāna, it is not placed in the First Dhyāna. It is not placed in the Second, etc., in view of
the absence of viseşa.”
I doubt that the Chinese translators really understood this.
The Vyākhyā says: The Bhāṣya has dhyānaviśeṣatvāt, that is, the first principle dhyāna,
through the absence of vitarka, becomes more distinguished and receives the name of
dhyānāntara: tad eva maulam prathamaṁ dhyānaṁ vitarkāpagamād višiṣṭaṁ dhyānānta-
ram ucyata ity arthaḥ.
125. Samghabhadra reproduces the text of Vasubandhu and adds some useful explanations
on anāgamya and dhyānāntara. We shall put this explanations into paragraphs.
a. Dhyānāntara, which is included in the First Dhyāna, differs from this latter by the fact
that it has less vitarka. In the higher sphere (Second Dhyāna, etc.), what are the dharmas
whose suppression would give rise to a dhyānantara? Thus there is a dhyānāntara in the
First Dhyāna, but not in the higher spheres.
b. Doesn't the Sūtra say that the seven absorptions (samāpatti)-namely the Four
Dhyānas and the first three ārūpyas—are the support [of pure prajñā, of the “qualities,"
viii. 20a, 27c]? Furthermore how do you prove that there is an anāgamya, and a
dhyānāntara?
c. We know that there is an anāgamya by Scripture and by reasoning.
The Sūtra says, "He who is not capable of entering into the First Dhyāna, etc., and of
remaining in it, obtains down here the destruction of the asravas by means of an āryan or
pure (anāsrava) prajñā.” If there were no anāgamya, what would be the support of this
Prajna
Furthermore, the Sūtra of the Good Precepts (Suśīla-Sūtra?) says, “There is a person
delivered-through-Prajñā (prajñāvimukta, vi.64) who has not obtained the principle dhyāna
(mauladhyāna: the dhyāna itself).” Now is it not by being in the dhyāna that the ascetic
obtains the deliverance-through-prajñā? Thus there is a dhyāna which is not the
mauladhyāna, namely the preliminary dhyāna, the anāgamya. On the mixed character of
anāgamya, iii.35d.
d. The Sūtra says, with respect to dhyānāntara, that there are three samādhis, sa-vitarka,1296 Chapter Eight
sa-vicāra, etc. (viii.23c). It says that the First Dhyāna contains vitarka and vicāra; and that,
in the Second and the following Dhyānas, vitarka and vicāra have ceased. If there were no
dhyānāntara, what samadhi would "possess vicāra and not vitarka”? Because the citta-caittas
cease gradually, it follows that there would be a dhyāna with vicāra but without vitarka.
Furthermore, out from dhyänäntara, what would be the cause of the arising of
Mahābrahmā the King of the World (Kośa, viii.23b)?
e. The Buddha does not speak of anāgamya and dhyānāntara, because both are included
the First Dhyāna. The word “dhyāna” includes them also.
f. The first "vestibule,” sāmantaka, is called anāgamya because one would distinguish it
from the others. A dhyāna does not arise before one has entered into this first sämantaka.
(See above vi.44d, p. 981.)
126. Elsewhere abhisaṁskāravāhya; see iv.78c,. (vahati = gacchati), vi.66a, 71d.
127. See ii.41d.
, samādhi,
128. Not in Paramärtha. Hsüan-tsang, samāpatti = teng-chih #
teng-ch'ih
(to grasp, dhar).
##
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 821c2. Opinions differ on the difference between samādhi and
samāpatti. Samādhi is understood as a momentary (kṣaṇika) absorption; samāpatti as a
prolonged (prabandhika) absorption. The samadhis always involve the mind (citta); they
are sacittaka; this mind can be either samāhita, absorbed, or vyagra (or vikṣipta, i.33c-d),
dispersed. The samāpattis (ii.44d, English trans. p. 231) can be accompanied by mind or not
(for example asaṁjñisamāpatti and saṁjñāveditanirodhyāsamāpatti). Thus we have: 1.
exclusively samadhi, the [semi]-absorption associated with the vyagra mind [We do not
understand how a non-samāhita mind can be in samādhi, see above note 4; but it is certain
that a mind in Kāmadhātu can be in samādhi, viii.25a, etc.]; 2. exclusively samāhita, the
states free from mind; and 3. samādhi and samāpatti, all states of absorbed mind. Samatha is
a state accompanied by an absorbed mind.
A traditional summary of the Eighth Chapter holds that it treats of 1. the dhyānas, 2. the
ārūpyas, 3. the samāpattis (all of which are "absorbed,” samāhita, with or without mind (see
ii.44d, p. 231); and of 4. the samādhis, that is to say in the proper sense of the word, the
śünyatāsamādhi group (viii.24).
129. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 538c3, Dirgha, TD 1, p. 110a24, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 132a18 (not
closely related); Dīgha, iii. 219, 274, Majjhima, iii. 162, Saṁyutta, iv. 363, Anguttara, iv. 300,
Kathāvatthu, ix.8 and trans. p. 239, note; elsewhere only savitarka-savicāra and
avitarka-avicāra are distinguished, Samyutta, v.lll, etc. [The role of avitakka-avicāra in the
reading of the mind of another, Digha, iii. 104.] See Compendium, Introduction, 58,
Visuddhimagga, 169.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 744b24. The Dārṣṭāntikas think that there is vitarka and vicāra up to
Bhavagra.
130. On vitarka-vicāra, see above note 18.
131. Hsüan-tsang: "This refers to the First Dhyana and its sāmantaka."
132. Dīrgba, TD 1, p. 50b1, Ekottara, TD 2, p. 630b3; Digba, iii.219: suññato samādbi,
animitto samādhi, appaṇihito samādhi; Dhammasaṁgaṇi, 344, 505; Vibhanga, Preface, p.
xviii; Atthasālinī, 221 and foll.; Sūtrālaṁkāra, xviii, 77-79. Anguttara, iii.397, animitta
cetosamadhi. Below note 140.
a. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 538a27. The samādhis are numberless; why say that they are
three? From the point of view of their opposition (pratipalsa), their intention (āśaya), and
their object (ālambana): 1. śūnyatā-samādhi opposes the belief in a self (satkāyadṛṣṭi); as it
considers things under the aspects of non-self and emptiness, it is opposed to the aspects of
self and mine; 2. apraṇihitasamādhi is the samādhi in which there is no intention (āśaya),
no will (praṇidhāna) with respect to any dharma of the Three Dhātus (or bhava, tribhāva,Footnotes 1297
threefold existence, i.8c). There is no complete absence of pranidhāna with respect to the
Path; but, although the Path rests on bhava, intention relative to the Path is not related to
bhava; 3. ānimittasamādhi has an object free from the nimittas, namely from rūpa, sabda,
etc. For others, the three samādhis, in this order, oppose satkāyadṛṣṭi, śīlavrata and vicikitsā.
b. The Bodhisattvabhūmi, fol. 106a, arranges the samādhis in the following order:
śūnyatā, apraṇiḥita, and ānimitta, and gives a definition of them very different from that of
Vasubandhu:
tatra katamo bodhisattvasya śünyatāsamādhiḥ / iha bodhisattvasya sarvābhilāpātmak-
ena svabhāvena virahitaṁ nirabhilāpyasvabhāvaṁ vastu paśyataḥ yā cittasya sthitiḥ ayam
asyocyate sünyatasamādhiḥ / apraṇihitasamādhiḥ katamaḥ / iha bodhisattvasya tad eva
nirabhiläpyasvabhāvam vastu mithyävikalpasamutthapitena klesena parigrhitatvad
anekadoṣaduṣṭaṁ samanupaśyato yā āyatyāṁ tatrāpraṇidhānapūrvakā cittasthitir ayam
asyāpraṇiḥitasamādhir ity ucyate / ānimittasamādhiḥ katamaḥ / iha bodhisattvasya tad eva
nirabhilāpyasvabhāvaṁ vastu sarvavikalpaprapañcanimittāny apanīya yathābhūtaṁ śāntato
manasi kurvato yā cittasthitir ayam asyocyate ānimittasamādhiḥ /.
The second samādhi refers to conditioned (saṁskṛta) things through which one does
not form any praṇidhāna; the third to unconditioned things (i.e. Nirvāṇa), the object of
pranidhāna; the first to non-existent (asat) things, the self, mine, with respect to which one
does not form either pranidhāna or apraṇidhāna, but which one regards solely as empty.
133. Calm = nirodha = Nirvāṇa, has four aspects of nirodha, praṇīta, śānta, and niḥsaraṇa,
vii. 13a.
134. Hsüan-tsang: “This samādhi has the four aspects of nirodha; nirodha can be called
fama [or śānta].”
135. On animitta as noun and adjective, see Wogihara, Bodhisattvabhūmi p. 19-20. On
nimitta, see Kośa, ii.14c.
136. The "emptiness" of the Hīnayāna should be studied in greater depth.
137. See i.7c-d, note 33. Majjhima, i.135: . . . evam eva kho bhikkhave kullūpamo mayā
dhammo desito nittharaṇatthāya no gahaṇatthāya / kullūpamaṁ vo bhikkhave ājānantehi
dhammā pi vo pahātabbā prāg evādhammā.
Vajracchedikā, p.23: . . . na khalu punaḥ subhūte bodhisattvena mahāsattvena dharma
ugrahītavyo nādharmaḥ / tasmād iyaṁ tathāgatena saṁdhāya väg bhāṣitā / kolopamam
dharmaparyāyam ājānadbhir dharmā eva prahātavyāḥ prāg evädharmā iti.
Bodhicaryavatāra, ix.33: adhigata upeya pascat kolopamatvād upayasyāpi prahāṇam.
Compare the bhisī (vṛṣī, raft) of the Suttanipāta, 22: "I have passed over ... there is no
(further) use for a raft."
In Samyutta, iv.174-175, the magga is a raft, but it is not said that one should abandon it.
The Vajracchedikāṭīkā (Tanjur, Mdo, xvi.237b) quotes the Ratnakaraṇḍa, where the
formula: kolopamaṁ dharmaparyāyam .. prāg evadharmaḥ is completed by the words: ye
dharmāḥ prahātavyā na te dharmā nāpy adharmāḥ.
One should examine the meaning of dharma and adharma in these sources.
138. See viii.5.
139. Excluding Kāmadhātu, Bhavāgra, and the samantakas from the samantaka of the
Second Dhyāna.
140. Paṭisambhidāmagga, ii.35: tayo me bhikkhave vimokkhā suññato vimokkho animitto
vimikkho appaṇihito; ibid. ii.67. Dhammasaṁgaṇi, 344, Atthasālinī, 223, Visuddhimagga,
658 (Compendium, 211, 216); Nettippakaraṇa, 90, 119, 126; Milinda, 413. Mahāvyutpatti,
73, the Three Vimokṣamukhas, fūnyatā, animittam, apranihitam; Madhyamakavṛtti, 246:
trīņi vimokṣamukhāni śünyatānimittāpraṇiḥitākhyāni vimuktaye vineyebhyo bhagavatā1298 Chapter Eight
nirdiṣṭāni ….. ; Madhyamakāvatāra, 319; Deva, Catuḥśatikā, p. 497; Bodhisattvabhūmi,
I.17.14 (with nirodhasamāpatti, the three Vimokṣas constitute the āryaviḥāra of the
Buddha).
141. According to Ekottara, 26.5
The Vibhāṣā (see below) and Hsüan-tsang (in the Kośa) call these samādhis
chung I - samādhis, "repeated" samadhis, "accumulated" samādhis, since they
are śūnya-śūnya... The thought that inspires the theory of these samādhis is clearly
explained by Samghabhadra (in his Prakaraṇāśāsana, TD 29. p. 971b26), “In the same way
that one burns the wood of the funeral-pyre which first burned the body, so too when the
absorption of emptiness (śūnyatāsamādhi) burns the kleśas, the ascetic namely produced
śūnyatāsamādhi in order to obtain disgust-abandon with respect to the first emptiness (=the
first śūnyatāsamādhi).”
The Vibhāṣā treats of these samādhis, TD 27, p. 543a27 (and c5 and following): 1. At
what moment does one obtain them? According to one opinion, in darśanamārga, when one
obtains abhisamayāntika (vii.21a); according to another opinion, in bhāvanāmārga, when
the detached (virakta) Āryan obtains nirmāṇacitta (vii.49c); according to a third opinion
(the orthodox opinion), at the moment of kṣayajñāna (vi.44d), because, at this moment, the
ascetic cultivates all the impure (sāsrava) good dharmas of the three spheres (vii.26c). 2.
Does one obtain them without effort? 3. After which jñānas? 4. In what spheres (viii.27b)?
5. With what aśraya (viii..27a)? 6. What ākāras do they take up?
142. The Vyākhyā, doubtlessly quoting a Šāstra or the Viḥhāṣā: āha / kim atra kāraṇaṁ yac
chünyatāśünyatāsamādhiḥ śunyatākāra eva na punar anātmākāro'pi śūnyatāvad iti /
atrocyate / śünyatākārapravṛttaśūnyattāpṛṣṭhenotpattir na punar anātmākārapravṛttaśū-
nyatāprstbeneti | atrocyate / tadutpattyanukul vật sa eva bị sùnyatakārab sùnyatasamadbis
tasya śūnyatāśünyāsamādher utpattāv anukūlyenāvatiṣṭhate nānātmākāraḥ / na hy evam
anat madarsanam uavejayati yatbà sinyatadarsanam / drstesu by anat matobbavest
abhiratir asti saṁsāre śünyatādarśanābhāvāt / tadyathādhvagasyāsaṁbādhādhvadarśanād
api prītiḥ / ekākinas tu tacchunyatvād aprītir iti/ tadvat. Sünyatāśünyatāsamadhi follows a
śūnyatāsamādhi which has the aspect of śūnya, not one which has the aspect of anātman.
Sūnyatā disgusts more than anātmată: one continues to find pleasure in things which one
recognized as anātman, as a traveller sees with pleasure a path little frequented (asaṁbādha;
MSS: asambandha), but, alone, be has a fear of the path because it is empty.
143. dūṣaṇīyatvāt. Vyākhyā: so'śaikṣasamādhir dūṣayitavya iti.
144. See viii.35b-d.
145. There are two nirodhas of ānimittasamādhi:
a. anityatānirodha [or svalakṣaṇanirodha or svarasanirodha] (i.20a, English trans. p. 77,
ii.45c): the extinction of which is the law of all conditioned things (saṁskṛta).
b. apratisamkhyānirodha (see i.5c, 6c-d, ii.55d, English trans. p. 280). Here the word
nirodha cannot be legitimately translated by extinction, but it is not impossible to say what
it refers to: when an Arhat leaves the ānimittasamādhi, some pure or impure thoughts arise
in him which are no longer of this samādhi; if these thoughts had not arisen, some new
moments of the ānimittasamādhi would have arisen. When these other thoughts arise, the
Arhat takes possession of apratisaṁkhyānirodha of the new moments of animittasamādhi
which, lacking causes, would not arise.
Vyākhyā: kathaṁ tasya [ānimittasamādher] apratisaṁkhyānirodhaḥ / aśaikṣād
ānimittāt samādher vyutthitasya tadanantaraṁ ye säsravāḥ kṣaṇā atikrāmanty anye
vānāsravā(s) yadi te notpannāḥ syur aśaikṣā ānimittakṣaṇā utpannāḥ syuḥ / teṣāṁ
sāsravāṇām anyeṣām anāsravāṇām votpattikāle teṣām aśaikṣāṇām ānimittakṣaṇānām
apratisamkhyanirodho abhyate pratyayavaikalyā / tam apratisamkhyānirodham ālambate
Animittänimittasamādhi thus takes the apratisaṁkhyānirodha of the ānimittasamādhi
śāntākāreņa.Footnotes 1299
as its object, for this nirodha is the enemy of this samadhi (tatpratyarthikabhūtatvät) and
the ascetic desires to become disgusted (vidūṣaṇam abhilașan) with this samādhi.
146. As we have seen in i.6c. Pratisaṁkhyānirodha is the nirodha which one obtains by a
type of prajñā called pratisamkhyā.
The Vyākhyā explains: apratikülatvāt / yad dhi prtikülam āryāṇāṁ tatsamyogavisamy-
ogāya yatante / visaṁypogaś ca pratisaṁkhyānirodhaḥ.
The pure dharmas are aheya, i.40a, English trans. p. 112.
147. Samghabhadra (in his Prakaraṇaśāsana, TD 29, p. 972a3) says, “The śānta
[characteristic or aspect] indicates only cessation (chih-hsi ); apratisaṁkhyāni-
rodha thus has the characteristic of śānta; the prolonged practice of the Path (āryamārga)
(which culminates in śūnyatā, apraṇihita, and ānimittasamādhi) includes fatigue, so one
produces pleasure (sukhalakṣaṇa) with respect to its cessation."
148. If the ascetic were to consider the apratisaṁkhyānirodha of ānimittasamādhi under the
aspect of nirodha or extinction, he would not consider it as "calm," śānta; he would consider
it under an aspect which renders it hateful, and as a consequence he would not take a dislike
to animittasamadhi.
149. As we have seen iv.9d.
150. The apratisaṁkhyānirodha of a certain kleśa is not the visaṁyoga (ii.55d) of this kleśa.
Let us suppose that an ascetic takes possession of the apratisaṁkhyānirodha of good or bad
dharmas, but he remains bound to these dharmas because their possession (prāpti), which
alone can cut off the possession of pratisaṁkhyānirodha, has not been cut off. [A good
example, Kośa, vi.23: the possessor of kṣānti contains the apratisaṁkhyānirodha of the
kleśas whose pratisaṁkhyānirodha can only be attained by darśanamārga.]
151. Only the akopyadharman Arhat, by reason of his sharp faculties, has the power
(sāmarthya) to produce them; not the other Arhats. The Vyākhyā explains: tebhyo
dṛṣṭadharmaśukhavihāratvād āsangaspadabhūtebhyo 'śaikṣebhyaḥ śünyatādisamadhibhyo
vaimukhyārtham aparasamādhin samāpadyante.
152. On samādhibhāvanā, above note 4; Visuddhi, 371.
The Vyākhyā quote the Sūtra: asti samādhibhāvanā āsevitā bhāvitā bahulīkṛtā
drstadhrmasukhavihārāya saṁvartate / asti... divyacakṣurabhijñājñānadarśanāya
samvartate / asti... prajñāprabhedāya saṁvartate / asti... āsravakṣayāya saṁvaratate.
On the value of āsevita, bhāvita, bahulīkṛta, the Vyākhyā says: āsevitā niṣevitā
bhāvanayā / bhāvitā vipakṣaprahāṇatayā / bahulīkṛtā vipakṣadūrīkaraṇatayā. When this
refers to the paths of action, iv.85a.
Dīgha, iii. 222, Añguttara, ii.44: atth’āvuso samādhibhāvanā bhāvitā bahulīkatā
diṭṭhadhammasukhaviḥārāya saṁvattati... ñaṇadasanapatilābhāya... satisaṁpajaññāya...
āsavānaṁ khayāya saṁvattati.
In Bodhisattvabhūmi (I,13, fol. 82), the theory of the three samādhibhāvanās is
modified:
tatra katamo bodhisattvānāṁ dhyānasvabhāvaḥ / bodhisattvapiṭaka-śravaṇacintāpū-
rvakaṁ yal laukikaṁ lokottaraṁ bodhisattvānāṁ kuṣalaṁ cittaikāgryaṁ cittasthitiḥ
śamathapakṣyā vā vipaśyanāpakṣyā vā... tadubhayapakṣyā va ayaṁ bodhisattvānāṁ
dhyānasvabhāvo veditavyaḥ / tatra katamad bodhisattvānāṁ sarvadhyānam / tad
dvividham laukikaṁ lokottaraṁ ca / tat punar yathäyogaṁ trividhaṁ veditavyam
dṛṣṭadharmasukhaviḥārāya dhyanam bodhisattvasamādhiguṇanirhārāya dhyānaṁ
sattvārthakriyāyai dhyānam / tatra yad bodhisattvānāṁ sarvavikalpāpagataṁ kāyikacaitasi-
kapraśrabdhijanakaṁ paramapraśāntaṁ manyanāpagatam anāsvāditam sarvanimittāpagataṁ
dhyānam idam eṣāṁ dṛṣṭadharmasukhaviḥārāya veditavyam / pratisamvidām araṇāpraṇid-
hijñānādīnāṁ guṇānāṁ śrāvakāsādhāraṇānām acchinirhārāya saṁvartate idam bodhisat-
tvasya dhyanam samādhiguṇābhirnirhārāya veditavyam...1300 Chapter Eight
153. The fourth pāda, the version of Paramartha appears to be: prajñāprabhedāya
saṁskārajāḥ; the version of Hsüan-tsang: prajñāprabhedāya prayogikaśubhabhāvanā.
The theory of Harivarman, TD 32, no. 1646, chap. 158, is very different from that of the
Abhidharma.
154. On the dṛṣṭadharmasukhaviḥāras, Kofa, ii.4, vi.42c, 58b, 65b, (note 415).
Vihāra = samādhiviśeṣa (ii., note 229).
According to ii.4, English trans. p. 157, happiness here below depends on ajñātavīndriya
and thus supposes the state of Arhat; it consists of the fact of experiencing the "satisfaction"
and the "well-being" of deliverance from the defilements (kleśavimuktiprītisukhapratisaṁ-
vedanā); in other words, this happiness is the enjoyment (upabhoga) of Nirvāṇa) ii.6,
English trans. p. 159).
We should distinguish śāntavihāra from sukhaviḥāra, the former being nirodhasamā-
patti (ii.43b), which is similar to Nirvāṇa (the śānta vimokṣas, viii. p. 10, Majjhima i.472).
We owe to Samghabhadra (above note 57) the fact that the word sukha does not necessarily
signify "agreeable sensation"; but sukhavihāra, being pratisamvedanā, is "sensation."
According to the Vibhāṣā, the sukhavihāras solely refer to the four fundamental
dhyānas, pure (śuddhaka) or anāsrava, not to the prefatory spheres (sāmantakas) or the
ārūpyas.
In Buddhaghosa, the Arhats (compare Majjhima, iii.4) cultivate the right samāpattis
(four dhyānas and four ārūpyas) "in order to agreeably pass the day with their minds
concentrated" (ekaggacittā sukhaṁ divasaṁ viharissāma), and the ninth samāpatti
(samjñāveditanirodha) "in order to agreeably pass seven days delivered in mind, having
attained nirodhā, Nirvāṇa in this world": . . . sattāḥam acittakā hutvā dittheva dhamme
nirodhaṁ nibbānaṁ patvā sukhaṁ viharissāma (Samantapāsādikā, i.156).
155. The Vyākhyā explains the value of these two words. Jñāna is a discernment (prajñā)
associated with the mental consciousness (manovijñānasaṁprayukta) which includes
vikalpas (or "judgements” as here: "Beings, endowed with bad bodily actions ...;" Darśana,
on the contrary, is discernment associated with the visual consciousness, and as such free
from vikalpa (avikalpika prajñā, see i.33a-b, English trans. p. 97).
Some references to jñānadarśana:
i. Worldly insight-consciousness.
a. The Buddha possesses asanga apratiḥata jñānadarśana with respect to the past,
present, and future (last three äveņikas of the Mahāvyutpatti, 9. Kośa, vii. note 162); this
ñāṇadassana is atīraka, Dīgha, iii.134.
Ñāṇadassana has previous existences for its sphere, Nettippakaraṇa, 28.
b. The ascetic obtains ñāṇadassana through ālokasaññāmanasikāra (by having, both day
and night, the idea that it is daytime, divāsaññā); in this way sappabhāsaṁ cittaṁ bhāveti,
Digha, iii.223.
c. The Bodhisattva obtains ñāṇadassana after samadhisampad, before the jhanas,
Majjhima, i.203.
d. The Bodhisattva, before Bodhi, purifies his ñāṇadassana: he saṁjānātis the obhāsa but
does not see the rūpas; then the gods, Aṇuttara, iv.302.
e. The Niggantha affirms that "going, staying in place, lying down, awaking,
ñāṇadassana is present in me without interruption," Añguttara, i.220, iv.428.
f. The jñānadarfana of Sakra views what is below, Avadānaśataka, i.189.
g. Bodhisattvasya sarvavidyāsthāneṣv avyāhatam parifuddham paryavadātam
jñānadarśanam (Bodhisattvabhūmi, I.xv, Muséon 1906, 22a); later, by virtue of
vipaśyanāparisuddhi, this jñānadarśana acquires pṛthuvṛddhivaipulyatā.
ii. Consciousness, knowledge, sambodha.
a. Kośa, vi.75b, ñāṇa = dassana; Majjhima, i.173: ñāņam nesaṁ dassanam udapādi:
akuppā no vimutti; Mahāvyutpatti, 81.9: vimuktasya vimukto'smīti jñānadarfanaṁ bhavati;
this is the vimuktijñānadarśanaskandha (ibid. 4.5, Kośa, vi. p. 1033, vii. p. 1157).Footnotes 1301
b. Kośa, vi.54, darśana = cakṣus, jñāna, vidyā, buddhi.
c. Mahāvyutpatti, 245.51: samyak pratyātmaṁ jñānadarśanaṁ pravartate.
d. Anguttara, ii.200: abhabbā te ñāṇadassanāya anyttarāya abhisambodhāya.
156. Why does the text say: "The abhijñā of divine sight has jñānadarśana for its result,"
and not: "The cultivation of the absorption of the abhijñā of divine sight has jñānadarśana
for its result?" The Vyākhyā explains:
aha/divyacakṣurabhijñā jñānadarśanāya saṁvartata ity uktam na ca divyacakṣurabhijñão
samādhibhāvanā / atrocyate / ayaṁ phale hetūpacāraḥ / yasya hetoḥ samādhibhāvanāyā
divyacakṣurabhijñā phalaṁ tatra phale hetüpacāraḥ / jñānadarśanāya samādhibhāvaneti /
yeşāṁ punar ayam pakṣaḥ ṣaḍvidhā muktimārgadhīr (vii.42) iti dhyā nasaṁgṛhīt eva
mānasā vimuktimārgaḥ ṣaḍ abhijñā iti tesām acodyam evaitat tesāṁ vimuktimārgāṇāṁ
samādhitatvāt / pūrvaka eva tu pakṣo'bhidharmakośacintakānām ity avagantavyam /
divyacaksuḥśrotravijñānayor abhijñātvenābhīṣṭatvāt.
157. Vyākbyā: prajnaprabbedāyeti prajnavisesākarsāya = vaisesikagunabbinirbārāya, Kośa,
vi., note 415. Compare the expression iddippabheda, vii.trans. p. 1157.
158. The dharmas or guņas, “qualities," of the Three Dhatus are aśubhā, ānāpānasmṛti,
araṇā (viii.36), praṇidhijñāna (vii.37), pratisamvid, abhijñā, vimokṣa (viii.32), abhibhvāya-
tana, etc. The pure "qualities” are vimokṣamukha (viii.25), vyutkrāntakasamāpatti
(viii. 18c), asravakṣayābhijñā, etc.
159. Vyākhyā: traidhātukā anāsravā iti traidhātukā asubhā ……. / atra tu samādhisaṁprayogāt
prayokigānāṁ guṇānāṁ samādhibhāvanety upacaraḥ.
160. Vyākhyā: bodhisattvo hi karmäntapratyavekṣaṇāya niṣkrānto jambumüle prathamam
dhyānam utpāditavān (see Kośa, iii. 41) / bodhimüle ca devaputramāraṁ bhaṁktvā
prathame yame divyam cakṣur utpăditvām/ tena divyena cakṣuṣā sattvān cyutyupapattisam-
katasthan abhivīkṣya tatparitrāṇāya madhyame yāme dhyānavimokṣasamāpattiḥ
sammukhi bịta văn | tẻ sya prāyogikagunab Prajnaprabbedaya jayante | tatas triiye game
caturtham dhyanaṁ niśrita niyāmam (vi.26a) avakramya yāvadvajropamena samādhinā
sarvayojanaprahāṇam kṛtavān (Compare Majjhima, i.22). On the conquest of Bodhi by the
Bodhisattva, vii. p. 1145.
161. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 420b8. “Why explain the Immeasurables immediately after the
dhyānas? Because the dhyānas give rise to or produce the Immeasurable; because the
dhyānas and the Immeasurables reciprocally occasion one another; because the Immeasura-
bles are the best qualities among [those that produce the] dhyānas."
162. Mahāvyutpatti, 69; Dīgha, iii.223, catasso appamaññãyo; Dīrgha, TD 1, p. 50c24,
Ekottara, TD 2, p. 658a21, Madhyama, TD 1, p. 563b8.
These are the Four Brahmavihāras. Visuddhimagga, Atthasālinī, 192, Itivuttaka, 15,
Bodhisattvabhūmi, Muséon, 1911, p. 177, Yogasūtram i.33; cultivated by a Rājarasipravraj-
ita, Divya, 122.
Considered by many sects as parts of Bodhi (Bhavya), Kośa, vi. p.281; they figure in the
presentation of the Path, Anuttara, i.38, between the dhyānas and the smrtyupasthānas.
On maitrī and araṇā, Kośa, vii.36; formula of maitrī, iv.124; difference between karuṇā
and mahākaruṇā, vii.37.
Samghabhadra (in his Nyāyānusāra, TD 29, p. 769b17) observes here that the
Immeasurables do no good to another. Why are they good and not morally neutral? Because
they oppose hatred, etc.; because they assure the mind of mastery over itself.
On the miracles that maitrīsamāpanna manifests, Divya, 1886.2, Cullavagga, v.6, 1;
Digha, ii.238, etc.
163. Paramārtha omits the second reason. P’u-kuang (TD 41, p. 433a10), because they
produce immeasurable retributive results and outflowing results. Three reasons in Fa-pao1302 Chapter Eight
(TD 41, p. 798b18).
164. Vyākhyā: adveṣasvabhāvatvān maitrī vyāpādapratipakṣaḥ / duḥkhāpanayanākāratvāc
ca karuṇā duḥkhopasaṁjārākārāyā vihiṁsāyāḥ pratipakṣo bhavati / muditā cārateḥ
pratipakṣaḥ saumanasyarūpatvāt / upekṣā ca mādhyasthayāt kāmarāgavyāpādayoḥ
pratipaksa iti (apalṣapātitve năpy anunīto nāpi pratihata iti), v.47, note 170.
165. Saṁghabhadra (in his Nyāyānysāra, TD 26, p. 769b16) says the contrary: Aśubhā and
upekṣā oppose, in this order, sexual desire and the other desires. On the attachment to
visible things, below viii.32a.
166. We do not mean to say that a single dharma, upekṣā, possesses two natures; we mean
to say that the word upekṣā designates both non-desire and non-hatred.
167. Sukhitā vata sattvāḥ. The meaning is: "May they be happy!" Maitrībhāvanā analyzed as
punyakriyāvastu, iv.112c; its efficacy, iv.121b; above note 162.
168. Duḥkhitvata sattvāḥ. The intention is: "May they be delivered from suffering!"
169. Compare the anumodana of the Mahāyāna (Bodhicaryavatāra, Third Chapter).
170. The absence of sympathy (anunaya) and antipathy (pratighāta). On saṁskāropekṣā,
iii.35d.
171. See ii.72, English trans. p. 320, adhimuktimanasikāra; vi.9, viii.32, 34, 35.
172. Digha, i.250, iii.223, etc.
173. Maulaśuddhakadhyānabhūmikatvāt: “They have the fundamental dhyānas of the
fuddhaka or pure category for their sphere" (viii.5). The prefatory (sāmantaka) absorptions
bring about worldly abandoning of the defilements, not fundamental absorptions (viii.21c).
174. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 427b14. Do the Apramāṇas bring about the abandoning of the
defilements? No. The abandoning (prahāṇa) of the defilements is of two types, temporary
abandoning and definitive abandoning. Concerning the first abandoning, the Sūtra says that
the Apramāņas cause abandoning; of the second, the Samādhiskandha says that they do not
bring about the abandoning.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 819b10. Why do the Apramāṇas not bring about the abandoning of
the defilements? For the following reasons: 1. on account of the diversity of their aspects;
sixteen aspects cut off the defilements: the four aspects of the Apramāṇas do not; 2. the
Apramāṇas are adhimuktimanasikāra; and only tattvamanasikāra cuts off the defilements;
3. the Apramāṇa are anugrahamanasikāra (tseng-i
), beneficial act of attention;
and only the acts of attention which do not have this characteristic cut off the defilements; 4.
the Apramāṇas have for their object the present; and only the Path which has the three
time periods, or the asaṁskṛta for its object, cuts off the defilements; and 5. only
ānantaryamārga cuts off the defilements; and the Apramāņas are obtained at the moment of
vimuktimārga.
175. Hsüan-tsang adds: "He has the idea that they are delivered from suffering and obtain
happiness."
176. Hsüan-tsang adds: “From equanimity one passes through the other categories to the
moment when one has, for his greatest friends, the same though as for those to whom he is
indifferent."
177. References given by Saeki: Madhyama, TD 1, p. 582a17, p. 694a28 and following,
Dirgha, TD 1, p. 490c3, p. 489b27, Prakaraṇapada, TD 26, p. 720c23-721b3, Samyukta-hr-
daya, TD 28, p. 927a19, Tattvasiddhi (Ch'eng-shih lun), TD 32, p. 15. 10, and the
Amṛta-śāstra, TD 28, p. 976a18.
Digha, ii.70 (Lotus, 824; Dialogues; O. Franke, 212), Atthasālinī 190, PațisambhidāFootnotes 1303
magga, ii.38, Dhammasangaṇi, 248 (seven).
Mahāvyutpatti, 70 (according to the Samgitiparyaya, TD 26, p. 443a26); Chavannes,
Religieux éminents, p. 164, compare the Mahavyutpatti and the Numerical Dictionary.
Vasubandhu follows Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 434b15, where the svabhāva (nature) of the
Vimokşas, their bhūmi (the stage in which one produces them), their āśraya (the persons
who produce them), their ākāra (aspect), their ālambana (object), their smṛtyupasthāna (of
which "application of mindfulness" they consist), their lābha (mode of acquisition), etc. are
explained.
178. Text of the Vyākhyā:
a. rūpī rūpāṇi paśyati.
b. adhyātmam arūpasaṁjñi bahirdhā rūpāṇi paśyati.
c. śubham vimokṣam kāyena sākṣātkṛtvopasaṁpadya viharati.
d. sarvašo rūpasaṁjñānāṁ samatikramāt pratighasaṁjñānām astaṁgamān nänātvasaṁj-
ñānām amanasikārād anantam ākāśam anantam ākāśam ity ākāśānantyāyatanam
upasampadya viharati tad yathā devā ākāśānantyāyatanopagāḥ.
e. punar aparaṁ sarvaśa ākāśānantyāyatanaṁ samatikramyānantaṁ vijñānam anantaṁ
vijñānam iti vijñānānantyāyatanam upasaṁpadya viharati tadyathā devā vijñānānantyāya-
tanopagāḥ.
f. punar aparam sarvašo vijñānānantyāyatanaṁ samatikramya nāsti kim cid ity
ākiñcanyāyatanam upasampadya viharati tadyathā devā ākiñcanyayāyatanopagāḥ.
g. punar aparaṁ sarvafa ākiñcanyāyatanaṁ samatikramya naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyata-
nam upasampadya viharati tadyathā devā naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatanopagāḥ.
h. punar aparam sarvaso naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatanaṁ samatikramya saṁjñāveditani-
rodhaṁ kāyena sākṣātkṛtvopasaṁpadya viharaty ayam aṣṭamo vimokṣa iti.
179. It is very difficult to interpret this formula.
a. The Pāļi sources read rūpī rūpāṇi passati; the Vyākhyā comments: rūpī rūpāṇīti
svātmani rūpāņi vibhāvya bahir api rūpāṇi paśyati.
Paramartha, Hsüan-tsang, one of the versions of the Mahāvyutpatti, 70, and
Harivarman (in his Tattvasiddhi), read adhyātmaṁ rūpasaṁjñī bahirdhā rūpāṇi paśyati
(which is the formula of the Abhibhvāyatanas, viii.35).
b. The exegesis of the Abhidhamma is developed in Paṭisambhidā, ii.38a and elsewhere:
the ascetic considers rūpa (blue, nīla, etc.) which is internal and external (First Vimokka),
and then only external rūpa (Second Vimokka). It appears probable that the Kośa intends
the same.
c. What is the meaning of the expression rūpāṇi vibhāvya (Vyākhyā quoted above a.)?
According to Atthasālinī, 163: “In the expressions rūpaṁ saññaṁ vibhāvehi, the word
vibhāvanā signifies antaradhāpana, to make disappear." Above, Kośa, viii.3a, vibhūtarūpa-
samjñā = = which makes the notion of rūpa disappear.
Harivarman translates vibhāvanā as “to expell, break." "First Vimokṣa: adhyātmaṁ
rūpasaṁjñī bahirdhā rūpāṇi paśyati [=He grasps the notion of internal rūpa (=of the body)
as being horrible (aśubha), and continues to see external rūpa: The ascetic, by this Vimokşa
breaks and rends (p'o-lieh
) rūpa. How do we know this? Because, in the Second
Vimokşa, it is said: adhyātmam arūpasaṁjñī bahirdhā rūpāṇi paśyati. The ascetic is termed
adhyātmam arūpasaṁjñí, because he has broken internal rūpa. By this we know that in the
First Vimokṣa the ascetic sees only external rūpa, the internal rūpa having been eliminated.
In the Third Vimokṣa, the external rūpa also having been eliminated, the ascetic no longer
sees internal and external rūpa. This is what is called the notion of rūpa, he abandons-des-
troys desire; he does not see any internal or external ātman.” Compare Suttanipāta, 1113:
vibhūtarūpasaññissa sabbakāyappahāyino (the Chinese reads kāma) ajjhattaṁ ca bahiddhā
ca n'atthi kim cīti passato.
180. Hsüan-tsang differs. Kārikā: The Vimokṣas are of eight types. The first three are1304 Chapter Eight
non-desire (alobha); two are in two absorptions; one in one absorption . . . Bhāṣya: ... the
first two are, by their nature, non-desire, because they oppose desire. The Sūtras
(Madhyama, TD 1, p. 582a17) define Vimokşa by saying that the ascetic sees (pafyati): [it
does not mean that Vimokṣa is sight; it expresses itself thus] because seeing increases
Vimokṣa. Hsüan-tsang puts into the text of Vasubandhu the definition of Vibhāṣā volume
84 (TD 27, p. 434b28) [where it is noted that the eighth Vimokṣa is a cittaviprayuktasaṁskā-
raskandha].
181. This opposition is dūrībhāvapratipakṣa “opposition which renders distant" (v.61, p.
855) for, from the fact that the ascetic enters into the First Dhyāna, attachment to the rūpa
of Kāmadhātu is already abandoned (prahīṇa: by means of a prahāṇapratipakṣa realized in
anāgamya, viii. p. 1268, line 25).
182. See iii.43: One does not die in a state of samadhi.
183. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.434c1: Why are they called Vimokşas? What is the meaning of
vimokşa? The meaning of vimokṣa is "rejection" (ch'i-pei DH, to discard, turn
the back on) ... The first two reject the mind of desire for rūpa (rūpalobhacitta); the third
rejects aśubhāsaṁjña; the Four Vimokṣas of Ārūpyadhātu each reject the mind of the sphere
immediately below; the Vimokṣa of nirodhasamāpatti rejects any thought having an object
(sālambanacitta). Consequently the meaning of vimokṣa is “rejection." The Bhadanta says
that the Vimokṣas are so called because they are obtained by the force of adhimokṣa;
according to Pāśva, because they are the locus wherein one rejects.
184. See ii.44d, vi.64a, viii.196. Majjbima, 1.160, 301,333,400,456, Anguttara, iv.426,448.
185. Hsüan-tsang corrects: "because it turns its back on everything that has an object
(sālamba)," that is to say, the mind and mental states.
186. Hsüan-tsang: "The Eight Vimokşa is called Vimokṣa because it delivers . . . '
It is evident that the possession of the Eighth Vimokṣa, [which confers the name of
Kāyasākṣin and, when one is an Arhat, the name of Ubhyatobhāgavimukta], assures perfect
mastery in absorption, the complete deliverance of vimokṣāvaraṇa (vi.64a); but the version
of Paramartha is doubtless correct, for the possession of the first two Vimokṣas, which
supposes the cultivation of the First Dhyāna, makes this same cultivation sharper by
"making more distant” the rūpa already abandoned (above note 181), by giving the mind
karmaṇyatā (see following note). The Third Vimokṣa surpresses obstacles to the Vimokṣas
of the sphere of Rūpadhātu (rūpivimokṣāvaraṇa, below note 198).
187. The obstacle is the ineptitude of the mind (akarmaṇyatā) which causes a person
detached from the three Dhātus to be incapable at the same time of entering the First
Dhyāna.
188. Vibhāṣā TD 27, p. 774a14: The Dārṣṭāntikas and the Vibhajyavādins maintain that a
subtle mind is not destroyed in nirodhasamāpatti. According to them, there is no being
(sattva) without matter (rūpa), and there is no absorption without the mind. If absorption
were free from mind, the vital organ (jīvitendriya) would be cut off; one would say that [the
ascetic] is dead and not that he is in an absorption. In order to refute this opinion, one
indicates that nirodhasamāpatti is absolutely without mind. See Kośa, ii.44d, note 253.
189. Definition of Bhavägra, viii.4c.
190. According to the Mahāyāna, the "entering mind" of this absorption is always anasrava,
and the leaving mind is of two types, anāsrava or säsrava … . . Among the Buddhas, the Eight
Vimokṣas are anāsrava; among others, the Eighth is always anāsrava, the first seven are of
two types accordingly as they have for their nature worldly or transworldly knowledge
(laukikalokottarajñāna).Footnotes 1305
191. Anvayajñāna is the Path with the exception of the part of Path relative to Kāmadhātu.
The Vyākhyā indicates the spheres where the Vimokṣas are cultivated: eleven spheres
by excluding seven samantakas.
192. Vyākhyā: āha / katamaḥ punar apratisaṁkhyānirodhas teṣām ālambananam /
atrocyate / aśaikṣasyānimittasya samādher apratisaṁkhyānirodham ālambate / ete hy
ārūpyā vimokṣā ānimittānimittasamādhisvabhāvāḥ saṁbhavanti (viii.26c).
193. Akāśa is the object of the ākāśānantyāyatana Vimokṣa.
194. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 436b10: Because he wishes to assure himself whether the
kuśalamūlas are complete (man) or not. The ascetic thinks: Even though I
contemplate the horrible (afubha), I do not produce any defilements, but I do not know if
the kuśalamūlas are complete; if, by contemplating the agreeable, the defilements do not
arise, I would know that the kuśalamūlas are complete.
195. See vii.42, 48. On abhinirhāra, see Speyer, Avadānaśataka, ii.221; index of the
Mahāvastu and the Divya; Mahävyutpatti, 21.88, 25.12; Lévi ad Sūtrālaṁkāra, iv.12; Rhys
Davids-Stede.
On ārya ṛddhi in Pāļi sources, vii. P. 1168.
196. Vyākhyā: atra sākṣātkṛtveti pratyakṣīkṛtyety arthaḥ / upasampadya viharatīti tāṁ
samāpattim samapadya viharatīty arthaḥ.
vi.43c, 58b (p. 1006), 63; viii. p. 1232. Uttarādhyayana, v.23, SBE, 45, p. 23.
Compare the expressions phusati cetosamādhim, nirodham (Dīgha, 184), and catasso
appamaññãyo (Theragathā, 386), etc.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 776a21: In the other Sūtras, the Bhagavat employs, in the definition
of the Eight Vimokṣas, the expression kāyena sākṣātkṛtvā upasaṁpadya viharati; notably in
the Mahāhetupratyayasūtra . . . Some say: "The Third and Eighth Vimokṣas are found at the
end of the two Dhātus . . ." Some say: "These two Vimokṣas are found at the end of two
bhūmis..."
197. Vyākhyā: prathamadvitīyābhyāṁ vimokṣābhyāṁ tṛtīyasya vimokṣasya prādhāṇyāt /
rūpivimokṣāvaraṇasākalyapraḥāṇād āśrayaparivṛttitas tṛtīyasya sākṣātkaraṇam uktam /
aṣṭamasyāpi pradhāṇyād ārūpyavimokṣāvaraṇasākalyaprāhāṇād āśrayaparivṛttitaḥ
sākṣātkaraṇam uktam: "The Sūtra says that the ascetic manifests (sākṣātkaraṇa,
pratyakṣīkaraṇa) the Third Vimokṣa because this Vimokṣa outweighs the first two. It
includes the abandoning of all the obstacles which are opposed to the Vimokṣas of dhyāna
(rūpivimokṣa): once he has acquired it, he possesses a suppleness of mind which permits
the realization, without effort, of the first three Vimokşas. And this because it includes an
äśrayaparivṛtti, a certain transformation of the aśraya or physico-psychological complex. So
too the Eighth Vimokṣa outweighs the preceding Vimokşas because it includes the
abandoning of all the obstacles to the Vimokṣas of the sphere of Arūpyadhātu.
The Third Vimokṣa is obtained by an ascetic who cultivates the Fourth Dhyāna, the
highest sphere of Rūpadhātu; the Eighth, by an ascetic who cultivates Bhavāgra, the highest
sphere of Arūpyadhātu.
a. iv.56, English trans. p. 631, āśrayaparivṛtti by the Path of Seeing, etc.; 14c,
parivṛttavyañjana: "whose sex has been changed"; 38, āśrayatyāga, āśrayavikopana:
“abandoning, overthrowing the aśraya by death, by hermaphroditism"; the Dharmakāya,
vii., note 196. The Sūtrālaṁkāra prefers the expression āśrayaparavṛtti.
b. raya = “the body endowed with organs.” iii.41; among the organs, the manas, ii.5,
i.20a (p. 78). A synonym of āśraya is ātmabhāva, v.2c. See also i.34d (p. 99), ii.55d (p. 285),
vii. 21b, and elsewhere. The translation "personality” is not bad, for example vi.21 has: “a
feminine personality..." Certain qualities can only have for their support (āśraya) persons1306 Chapter Eight
of the Three Dvipas; one only obtains them with a human āśraya.
In a different usage of the word, a certain dhyāna, or a certain bhūmi is the āśraya, or the
support, of the acquisition of a certain "knowledge," etc.
198. Dīgha, ii.110. iii.260, Samyutta, iv.85, Majjhima, ii.13, Visuddhimagga, 175, Atthasālini,
187.
Mahävyutpatti, 71; Sütrālamkāra, xx-xxi.44.
When an ascetic considers the six āyatanas (physical matter, sound, etc.) without
producing any bad ideas, these āyatanas have prevailed, abhibhūta: such as the ten
abhibhāyatanas, Samyutta, iv.77.
References of Saeki: Madhyama, TD 1, p. 799c25, Dirgha, TD 1, p. 55c26, Amṛta-śästra,
TD 28, p. 976a25, Saṁgītiparyāya, TD 26, p. 445b19, Prakaraṇapada, TD 26, p. 721b4,
Samyukta-hrdaya, TD 28, p. 927b19, and Tattvasiddhi.
In the Madhyama version, ch'u-ch'u
chih-ju
"expelling äyatana,” Paramārtha,
(abhi-ayatana). The abhibhūya of
(control-bbāvana)
Hsüan-tsang, sheng-ch'u
>
the formula tāni rūpāṇy abhibhūya is translated by chih-hsiu
or by ch'u
(to expel, vinodana, apanayana, vibhāvana).
199. Pāļi: eko bahirdhā.
200. Vyākhyā: jānāti . . . paśyati. Paramārtha: jānāmi paśyāmi.
On jñāna and darśana, above viii.27c.
201. On ākārayati, vi. p. 931, vii,p. 1144
202. The classical list Añguttara, v.46, 60 (Comm. i.27.10), Majjhima, i.423. ii.14, Dīgha,
iii.268 (Sumangala, i.115, Franke, p.210); Visuddhi, 110, replaces the last two by āloka,
paricchinnākāsakasiņa (see Childers); the last two omitted occasionally in Pațisambhidā. On
ālokamanasikāra, etc., vii. p. 1160, 1177.
Visuddhimagga, 425 (see Index and Warren, 293), Atthasālinī, 185, Compendium,
passim; Spence Hardy, Eastern Monachism, 252; Kern, Geschiedenis, i.393 (“universal or
cosmic circles"); Yogāvacara-Manual, p. xxix; Rhys Davis-Stede.
Mahāvyutpatti, 72, Saṁgītiparyāya, 11th section, Sūtrālaṁkāra, vii. 9, xx. 44.
These summary remarks in the Kośa have been extracted from a more complete treatise
in the Vibhāṣā.
(= total),
203. Paramārtha sometimes (TD 29, p. 303b12) translates kṛtsna as pien
sometimes (p. 303b18) as wu-pien
(=ananta). There are Ten Kṛtsnāyatanas (pien
ju λ). They are called kṛtsna (wu-pien) because they totally embrace one type
without interval-crack. What dharmas are kṛtsna (wu-pien)? Earth, water, fire, wind, blue,
yellow, red, white: these contain rūpa (literally: rūpalakṣaṇāni) …. There are some masters
who say that the väyukṛtsnāyatana (feng wu-pien ju
) has tangible things
^
for its object.
The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 440b17, translates kṛtsna by pien
: . . . They are called
Kṛtsnāyatanas for two reasons: because they do not present any interval (chien
),
and because they are extended (kuang-taxt ): on the one hand, the act of
imaginative attention (adhimuktimanaskāra) bears exclusively on blue, etc., without being
mixed with any other characteristic; on the other hand, the act of attention, bearing on all
blue, etc., has for its object an infinite characteristic. The Bhadanta says: "Because their
object is large-extended (k'uan-kuang
), and because there is no interval-crack
(chien-hsi
).”
204. This last phrase is not in Hsüan-tsang.
205. This problem is examined Visuddhimagga, 415.
206. The cause or hetu, is the ārūpya absorption acting as sabhāgahetu, that is to say, leading
to a new ārūpya absorption.Footnotes 1307
207. Someone who produces an ārūpya absorption falls from this absorption, dies, and is
reborn in a heaven of Rūpadhātu by virtue of some former action: there he will produce a
new ārūpya absorption because the preceding ārūpya absorption is close (āsanna). Someone
frequently enters an arūpya absorption: he has a strong habit (abhikṣṇabhyasa) with respect
to it; he dies, is reborn into Rūpadhātu, and here he will produce an ārūpya absorption
again.
In the same way, born in Ākāśānantyāyatana, one could produce a higher ārūpya
absorption, Vijñānānantyāyatana, etc.
208. Someone accomplished an action which sould be retributed in Ārūpyadhātu, not
immediately upon his death, but in a later birth (iv.50). By reason of other actions "of
immediate retribution,” he is first reborn in Rūpadhātu. The imminence of the retribution
of the action retribuable in Ārūpyadhātu makes this person produce an ārūpya absorption.
This is necessary for the retribution of this action, for not being detached from the sphere
where he is born (adhastād avītarāga), namely of Rūpadhātu, this person could not be
reborn in Ārūpyadhātu if he were not detached from it, by an ārūpya absorption of the said
sphere.
209. When the universe perishes by fire, Kāmadhātu and the heavens of the First Dhyāna
disappear; when it perishes by water, the heavens of the Second Dhyāna disappear; when it
perishes by wind, the disappearance also includes the spheres of the Third Dhyana (Kośa,
iii. 100c-d). Thus, at the end of the world, all beings should be reborn in spheres sheltered
from this destruction, and so they should produce absorptions entailing rebirth in the
heavens of the Second, Third or Fourth Dhyāna.
Hsüan-tsang: The receptacle or physical world begins to perish by the force of
dharmată. Such is the law of nature (dharmatā) of beings in the lower spheres that they
produce higher dhyānas, because, under these circumstances (avasthā), the good dharmas
undergo full development by the force of this dharmată. Beings in the two higher Dhātus
(in the heavens of the Fourth Dhyana and in Ārūpyadhātu) produce ārūpyasamapatti by the
force of cause and actions, and not by the force of dharmată, for the Anabhraka gods, etc.
(Fourth Dhyāna) are not affected by the three catastrophies.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 779a28: Why do beings in Rūpadhātu first produce the dhyānas, the
ārūpyas, and not nirodhasamāpatti? They produce the dhyānas by reason of three causes
(pratyaya): 1. by the force of cause (hetubala): in a former existence, they produced, and
destroyed, the dhyānas; 2. by the force of action (karmabala): they did and accumulated
actions of necessary retribution which should be retributed in a later existence in a sphere of
dhyāna; this action will give forth its fruit; and 3. by the force of the "nature of things"
(dharmatā): when the world perishes, beings in the lower spheres are necessarily reborn
above... The first two reasons hold for the production of the ārūpyas.
210. Vyākhyā: keyaṁ dharmatā nāma / kecit tavat sautrāntikā āhuḥ / eṣām eva
dharmāṇāmudbhūtavṛttīnāṁ pūrvadhyānavāsanādhipatyāt tadutpattāv upadeśam antareṇa
dhyānotpattāv ānuguṇyaṁ dharmatā prakṛtiḥ svabhāva ity arthaḥ // vaibhāṣikā api kecid
āhuḥ / paurvajāgarikāt sabhāgahetoḥ nisyandaphalam dhyānotpadanam tadupadeśam
antareṇānyato dharmateti.
On dharmată, see ii.46, English trans. p. 248, iv.17a, 20, 67, vi.34a.
211. On vāsanā, see vii. p. 1137 to 1143. Here, the good dharmas are adhipatipratyaya.
212. As long as the Good Law lasts, it is possible to know all the dharmas, pure and impure,
to which Dhātu and sphere they belong, their aspect, etc.
213. According to Paramārtha. Hsüan-tsang: All these diversely specified dharmas have for
their goal the expansion and duration of the Good Law. What is the Good Law? How long
will it last?1308 Chapter Eight
214. The Saddhamma is threefold: pariyattisaddhamma: all the words of the Buddha in the
Three Pițakas; paṭipattisaddhamma: the thirteen dhutaguṇas, the fourteen khandhakavat-
tas, the eighty-two mahāvattas, sīla, samādhi, and vipassanā; and adhigamasaddhamma: the
four ariyamaggas, the four fruits and Nirvāṇa (Samantapāsādikā, i.225). See below note 219.
215. The twelve angas are enumerated in the Abhisamayalamkārāloka:
sūtraṁ geyaṁ vyākaraṇaṁ gāthodānāvadānakam /
itivṛttikaṁ nidānaṁ vaipulyaṁ ca sajātakam /
upadefo'dbhută dharmā dvādaśāṁgam idaṁ vacaḥ //
216. It appears that "holiness" is not too bad an equivalent for adhigama, since adhigama is
defined as being “the dharmas attendant upon Bodhi plus the results of brahmacarya." [It is
through the bodhipākṣikas that brahmacariya is addhaniya ciraṭṭhitika, Dīgha, iii.27.]
Moreover adhigama signifies "penetration, intelligence."
Adhigama is a synonym for satyābhisamaya (see vi.27) in the definition of the three
prajñās or discernments: A fool (bāla) is one who lacks innate (upapattilābhikā) prajñā
which proceeds from the traces of a former cultivation (pūrvābhyāsavāsanānirjātā);
unlearned (aśrutavān) is one who lacks the prajñā which arises from the Teaching
(āgamajā); an ordinary person (pṛthagjana) is one who lacks the prajñā which arises from
adhigama, which arises from the comprehension of the Truths (yasyādhigamajā
satyabhisamayajā nāsti . . . ) (iii.28a).
The Bodhisattvabhūmi, in the definition of "refuge" (pratisaraṇa), defines jñāna, which
is a refuge-as adhigamajñāna created from absorption, bhāvanāmya (See iv. English trans.
p. 655, notes 341 to 343 and below Chapter IX, trans. Hsüan-tsang, xxix.15a, note).
217. a. Hsüan-tsang translates: “As long as there are bearers, preachers, and acquirers, the
Law will endure."
The two Chinese translators distinguish three categories: the first two (those who bear
and those who preach) with respect to the agama; the third (those who acquire) with
respect to the adhigama. The āgama lasts as long as the first two categories exist; the
adhigama lasts as long as the third exists. Thus the Law lasts because of these three classes
of persons.
Paramārtha (TD 29, p. 303c23) adds: Why? Because there are two causes of the duration
of the Good Law: speaking correctly and receiving correctly. There are some other masters
who say
that the Law lasts one thousand years: this is in reference to the adhigama, not to
the agama which lasts longer. Why? In the future, persons capable of bearing the Law will
be of two types: those who believe by reason of hearing, and those who believe by reason of
correct intelligence (? cheng-chieh E ). The gods protect these persons in order
that the āgama and the adhigama do not quickly disappear. Consequently one should, both
literally and in meaning, meditate and practice.
b. Saṁghabhadra (in his Nyāyānusāra, TD 29, p. 775b1) corrects Vasubandhu on many
points and adds some interesting details: The Saddharma of the Bhagavat is twofold, agama
and adhigama. The āgama is Sūtra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma. The adhigama is the pure path
(anāsravamārga) of the Three Vehicles. [For Vasubandhu, this is the bodhipākṣikas which
are not all necessarily pure.] As long as the adhigama-saddharma lasts in the world, the
āgama-saddharma, increased and sustained by it, also lasts. At present, in the East, the
adhigama-dharmapis disappearing; the āgama has much disappeared. As the adhigama-
dharma flourishes in the North, the good āgama of the Bhagavat is being extended and
augmented. Consequently, this is the land of the supreme knowledge of the Tathāgatas (...
jñānagocara). The Aryans dwell therein; the correct sense of the Abhidharma flourishes in
this country; not in the East, etc., where tradition and practice are impossible (??). The
āgamadharma, essentially depends on its “bearers" (dhătar, those who have learned it) and
preachers in order for it to last in the world; the adhigama lasts solely depending on "those
who practice" (pratipattar). But these are not only the supports of the adhigama; the
āgamadharma also depends on pratipattar: as long as persons practice the Dharma without
error (aviparīta), the adhigama will last; as long as the adhigama lasts, the āgama will last.
GREEN VOETES ANGERUSTAN TUHAN BAN HON,Footnotes 1309
For the disappearance of the Law in the West, compare the Dreams of Krkin, Vinaya of
the Mahīśāsakas (Wu-fen Lü, TD 22, p. 172a7), Chavannes, Cinq cents contes, II. p. 348.
The eleventh dream (a piece of water whose center is troubled but whose sides are calm and
clear) signifies that the Good Law will begin to disappear in the Middle (Kingdoms), but
that it will prosper in the frontier kingdoms.
218. The Vyākhyā approves of this explanation: eșa eva pakṣo yukta iti paśyāmaḥ.
219. a. Condition for the duration of the Law (respect for the Buddha; no mention of years),
Anguttara, iv.84. anāgatabhaya, iii.15, 108, etc.
Why the Law of certain Buddhas lasts a long time, Suttavibhanga, Pārājika, i.3.3,
Samantapāsādikā, i.184, Kofa, vii.p. 1145.
The Arhat prolongs his life in order to prolong the Law, Kośa, ii. English trans. p. 165.
The Law is protected by humans and gods, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 177b22. Lévi and Chavannes,
"Les seize Arhats protecteurs de la Loi,” J. As., 1916, ii.9; J. Przyluski, Açoka, Chap. VII.
Development of eschatological ideas relative to the Law, and also 207, 336, 399, 452.
b. Cullavagga, x.1.6: “If women had not been admitted, this brahmacariya would last a
long time, it would last one thousand years; but as they have been admitted, this
brahmacariya will not last for a long time: the Saddharma will last five hundred years." No
mention of years in the Bhikṣuṇīkarmavācanā (Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies,
1920, p. 125)., nor in Rockhill, Life, p.60.
Same doctrine in the Pi-ni-mu ching (TD 24, p. 818c5), where the explanation is given
by Kāśyapa (Przyluski, Açoka, p. 173); see also Madhyama, TD 1, p. 607b8 (quoted by
Saeki). Saeki also quotes the Vinaya of the Mahīśāsakas (TD 22, p. 186a14) "If the
Bhikṣuṇīs observe the eight gurudharmas, the Law will last one thousand years."
But, in the Vinaya of the Sarvāstivādins ("judgment of Ananda"), the duration of the
Law is limited to one thousand years because women have beens admitted. Same doctrine in
the other texts relative to the First Council (Przyluski, ibid.).
Ašokāvadāna, and many other texts, have one thousand years; the Mahāmāyāsūtra, TD
12, p. 1013b21 - 1014a2, has fifteen hundred years (Przyluski, p. 161-173); see also the [Fo
lin nieh-p'an chi] Fa-chu ching, TD 12, p. 1113a2-c10.
I-ching (Takakusu, 106) quotes the Vinaya: “As long as there is a karmācārya (? “the
Upholders of rules"), my Law will not be destroyed. When there will be no person who
"upholds and supports” the karman, my Law will end,” and again: “As long as my precepts
exist, I shall live." Sum. Vil. i.11.
c. Five successive disappearances: adhigama, pațipatti, pariyatti, linga, and dhātu, in
Manorathapūraṇī, i.87, Anāgatavamsa (Minayev, JPTS. 1886 and Warren, 481).
Three disapearances, adhigama, pațipatti, and linga, in Milinda, 133.
"Disappearance of the shadow of the Buddha ... and how many Arhats do we have who
can preserve the Good Law? It is said in a Treatise: The Great Lion has closed his eyes and
his witnesses have disappeared one after the other ...,” I-ching, Takakusu, p. 106 [compare
above p. 1282].
The Vajracchedikāṭīkā, Mdo, xvi. fol. 234a, explaining Vajracchedikā, p. 22: paścime kāle
paścime samaye paścimāyāṁ pañcaśatyāṁ saddharmavipralopakāle vartamāne: “It is well
known (prasiddha) that the teaching of the Bhagavat lasts five times five hundred years;
this is why the text specifies: during the last period of five hundred years, for it is then that
the five kaṣāyas (iii.4c, 93a) increase."
Nanjo (in Max Müller, SBE. 49, p. 116) mentions the Mahāsaṁnipātasūtra (TD 13, p.
363a29): In the first five hundred years, the Bhikṣus and others will be "strong in
deliberation" (will obtain satyābhisamaya?); in the second period of five hundred years, they
will be strong in meditation (samādhi, dhyāna); in the third, in Scripture (fruta); in the
fourth, the building of monasteries; and in the fifth, in quarrels and slander. The White Law
will become invisible.1310 Chapter Eight
d. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 226c6: In the Period when the Saddarma of Kāśyapa began to
perish, a pratirūpaka Dharma arose; when this has arisen, the Saddharma will have
perished." Saddharmapuṇḍarikä, 67.7: “The Saddharma of Padmaprabha will last thirty-two
antarakalpas; when it is destroyed, the saddharmapratirūpaka will last the same number of
kalpas"; 377: "The Saddharma of Jitasvararāja was destroyed, and in the period when the
saddharmapratirūpala was disappearing, this religion (śāsana) was overrun by Bhikṣus who
attributed to themselves spiritual gifts which they did not possess . . . .
220. According to Hsüan-tsang. According to Paramărtha: I have presented in this treatise
the Abhidharma of the Buddha Bhagavat. Have I presented it according to the school of the
Sautrāntikas or as it is presented in the Vibhāṣā?
According to the Vyākhyā: Is the Abhidharma that I have taught here, namely the
Abhidharmakośa, the Abhidharma of the canonical Treatises, the Abhidharma of the
Jñänaprasthāna, etc.?
221. Vyākhyā: yo'yam iti vistaraḥ / yo'yam ihābhidharmakośalakṣaṇo ‘bhidharma uktaḥ kim
eṣa eva śāstrābhidharmo jñānaprasthānādhilakṣaṇo dešito’ta idam ucyate / kāśmīravaibhā-
șikanītisiddha iti vistaraḥ / kaśmīre bhavāḥ kāśmīrāḥ / vibhāṣayā dīvyanti vaibhāṣikā iti
vyākhyātam etat / santi kāśmīrā na vaibhāṣikā ye vinayacintādayaḥ sautrāntikā ity
bhadantādayah / santi vaibhāṣikā na kāśmīrā ye bahirdeśakā ity ubhayaviśeṣaṇam // teṣām
nītyā yaḥ siddho 'bhidharmaḥ sa prāyeṇeha mayā deśitaḥ / arthād uktaṁ bhavati /
anyanītisiddho'pi defita iti // yad durgṛhitam kāśmīravaibhāṣikanayenānyanayena vā tad
ihavacane 'smadāgo 'smadaparādhaḥ // kiṁ kāraṇam ity āha / saddharmanītau munayaḥ
pramāṇam iti / saddharmasyāgamādhigamalakṣaṇasya nītau varṇane munayo buddhā
bhagavanto buddhaputrāś cāryaśāradvatīputrādayaḥ pramāṇaṁ sarvākārasarvadharmāva-
bodha äptä ity arthaḥ.
222. a. Hsüan-tsang: "The discussion of the Abhidharma of the Vaibhāṣikas of Kaśmir
[=the Five Hundred Arhats, according to Saeki] is correctly established. [There is perhaps a
mistake here with respect to the sense of siddha.] It is by depending on them that I have, in
general, presented the Abhidharma. That which is false is my fault. The authority for
judging the Dharma is only the Buddhas and the Mahāśrāvakas.”
b. Samghabhadra (in his Nyāyānusāra, TD29, p. 775b18): “. . . It is by depending on
them that I have, in general, presented the Abhidharma. Here the Sauträntika
[= Vasubandhu] presents his fundamental thought, saying: Depending on the Mahāvibhāṣā,
discussing the principles of the Abhidharma of the Saugatas of this land, and making an
effort to correctly understand to the end that the Good Law will last a long time for the
salvation of beings, I have composed this treatise. The great bulk of this book presents the
system [of the Vibhāṣā]; a smaller part follows other paths, for example with respect to
physical matter as shape (saṁsthānarūpa, iv. English trans. p. 557), with respect to the past
and future (v.27), etc. But the nature of the dharmas is very profound, and my intelligence is
weak: I am not capable of diligently searching out (ch'in-ch'iu * ) the Preacher of
Truth (yathābhūtavādin) (?). Consequently, in the interpretation (nīti) presented in this
long treatise, if one small part is poorly supported (durgrhita = pien-liang
= of
contestable authority; the meaning is perhaps “If I have, sometimes, reproduced some
incorrect doctrines..."), it is my fault. The Buddhas, having accumulated the provisions of
knowledge (jñ ānasaṁbhāra) know any object of consciousness. The Pratyekabuddhas
cannot judge the characteristics of the dharmas; even less the Śrāvakas, for the Dharma that
they realize depends on a teaching. Thus, in order to judge the dharmas, there are only the
true great Munis. By this we know that the Abhidharma is truly the word of the Buddha.
One should accept it with faith, practice-meditate on it correctly, and diligently search out
deliverance."
c. Paramārtha (TD 29, p. 304a5): The Vaibhāṣikas of Kaśmir possess the two cheng¹
This Abhidharma—the Abhidharmakośa-has been presented by me, inFootnotes 1311
general, conforming to their doctrine. If there is here anything that is badly grasped, it is my
fault. In lieu of cheng capable of correctly judging the Good Law, only the Buddhas
Bhagavats are the supreme measure (pramāṇa). Why? Because they immediately see all the
dharmas. Apart from Scripture (agama) and the Path (mārga), the Āryaśrāvākas of the
Buddha are not even a mediocre measure in correctly judging the Good Law.
1. What is this twofold cheng (= sākṣin, pratibhū, etc.)? Perhaps persons who possess
the āgama and the adhigama (as explained viii.39a), in other words the āgama and the
mārga.
223. The first stanza is quoted in I-ching, Takakusu, p. 106.
Vyākhyā: nimīlite śāstari lokacakṣușīti / parinirvṛte bhagavati lokasya cakṣurbhūte
mārgāmārgasaṁdarśake / anenāndhabhūtatāṁ lokasya darśayati // kṣayaṁ gate sākṣijane
ca bhūyaseti / sākṣād draṣṭari sākṣī / mārgāmārgajño bhagavan iti ye’dhigatatattvā
bhagavataḥ sākṣijanaḥ sahāyabhūtaḥ / tasmin parinitvāṇe kṣīņe/ avidyāndhādṛṣṭatattvair
niravagrahair nirankuśaiḥ svayaṁdṛṣṭikatayā kutarkāpannair bhavadhir bhagavataḥ
śāsanaṁ granthataś cārthataś cākulaṁ kṛtam // gate hi śāntiṁ paramāṁ svayambhuvītyādi
pūrvaślokoktasyārthasya heturūpo'yam dvitiyaḥ śloka upanyasyate / buddhabuddhaputreșu
hi parinirvṛteşv anāthajagati śāsanāntardhānahetubbir dṛṣṭyādibhir malair doşair
nirańkuśaiḥ svayaṁ yatheccham iha loke’dye samprati caryate / bhāvasādhanam etat //
tataś caivaṁ kaṇṭhagataprāṇam ivety arthaḥ / tad viditvā / balakākaṁ ca mālānāṁ
doṣāṇāṁ na pramādyaṁ mumukṣubhir iti bhāvasādhanam iti.CHAPTER NINE
Preliminary Notes
I. According to the Tibetan, this is "The Ninth Chapter (Kośasthānam) entitled An
Exposition of the Refutation of the Pudgala” (gań zag dgag pa bstan pa zhes bya ba mdzod
kyi gnas dgu pa; Mdo 64, Cordier, p. 394).
But the colophon to the Eighth Chapter says that the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam ends
with that Chapter: chos mnon pa'i mdzod kyi bśad pa las sñoms par jug pa bstan pa zhes
bya ba mdzog kyi gnas brgyad pa'o / chos mnon pa'i mdzod 'di rdzogs so = Abhidharma-
kosabbasye Sama pattinirdeso năma astamam kosastbānam | samāpto yam Abbidbarma
kośaḥ.
According to the colophon of the Vyākhyā, this Chapter is "The Determination of the
Pudgala, An Annex to the Eighth Chapter" (aştamakośasthānasaṁbaddha eva pudgalavinis-
cayaḥ). And according to the Bhāṣyam, this section is entitled "The Treatise on the
Refutation of the Pudgala," Pudgalapratiședha-prakaraṇa (iv.73, p. 650), or "The
Refutation of the Doctrine of the Soul," Atmavādapratiṣedha (v.27, p. 818).
To certain commentators, the last of the final stanzas of the "Ninth Chapter" refer to
the entire Kośabhāṣyam; for others, who appear to be the wiser, -to only the Refutation
of the Pudgala.
Evidently the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam, an exposition of the doctrines of the
Abhidharma according to the principles of the Vaibhāṣikas, ends with Kārikā viii.40. The
stanzas which follow on p. 1355 are the conclusion of the work.
The so-called "Ninth Chapter" does not contain any Kārikās; here Vasubandhu teaches
many doctrines which are common to both the Vaibhāṣikas and the Sautrāntikas, but, on the
whole, he adopts the position of the Sautrāntikas.
Samghabhadra does not concern himself with the Ninth Chapter.
The stanzas on p. 1355 are, we would say, the conclusion of the Abhidharmakośabhā-
syam. Hsüan-tsang (TD 29, p. 152b17-22) places them at the end of his Chapter VIII;
Paramārtha, on the contrary, makes them the preamble to Chapter IX (TD 29, P.
304a15-20). Thus it is evident that the "Treatise on the Refutation of the Pudgala"
importunes, if one can say this, these stanzas (see below note 1).
II. Vasubandhu refutes the doctrines of the Pudgalavādins, “followers of the pudgala," and
he calls them Vātsīputrīyas. The Vyākhyā explains: vātsīputrīyā āryasāṁmatīyāḥ (see note
8). The sources (Vasumitra, Bhavya, and Vinītadeva) do not agree in their enumeration of
the sects or schools which admit a pudgala.One will finds some information in Nirvāṇa,
1926, p. 34, and in a version of Vasumitra's treatise which I hope to publish in the
Collection de Matériaux pour l'étude du Bouddhisme, by J. Przyluski.
The question is asked: are the Pudgalavādins Buddhists? Yaśomitra is very plain in this:
na hi Vātsīputrīyāṇāṁ muktir neṣyate bauddhatvät; "one does not pretend that they cannot
obtain deliverance, for they are Buddhists” (see note 8). An opposite opinion, however, is
given on p. 1338 (Hsüan-tsang, TD 29, p. 156c25) and in the final stanzas where the
Pudgalavādins are included among the Tirthikas.
Lcan-skya hu-thug-hu expresses a very widespread opinion when he says that the five
schools of the Mahāsṁmitīyas, admitting that the "self' is a "person", cannot be considered
as Buddhist (Wassilief, p. 270).
Śāntideva (Bodhicaryāvatāra, ix.60) says, “The followers of a pudgala, internal
non-believers (antaścaratīrthika), admit a soul (ātman) called pudgala, and say that this soul
is neither identical to the skandhas, nor different from them: otherwise one can see that
they enter into the philosophy of the non-
n-Buddhists.” They call themselves Buddhists,
saugatammanya.
Candrakirti (Madhyamakāvatāra, vi.86) says, “The non-Buddhists (tīrthikas) speak of a
pudgala, etc.; seeing that the pudgala and other supposed principles do not have any activity,Footnotes 1357
the Buddha declared that the mind alone is active. To say 'non-Buddhists' is a general
manner of speaking; for there are Buddhists ('some sectarians of this Dharma') who admit a
pudgala. From a certain point of view (rnam pa gcig tu na = ekaprakāreṇa), they are not
Buddhists, for, like non-]
-Buddhists, they do not correctly understand the sense of the
Teaching. Consequently, this designation ('non-Buddhist') is extended to all. It says in the
Ratnávali, 'The world, with the Sāṁkhyas, Vaiśeşikas, and Nirgranthas, believe in a
pudgala, in the skandhas, and in other principles. We would ask them if they teach the
means to pass beyond being and non-being (or rather: if they pass beyond the affirmation
and the negation of existence)... Consequently one must consider those who believe in the
skandhas, etc., as persons outside (bāhya)." (We see that the "followers of the skandhas" or
skandhavādins, that is to say, the orthodox Buddhists of the Hīnayāna, are, like the
followers of the pudgala, excluded from the Good Law).
III. The classical etymology of pudgala is represented in the Tibetan by gań zag and in the
Chinese (Mahävyutpatti, 207.7) as ts'eng-chien *
: püryati galati ca
(Sarvadarśana; and Sarad Candra Das and S. Levi's translation of the Sūtrālaṁkāra, p. 259:
"through which demerit increases and merit decreases, and vice versa").
Buddhaghosa, in his Visuddhimagga, 310, has: pun ti vuccati nirayo tasmin galantīti
puggalā.
The Abhisamayalaṁkārāloka, commenting on the Aṣṭasāhasrikā 19.2, proposes the
etymology: punaḥ punar gatișu līyate, which is reflected in the translation of Hsüan-tsang
"which, on many occasions, takes up the gatis."
The Aṣṭasāhasrikā has: sattvadṛṣṭyā jīvadṛṣṭyā pudgaladṛṣṭyā bhavadṛṣṭyā vibhavadṛṣṭyā
ucchedadṛṣṭyāḥ śāśvatadṛṣṭyāḥ svakāyadṛṣṭyā etāsām evamādyānāṁ dṛṣṭīnāṁ prahāṇāya
dharmaṁ deśayiṣyatīti tenārthena bodhisattvo mahāsattva ity ucyate.
The Abhisamayalaṁkārāloka has: tatrāhaṁkārādhānārthena ātmā / āhito’haṁkāra
etasminn iti kṛtvā / sīdanātmakatvāt sattvaḥ / jīvitendriyavaśena nikāyasabhāge
parisamāpte vartata iti jīvaḥ / punaḥ punar gatișu līyta iti pudgalaḥ / āvirbhavatīti bhavaḥ
/ tirobhavatīti vibhavaḥ / nāstīdānīm abhūt pūrvam ity ucchedaḥ (prasajyate) asti yac (ca)
svabhāvena na tan nāstīti śāśvataḥ / ātmātmīyākāreṇa pañcaskandhadarśanam /
evamadyānāṁ dṛṣṭīnām ...
We would remark that the etymology of sattva is as we have encountered in Kośa, v.7,
note 27 (reading of S. Lévi). Buddhaghosa gets sattva from sakta, etc.
On other synonyms of pudgala, see above p. 1324 (Hsüan-tsang, TD 29, p. 154a28)
IV. Among the sources which must be compared with the present Treatise on the
Refutation of the Pudgala, we would point out: 1. Kathāvatthu, i.1 (translation of S. Z. Aung
and Mrs. Rhys Davids, Points of Controversy); 2. Vijñānakāya, TD 26, number 1539, Chap.
II (translated and analyzed in Etudes Asiatiques, 1925, i. p. 358-376); 3. Sāṁmitīyaśāstra,
TD 32, number 1649, an analysis of which will be published in the Collection de Matériaux
pour l'étude du Bouddhisme, by Przyluski). Vasubandhu quotes part of these last two
treatises: some indications on this subject are in the notes of our translation.
On the other hand, the Sûtrālaṁkāra of Asaṁga (edited and translated by S. Levi,
1907-1911), xviii.92-103, depends to a certain extent on the Treatise of Vasubandhu. We
would mention for example the discussion of the relationship between fire and fuel, the use
of the same scriptural texts, and the demonstration of the inactivity of the pudgala.
A dependence by Santideva (for example, the Bodhicaryavatāra ix.73) and his
commentator on Vasubandhu is no less evident.
Vasubandhu's observations on the inability of an atman to transmigrate, and on the
relationship of fire and fuel, is seen in the Madhyamakasūtras, x.14 and xvi.2.
All of the refutation to the pudgala in Candrakīrti's Madhyamakāvatāra, is, one could
say, inspired by Vasubandhu; for example vi.146: "Some maintain the real existence of a
pudgala, of which one cannot say that it is identical to the skandhas or different from them,
permanent or impermanent; it is known by the six vijñānas, and it is the object of the idea1358 Chapter Nine
of self."
In his small Treatise, Vasubandhu refutes not only the followers of the pudgala,
-Buddhists albeit heretical, but also some non-Buddhists, the Grammarians, the
Sāṁkhyas, and the Vaiśeşikas. He quotes Vārṣagaṇya (v.27, translation, p. 818). He has
some details concerning the positions of these non-Buddhists which can be compared with
the traditions preserved by Paramārtha and K’uei-chi (Takakusu, T’oung-pao, 1904, and
JRAS, 1905).
V. An argument of the Pudgalavādins, not mentioned by Vasubandhu, is pointed out in the
Vyākhyā for i.42 (p. 85 of the Petrograd edition). The Sūtra says: cakṣuṣā rūpāṇi dṛṣṭvā na
nimittagrāhī….. “Having seen visibles by the eye, he does not conceive any affection...” As
the eye sees, so too the pudgala sees by the eye (yasmāc cakṣuḥ paśyati tasmāt pudgalaś
cakṣuşā paśyati; see below note 38).
The Vyākhyā for iii.43a admits the two hypotheses that Vasubandhu attributes death
(cyuti) to the mind (citta), or to the pudgala.
Buddhaghosa, in his Manorathapūraṇī, i.95, explains in terms of which Vasubandhu
would approve, why the Bhagavat speaks of a pudgala, even though a pudgala does not exist.
***1. Vyākhyā: kim khalv ato'nyatra mokṣo nāstīti / na pramādyaṁ mumukṣubhir iti vacanād
ayam eva mokṣopāyo nāsty ato'nyo mokṣopāyas tad atra moktukāmaiḥ pramādo na kartavya
ity arthād uktam ācāryeṇa / codakaḥ pṛcchati kiṁ khalv ata iti vistaraḥ.
Footnotes 1359
Vasubandhu said, "Those who desire deliverance should apply themselves without
weakness to this doctrine." That is to say, "There is no deliverance outside of this doctrine."
The opponent answers, “Is there then no deliverance ...
>>
2. On this subject, see the stanza of the Stotrakāra (=Mātṛceta, Takakusu, I-tsing, p. 156):
sāhaṁkāre manasi na śamam yāti janmaprabandho
nāhaṁkāraś calati hṛdayād ātmadṛṣṭau ca satyām /
anyaḥ śāśtā jagati ca yato nāsti nairātmyavādī
nānyas tasmād upaśamavidhes tvanmatād asti mārgaḥ //
"As long as the mind (manas= citta) is accompanied by the idea of "I," the series of
rebirths cannot be stopped; the idea of "I" is not removed from the heart as long as there
exists the view that there is a soul (ātman). Now there is not in the world any master who
teaches the non-existence of the soul (nairātmya-vādin), except you. Thus, there is not,
outside of your doctrine, any other path of deliverance."
Compare the stanzas attributed to the Acārya, Bodhicaryāvatārapañjikā, 492: yaḥ
paśyaty ātmānaṁ tasyāham iti śāśvataḥ snehaḥ / snehāt sukheṣu tṛṣyati tṛṣṇādoṣāṁs
tiraskurute...
The same for Candrakīrti, Madhyamakāvatāra, vi.120 (quoting the Madhyamakavṛtti, p.
340), "Seeing through, prajñā that all defilements and all evil (kleśa, doșa) comes from the
idea of self (satkāyadṛṣṭi), and taking into consideration that the object of this idea is the
soul (ātman), the ascetic (yogin) denies the soul."
3. Saeki cites a commentary on the Vijñaptimātra, 2,4: a. the asaṁskṛtas do not exist; b. that
which exists (asti-dharma= bhāva) is of three types: things known through direct
perception, matter (color), the mind; things like pots and clothes (hsien shou yung
fa 2 ); things like the organs (yu tso yung fa #F# ); c. three concep-
tions of the self: identical to the skandhas, different from the skandhas, neither identical or
different.
4. Agama, the proof from authority, is not mentioned because it is included within anumāna,
inference.
which calls to mind the
6. Vyākhyā: pratyakşam upalabdhir iti pratyakşam ity upalabdhiviseṣaṇam / pratyakşam tad
upalabdhiḥ pratyakṣata upalabdhir ity arthaḥ / athavā pratyakṣaṁ pramāṇam upalabdhir
upalabhyate’nayā ity upalabdhiḥ /
On upalabdhi, i. English trans. p. 74, ii. p. 205, Sūtrālaṁkāra, p. 155.
The object of the mental consciousness is defined by Yaśomitra: (upalabdhir)
dharmāyatanasya vedanādilakṣaṇasya yogiviṣayasya ca = the perception of the dharmāyatana
(that is to say, vedanā, etc.) and of things which the Yogins perceive. (In fact the mental
consciousness of the Yogins knows the minds and mental states of others, vii.11).
5. Entity = bhāva; Hsüan-tsang translates this as yu-fa
atthidhamma of Buddhaghosa.
But how can perception (upalabdhi) by the manas be pratyakṣam, immediate or direct
perception? In fact the manas which has just arisen is known by the manas which
immediately follows (i.17): manasaś ca kiṁ pratyakṣam upalabdhiḥ / samanantaranirud-
dham hi mano'nantarotpannena manovijñānena vijñāyate. There is a difficulty here. Some
other masters (the Sautrāntikas) think that the mind knows itself: the subject and the object
of the consciousness are both directly perceived: raktaṁ vā dviṣṭaṁ vā sukhasaṁprayuktaṁ
vā duḥkhasaṁprayuktaṁ vā (iv. 49) ity evamadi svasaṁvedyatayā (pratyakṣam) ity apare /
tad etad dvividhaṁ pratyakşam grāhyagataṁ grahakagataṁ vā.
7. Vyākhyā: maharṣipraṇidhijñānaparicchinnatvād asty eva cakṣurādikam indriyamChapter Nine
cakṣurvijñānādikāraṇam iti / sarveṣām avivādāc ca.
See i. 9c (Vyākhyā, p. 25), 44a. On praṇidhijñāna, see vii.37.
1360
8. Vyākhyā: Vātsīputrīyā Āryasāṁmatīyāḥ / anena vitathātmadṛṣṭiniviṣṭatvalakṣaṇo hetur
anaikāntika iti darśayati / na hi vātsīputrīyāṇāṁ mokṣo neṣyate bauddhatvāt / atha vā
prākpakṣavirodhaḥ / sāpakṣālo'yam pakṣo nāsty ātmā ity anena darśayati.
From two things, one. The Vātsīputrīyas believe in a certain type of real self: now they
are Buddhists, and one cannot deny that they can obtain deliverance: thus the author is
wrong in saying that a false conception of the self creates an obstacle to deliverance. Or
rather the thesis which denies the self is false.
On the avaktavyată of the pudgala, see, for example, Madhyamakavṛtti, 283.
9. Color, sound, etc., are distinct things (bhinnalakṣaṇa); milk, a house, and an army are
complexes of colors, tastes, odors, and tangibles, of straw and wood, of elephants, horses,
and chariots, not of separate things, bhāvāntara: milk is nothing other than color, etc.
Compare Sūtrālamkāra, xviii.92: prajñaptyastitayā vācyaḥ pudgalo dravyato na tu.
10. Yaśomitra quotes this stanza of Dharmakīrti:
varṣātapābhyāṁ kiṁ vyomnaś carmaṇy asti tayoḥ phalam /
carmopamas cet so'nityaḥ khatulyaś ced asatphalaḥ //
Sarvadarśana, p. 10 (1858); Nyāyavārttika, ii. 1, 5, Tātparya, 164; in Ślokavārttika:
khatulyaś ced asatsamaḥ; Naiṣkarmyasiddhi, ii. 60, etc.
If the pudgala is unconditioned (asaṁskṛta), eternal, unmodifiable, it is like space, it is
like not existing. There exists only that which is "capable of action” (arthakriyā), that which
is momentary (yat sat tat kṣaṇikam): a thesis of the Sautrāntikas; for the Vaibhāṣikas, the
asaṁskṛtas (space and the two nirodhas, i. 5c) exist.
11. For the Vätsiputrīya, as for Vasubandhu, the skandhas of the past and of the future do
not exist. The meaning of the expressions ādhyatmika (or abhyantara) and upatta is
explained in Kośa, i. 34d, 39a-b.
12. The Vyākhyā attributes this paragraph to the author, not to the Vātsīputriyas.
13. For certain commentators, idhyate and dahyate are equivalent.
14. Aṣṭagravyaka (ii.22): the four mahābhūtas or primary substances, and the four
upādāyarūpas, from rūpa (the visible) to the tangible.
15. The thing on fire (pradipta) is a complex; it is at one and the same time burner (fire)
and the thing burning (indhana): in fact this thing is constituted of four elementary
substances (above note 13), and one of these substances which is "heat" is the fire.
16. Earth and water are different, for their lakṣaṇas differ; the same holds for the burner
and the thing burned.
17. Vyākhyā: upādāyarthas tu vaktavya iti/ ananyatvād ity abhiprāyaḥ. We must give the
word upādāya an explanantion that justifies the thesis that fire and fuel are not different.
18. The fuel is made up of three mahābhūtas, and fire is its ușmalakṣaṇa, the fourth
mahābhūta. They arise at the same time, like two horns.
19. One should understand: indhanaṁ upādāya = indḥanaṁ āśritya: the fire takes it support
from the fuel. Or rather the meaning is that of sahabhāva, co-existence, or sabotpāda,
co-arising.
20. Paramārtha: If he says, “that which is hot by its nature (the fire) is called hot. The object
in question (fuel), although different from fire which is hot by nature, becomes hot through
its association with that which is hot by its nature,” we conclude that it is not incorrect to say
that fire and fuel differ.Footnotes 1361
21. See below note 32. See the Sāṁmitīyanikāyaśāstra.
22. Stcherbatski, p. 832, differs.
23. This is perhaps better translated, "is ascertained."
24. The Chinese fen-pieh kuan AND
maintains the version "to discern." "By reason
of physical matter, etc., which the eye perceives (as its own object), the visual consciousness
"indirectly knows,” “knows in second rank" the pudgala, because physical matter is the support
(upādāna) of the pudgala. And one cannot say that the pudgala is physical matter.
25. In this hypothesis physical matter is not the cause of the perception of the pudgala:
there is perception of the pudgala “through relationship" with physical matter.
26. Compare Samyutta, iv. 166.
27. Not by reason of three.
28. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 57c18. The Vyākhyā quotes the first words, cakṣur bhikṣo hetur
(cakṣurvijñānotpädāya / rūpam bhikṣo pratyayaḥ...).
Vyākhyā: hetur āsannaḥ pratyayaḥ / viprakṛṣṭas tu pratyaya eva // janako hetuḥ
pratyayas tv ālambanamātram ity apare / paryāyāv etāv ity apare. See ii. 61c, vii. 13a, p.
1112, 1113.
29. Saeki has a note (fol. 14a) on the Dārṣṭāntika theory of the six vijñānas.
30. Thus none of them "perceive" a pudgala.
31. Madhyama, TD 1, p. 791b11-17: svakaṁ gocaraviṣayaṁ pratyanubhavanti / nānyad
anyasya gocaravişayaṁ pratyanubhavati / manaś caiṣāṁ pratisaraṇam.
Samyutta, v.218: pañcimāni brab mana indriyani nàng visayani nănà gocarini nẵnna mãn
ñassa gocaravisayaṁ paccanubhonti / katamāni pañca . . . / imesaṁ kho pañcannaṁ
indriyānaṁ nānāvisayānaṁ nānāgocarānaṁ na aññamaññassa gocaravisayaṁ paccanubhon-
tānaṁ mano pațisaraṇaṁ mano ca nesaṁ gocaravisayaṁ paccanubhoti.
On the formula manaś caiṣāṁ pratisaraṇam, the Vyākhyā says: anusaṁgenedam uktam /
nedam udāharaṇam / tathāpi tu manaś caiṣām indriyāṇām pratisaraṇam iti tadapekṣāṇīn-
driyāṇi vijñānotpatta vijñānotpattau kāraṇaṁ bhavantity arthaḥ.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 449a16. The Dārṣṭāntikas say, "The objects of the six vijñānakāyas,
cakṣurvijñāna, etc., are distinct." They say, “The manovijñāna has a distinct object; it does
not bear on the objects of the five vijñānas, cakṣurvijñāna, etc.” They say, "The six vijñānas
bear solely on external objects; they do not bear on the internal (ādhyātmika, see p. 1313)
organs, nor on the vijñāna." In order to refute this opinion, it is explained that the first five
vijñānas have distinct objects, bearing solely on external objects, not bearing on the organs
and the vijñāna; but that the manovijñāna has an object common to the five vijñānas and
also a different object, which bears on the internal organs and also on the vijñāna. It has
been explained, Kośa, i.48a, that among the eighteen dhātus, thirteen are the object of a
single manovijñāna with the exclusion of visible things, of sounds, etc., which are also the
object of the cakṣurvijñāna, etc.
32. The words in parentheses are according to Hsüan-tsang.
Bhāṣya and Vyākhyā: na vā pudgalo viṣaya iti (yadi sūtraṁ pramāṇīkriyate) / na ced
vişayaḥ (yadi na kasya cid vijñānasya viṣayaḥ) na tarhi vijñeyaḥ (tataś ca pañcavidham
jñeyam iti svasiddhānto bādhyate) (above note 21).
Paramartha: Or rather the pudgala is not an object. If it is not an object, it is not
discerned by the six consciousnesses.
33. In spite of the Sūtra, you affirm that the object of the mental consciousness is general; so
too, in spite of the Sūtra, you affirm that the pudgala is discernible by the visual
consciousness.1362 Chapter Nine
34. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 313a15, Ekottara, TD 2, p. 723c18; Samyutta, iv. 198. şad
imānīndriyāṇi nānāgocarāṇņi . . . kukkurapakṣisṛgālaśiśumārasarpamarkaṭāḥ saṭ prāṇakāḥ
kena cid baddha madhye granthim kṛtvotsṛṣtäḥ / te svakaṁ svakaṁ gocaravisayam
ākāṁkṣante / grāmākāśaśmaśānodakavalmīkavanā kāṇkṣaṇād evam ṣaḍ imānīndriyāṇi . . .
35. The desire (ākāṁkṣaṇa) to see, to understand, etc., is certainly foreign to the organs of
sight, hearing, etc., which are material (rūpasvabhāvatvāt), and also to the visual
consciousness, the auditory consciousness, etc., which are non-imaginative (nirvikalpakat-
vāt). This refers, under the name of the organ of the eye (cakṣurindriya), to the mental
consciousness led by the predominating, specifying action of this organ, tadādhipatyād-
byahṛta.
36. Samyutta, iv.29: sabbaṁ bhikkhave abhiññāpariññeyyam / kim ca bhikkhave
abbinnaparinneyyam / rù pam bbikkhave abbin naparineyam cakkhuvinnanam...
37. Compare Vasumitra, Sectes, on jñeya, vijñeya, and abhijñeya.
38. This according to Hsüan-tsang. Paramārtha: “The master who believes in a self says, 'I
see the pudgala through (yu by means of) the eye'; as he sees that there is a self in
(yü) that which is not a self, he falls . . . '
The Bhasyam has the word anātmanā which the Vyākhyā glosses as cakṣuṣā
cakṣurvijñānenety arthah. Thus one should understand the yu of Paramārtha in the sense of
the instrumental, "As he sees, through that which is not a self-that is to say through the
eye, through the visual consciousness...
"}
Stcherbatski: "This idea of yours that there is an existing self who through the opening
of his eyes contemplates other selves, this idea it is which is called Wrong Personalism."
One can draw the conclusion from the formula cakṣuṣā rūpāṇi dṛṣṭvā that the pudgala
sees through the eyes; Vyākhyā ad i.42, p. 117 (Petrograd ed.). Cullaniddesa 234 has:
cakkhunā puriso ālokati rūpagatāni. See below n. 67.
39. According to Paramārtha and Hsüan-tsang. Stcherbatski, "In the Ajita-sermon."
40. Version of Paramārtha. This is the well-known text: cakṣuḥ pratītya rūpāṇi cotpadyate
caksurvij nà nam | traya năm samnipatab sparsab / sabajata vedanā samjna cetana.. . See iii.
●
32a-b.
41. Paramartha transcribes; Hsüan-tsang: nara-na ramate, mānava-ju-t'ung
scholar-kumāra, jantu, “who is born”.
A Yogācărin commentary quoted by Saeki says: sattva, because all the Ãryans truly see
that only the dharmas exist, no other thing; or rather because there is affection therein
(sattva from sakta, as in Buddhaghosa?); manoja (i-sheng
), because it is
constituted by the manas... . pudgala, because it goes frequently taking up realms of rebirth
without the power to be disgusted with them; jīva, because it presently lives through union
with the ayus (Kośa, ii.45); jantu (sheng
), because all the dharma which exist are
endowed with arising.
Other lists contain thirteen names. Among them, yakṣa, Suttanipāta, 875.
On sattva, see Ledi Sadaw, JPTS, 1914, 133, Mrs. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Psychology,
1914, 83. We have seen that sattva signifies “that which perishes,” v. n. 27 and above p.
1319.
42. See below note 71.
43. The Sūtra of the four "authorities,” “supports," is quoted in the Vyākhyā ad ii.46,
English trans. p. 241: catvārīmāni bhikṣavaḥ pratisaraṇāņi / katamāni catvāri / dharmaḥ
pratisaraṇaṁ na pudgalaḥ / arthaḥ pratisaraṇaṁ na vyañjanam / nītārthaṁ sūtraṁ
pratisaraṇaṁ na neyārthām / jñānaṁ pratisaraṇaṁ na vijñānam.
Mahāvyutpatti, 74, where the order differs: arthapratisaraṇena bhavitavyaṁ naFootnotes 1363
vyañjanapratisaraṇena, dharma ….. jñāna ….. nītārthasūtrapratisaraṇena... (Extracted from
the Hsien-yang, TD 31, Tokyo, xviii.7,10a).
Dharmasaṁgraha, 53; Sūtrālaṁkāra, xviii.31-33; J.As. 1902, ii.269, Madhyamakavṛtti,
268, 598.
Pratisaraṇa, pratiśaraṇa (Divya, 427.22, 176.26, where the editor translates the word as
"confidence") is translated rton pa (confidence) and rten-pa (support), i (support),
and liang H (authority).
i. Bodhisattvabhūmi, I.xvii.
katham bodhisattvaś caturşu pratisaraṇeṣu prayujyate.
iha bodhisattvaḥ arthārthī parato dharmaṁ śṛṇoti na vyañjanābhisaṁskārārthi /
arthārthi dharmaṁ śṛṇvan na vyañjanārthī prakṛtayāpi vācā dharmaṁ deśyamānam
arthapratisarano bodhisattvaḥ satkṛtya śṛṇoti.
punar bodhisattvaḥ kālāpadeśaṁ mahāpadeśaṁ ca (Dīgha, ii. 124, etc.) yathābhūtaṁ
prajānāti / prajānan yuktipratisaraṇo bhavati na sthavireṇābhijñānena vā pudgalena
tathāgatena vā saṁghena vā ime dharmā bhāṣitā iti pudgalapratisaraṇo bhavati / sa evam
yuktipratisaraṇo na pudgalapratisaraṇas tattvārthān na vicalati aparapratyayaś ca bhavati
dharmeșu. (aparapratyaya= gzhan las ses ma yin, Madhyamakavṛtti, xxiv.8).
punar bodhisattvas tathāgate niviṣṭaśraddho niviṣṭaprasāda aikāntiko vacasy
abhiprasannas tathāgatanītārthasūtram pratisarati na neyārtham / nītārthaṁ
pratisarann asaṁhāryo bhavaty asmad dharmavinayāt / tatra hi neyārthasya sūtrasya
nānāmukhaprakṛtārthavibhāgo 'niścitaḥ samdehakaro bhavati / sacet punar bodhisattvo
nītārthe'pi sūtre'naikāntikaḥ syād evam asau saṁhāryaḥ syād asmād dharmavinayāt.
punar bodhisattvaḥ adhigamajñāne sādaršī (?) bhavati na ca śrutacintādharmārthavijñā-
namātrake / sa yad bhāvanāmayena jñānena jñātavyaṁ na tac chakyaṁ śrutacintāvijñānamā-
trakena vijñātum iti viditvā paramagaṁbhīrān api tathāgatabhāṣitān dharmān śrutvā na
pratikṣipati nāpavadati /
evam ... caturăm prà màn xám prakasitam bbasitasyartbasya yukteb Sasturbbavana
mayasya cadhigamajñānasya.
ii. arthaḥ pratisaraṇam . . . A notion expressed in the Mahāvagga, i. 23, 4, Majjhima,
ii.240; developed in the Lanka: arthapratisaraṇena bhavitavyam... and again arthānusāriņā
bhavitavyaṁ na deśanābhilāpābhinivișțena. A “word” is like a finger which touches the
object that one should see; one must remove the finger in order to see the object (Lanka
quoted in the Subhāṣitasaṁgraha, ed. Bendall, fol. 34).
On the relation between the attha and the vyañjanas, see Dīgha, iii. 127-129,
Nettippakarana, 21.
iii. dharmaḥ pratisaraṇam na pudgalaḥ. Variant: yuktipratisaraṇo bhavati na
pudgalapratisaraṇaḥ.
The refuge is the truth itself, not authority whatever it may be, even the Buddha. This is
the teaching of the Majjhima, i.265. He who says, “These dharmas are taught by a Sthavira,
a person possessing the abhijñās, the Tathāgata, or the Samgha," is pudgalapratisaraṇa.
Do not lose sight of the teaching of the mahāpadesās, below note 56.
iv. A nītārtha Sūtra is a vibhaktārtha Sūtra, "of explicit meaning"; a neyārtha Sūtra is of
undetermined meaning, of meaning yet to be determined (Vyākhyā ad iii.28). iv.30, English
trans. p. 614, calls for a Sūtra of explicit meaning. Vasumitra, Sectes.
It
appears that the sole canonical text of interest here is Anguttara, i.60: to attribute to
the Tathāgata that which has not been said; to not recognize as said by him that which he
has said; to consider as neyyattha a nītattha Suttanta, and vice versa. (The theory of the
Sūtra exact in its words but badly understood, Dīgha, iii. 127-128, can lead to the distinction
between nitattha and neyyattha Sūtras).
Nitattha and neyyattha in the Nettippakaraṇa (where the meaning conforms to the
letter, yathārutavasena ñātabbattham, where the meaning should be determined through
reflection, niddhāretvā gahetabbattham); and in the Dipavamsa (Oldenberg, ed., p. 36)
quoted in the Introduction to the Commentary on the Kathāvatthu (JPTS, 1889, p. 3). "To1364 Chapter Nine
confuse pariyayabhāsita and nippariyāyabhāsita (compare Visuddhimagga, 473, 499: that
which should not be understood literally, and that which should be understood literally,
nītattha and neyyattha; to attribute another meaning (other than the true meaning) to what
has been said with a certain intention (saṁdhāya bhaṇita): thus, respecting the letter
destroys the meaning; to create pseudo-Sūtras ...
Atthasālinī, 91, "We shall weigh the sense of the Sūtra that you allege...
Samghabhadra, iii.25 (Tokyo xxiii.4, 33b16). According to the Sthavira, all āryā deśanā
promulgated by the Buddha himself (tathāgatabhāṣita= ahaccavacana of the Nettippaka-
raņa, 21) is nītārthasūtra; the other Sūtras are anītārtha. Saṁghabhadra observes initially
that this definition is not found in Scripture; then it is bad reasoning: for there are Sūtras
not promulgated by the Buddha which are nītartha, and vice versa. Examples follow. It is
said, "It is impossible to say, if not through abhimāna (or "presumption"): I shall enter into
the animitta without supporting myself on the void" (These words are not by the Buddha
himself, yet the Sūtra is nītārtha)..
"
99
The Schools, as we see in Wassiliev, 329, and in the Madhyamakāvatāra, vi. 94, are not
in agreement in placing Sūtras in these two categories.
v. We have seen that, according to the Bodhisattvabhūmi, adhigamajñāna is absorption
consciousness (bhāvanāmaya), whereas vijñāna is consciousness obtained through hearing
and reflection (frutacintā).
According to the Vibhajyavādins, jñāna is good in and of itself; vijñāna is good when it is
associated with jñāna (Kośa, iv.8b, note 46): it can be understood that jñāna is
"supermundane knowledge," and that the vijñāna, worldly knowledge, is good when it is
consecutive to supermundane knowledge.
According to iv.75, an opinion of the "ancient masters,” adhigata (what one knows by
absorption) forms part of the vijñāta: but this refers to a worldly consciousness, a worldly
absorption.
(In the Sutra of the Four Pratisaraṇas, jñāna primarily designates the knowledge of the
Āryans, anāśravajñāna, exactly as prajñā is, among all the prajñās-which can be avyākṛta,
kliṣṭa, or kuśala,—the pure prajñā). See above notes 36 and 37.
Some notes in the Madhyamakavṛtti, xxv, 16, p. 65, 74. Jñāna is distinguished from
vijñāna in the Gīta, iii.41, vi.8, vii.2, ix. 1, xviii.42.
44. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 91a27, “All, that is to say, the twelve āyatanas, the eye, etc.”; Kośa, v.
trans. p. 819, Mahāniddesa, 133, Saṁyutta, iv.15: sabbaṁ vuccati dvādasāyatanāni.
On sarva, sabba, see Kośa, v.27c, Warren, p. 158, Mrs. Rhys Davids' Points of
Controversy, 85, Stcherbatski, Central Conception, 5; Nirvana (1925), p. 139.
= "who frequently
45. Hsüan-tsang here translates Pudgala= shu ch'u chu
takes up rebirth," see above note 41.
46. This Sūtra is quoted in Kofa, iii.28a-b. (Cosmologie bouddhique, p. 45).
One can compare the Sūtra quoted in Madhyamakavṛtti, vi. at the beginning
(Śikṣāsamuccaya, 252, Madhyamakāvatāra, 217, Bodhicaryāvatāra, ix.73, an extract of the
Pitāputrasamāgama): bālo bhikṣavo (or mahārāja) aśrutavān pṛthagjanaḥ prajñaptim
anupatitaś cakṣuṣā rūpāṇi dṛṣṭvā saumanasyasthānīyāni abhinivīsate...
The Vyakhyā for iii.28a explains prajñaptim anupatita iti yathā saṁjñā yathā ca
vyavahāras tathānugataḥ. (It defines bāla, etc). Here we have the gloss: yatraiva prajñaptiḥ
kṛtā ātmā iti vyavahārārthaṁ tatraivātmety abhinivista ity arthaḥ.
47. Paramārtha omits the first stanza. Śilā=shih-lo, translated as "small
mountain"; without doubt the Selā of Therāgāthās 57-59 who has a conversation with Māra.
Stanzas attributed to Vajirā in the Saṁyutta, i.135, trans. in the "Psalms," p. 190
(Kathāvatthu, trans. p. 61, Madhyamakāvatāra, 246, 257).
48. Tibetan: lun-phran-tshegs. Hsüan-tsang, "in the Tso-āgama”; Paramārtha, "in theHsiao-āgama"
(TD 2, number 100).
49. P'o-t'o-li FE FU =old-beam-pear (Hsüan-tsang)=
(Paramārtha); Stcherbatski reads: Bādarayana.
Footnotes 1365
waves-cover-profit
50. Paramartha: Listen, Oh Bādari, (you shall obtain) the power to deliver yourself from all
bonds; through them, the mind is defiled, through them also it is purified. The self does not
have the nature of a self; through error, one imagines (fen-pieh
) it; there is
no self, no jantu; only dharmas, cause and results...
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 731b11: Through trouble and defilement (saṁklesa) of the mind, the
being (sattva) is troubled, defiled; through the purification (vyavadana) of the mind, the
being is purified; the two masculine and feminine organs exercise sovereignty over two
things, sattvabheda and sattvavikalpabheda (see Kofa, ii. English trans. p. 154).
Saeki remarks: the first stanza exhorts one to the hearing of the Truths.
52. śünyam ādhyātmikaṁ paśyan paśya fünyaṁ bahirgatam /
na vidyate so'pi kaścid yo bhāvayati śünyataṁ //
51. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 37a12: Satkāyadṛṣṭi is opposed by the ten types of sūnyatā,
adhyātmaśūnyatā, etc. (See the complete lists of the Mahāvyutpatti, 37= Madhyamakāvatāra,
v.180= Šatasāhasrikā, 215; the Abhisamaya has twenty śūnyatās.)
Saeki refers to the Samyuktahṛdaya, (TD 28,
p. 925b28).
9
This third stanza (with the reading paśya paśya) is attributed to the Bhagavat without
any other details in the Madhyamakavṛtti, p. 348. The reading pasya paśya is recommended
by the Chinese versions: jo kuan nei chih kung #AZE "If you visualize that the
interior is empty" (Paramartha); chi kuan (Hsüan-tsang). The Gauḍakārikā, very
likely written under Buddhist influence, has: tattvam ādhyātmikaṁ dṛṣṭvā tattvaṁ dṛṣṭvā tu
bāhyataḥ (ii. 38).
Hsüan-tsang translates the last line, “A seer capable of meditating on emptiness is not
to be found." The Vyākhya glosses: yogy api nāsti yaḥ śūnyatām abhyasyati.
53. This text (according to Stcherbatski, from the Kṣudrāgama) is quoted in the
Sūtrālaṁkāra, xviii.101 (p. 158) as an extract from the "Pentades" (pañcakeșṣu, Chinese: "In
the Ts'eng-wu
Sūtra= Pañcottara?” S. Lévi): pañcakeṣu pañcādīnavā ātmopa-
lambba iti desitāḥ / ātmadṛṣṭir bhavati jīvadrstiḥ / nirviseṣo bhavati tīrthikaiḥ /
unmārgapratipanno bhavati / śūnyatāyām asya cittaṁ na praskandati na prasīdati na
santiṣṭhate nādhimucyate / āryadharmā asya na vyavadāyante.
These readings are confirmed by the Tibetan and the Vyākhyā, so close in fact that the
Tibetan corresponds to an original ātmadṛṣṭir bhavati sattvadṛṣṭir jīvadṛṣṭiḥ; the same for
the Vyākhyā: ātmadṛṣṭir bhavati yāvaj jīvadṛṣṭir iti prathama ādīnavaḥ. Hsūan-tsang and
Paramartha replace jīvadṛṣṭi with "to fall into the drstigatas." The phraseology
praskandhati ... in the Anguttara, iii.246; Dīgha, iii.240, Samyutta, iii.133: . . . me nibbāne
cittam na pakkhandati na ppasīdati na saṁtiṭṭhati na vimuccati (var. nādhimuccati) /
paritassanā upādānam uppajjati paccudāvattati mānasam. (The editor of the Samyutta
punctuates after paritassanā).
54. Vyākhyā: kenāpy adhyāropitāny etāni sūtrāṇīty abhiprāyaḥ.
a. "Sūtras promulgated by the Tathāgata (tathāgatabhāṣita), profound, of profound
meaning, supermundane (lokuttara), teaching emptiness (suññatāpațisamyutta): they do
not listen to them with faith, they do not lend them an ear, they do not recognize them as
true (aññācittam na upaṭṭhāpessanti) . . . But the Sūtras made by poets (kavikata), poetical
(kāveyya), of artistic syllable and phonemes, external (bāhiraka), promulgated by disciples
(sāvaka-bhāsita), these they believe . . . It is thus that the Sūtras of the first category will
disappear . . . " (Samyutta, ii.267).
Aṣṭasāhasrikā, 328: yad etat tvayedānīṁ śrutaṁ naitad buddhavacanaṁ kavikṛtaṁ
kāvyam etat / yat punar idam ahaṁ bhāṣe etad buddhabhāṣitam etad buddhavacanam.1366 Chapter Nine
b. See Samghabhadra, Tokyo, xxiii.3, 6a, 25b (translated in Nirvāṇa, 1925, p. 23);
mūlasaṁgītibhraṁśa, Kośa, iii.12d, 13a (Dreams of Kṛkin); muktaka sūtra, iii.4c; apāṭha
eva, see below note 65.
Discussion on the text of the Sūtras, iii.30b, and elsewhere.
55. Vyākhyā: Tāmrapārṇīyanikāyādiṣu. (The school of Taprobane is named in Vyākhyā ad
i.17a, English trans. p. 75, note 85).
56. See the texts on the four mahāpadesas (Dīgha, ii.123, Dialogues, ii. 133, note, Anugttara,
ii.167, Nettippakaraṇa, 21-22; Rhys Davids-Stede break this up as mahā-padesa, against the
commentator of the Netti) and the rule, “That which is in the Sūtra ... that which does not
contradict dharmata" (that is to say the paticcasamuppāda, Netti), Sūtrālaṁkāra, i.10,
Bodhicaryāvatāra, ix.42, p. 431, Abhisamayālaṁkārāloka. kālāpadeśa, above note 43.
57. sarve dharmā anātmānaḥ (Samyukta, TD 2, p. 66b14ff.) Vyākhyā: na caita ātmasvab-
hāvāḥ na caiteṣv ātmā vidyata ity anātmānaḥ.
Sūtrālaṁkāra, xviii.101 (p. 158): dharmoddāneṣu sarve dharmā anātmāna iti deſitam.
58. If the mental consciousness bears on the pudgala, it will arise from the pudgala in the
quality of being its object; thus it would arise from three conditions.
59. Anguttara, ii.52; Kośa, v.9.
60. The thesis: nātmā skandhāyatanadhātavaḥ, contradicts the thesis: no tu vaktavyāṁ
rūpāņi vā no vā (see above note 24).
61. Samyutta, iii.46: ye keci bhikkhave samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā anekavahitam attānaṁ
samanupassamānā samanupassanti sabbe te pañcupādānakkhandhe samanupassanti etesaṁ
vā aññataram. Same text quoted in the Madhyamakāvatāra, vi. 126c-d.
62. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 38a7. The ātman is supposed to be abhinnalakṣaṇa, aviśiṣṭalakṣaṇa,
nitya, avikāra, without arising-old age-sickness-death. How is it that the Tirthika says,
“Gautama, I think that rūpa is ātman … . . ?” Why rūpa is not ātman, vii. 13a.
63. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 11b23: (ye kecid anekavidhaṁ pūrvanivāsam … . . ) iman eva
pañcopādānaskandhān samanusmarantaḥ samanvasmārṣuḥ samanusmaranti samanusmari-
syanti vā.
64. Only the pudgala can be designated by the word “I,” aham.
65. If the word "I” is understood as you say, the Buddha, when he says "I," is evidently
defiled by satkāyadṛṣṭi, "the view of personalism." This, as we know, is of some twenty
points (vimśatikoṭika): rūpam ātmeti samanupaśyati / rūpavantam ātmānam . . ./ ātmīyaṁ
rūpam … / rūpe ātmānam … (Mahāvyutpatti 208; Madhyama TD 1, p. 788a25; Samyutta
iii.3, 16, etc.) The Vibhāṣā gives four examples reproduced in the Mahāvyutpatti: svāmivat,
alamkāravat, bhṛtyavat, bhajanavat.
66. Vyākhyā: ekasmin kṣaṇe samavahitānāṁ bahūnāṁ rāśiḥ / bahuşu kṣaṇeṣu samvahi-
tānāṁ dhārā / rāśidṛṣṭāntena bahuşu dharmeșu pudgalaprajñaptim darśayati / dhārādṛṣṭān-
tena bahutve sati rūpavedanādīnāṁ skandhānāṁ pravähe pudgalaprajñaptim darśayati.
There are other examples as the word ādi indicates, for example, the chariot (yānaka).
67. Saeki quotes the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 42c20: “As the Vātsīputrīyas say, it is the pudgala
that knows, not knowledge (jñāna).”
68. According to the commentary on the Samayabheda, the Mahāsāṁghikas think that the
Buddha, having cultivated his mind during numerous kalpas, can, in a single moment of
thought, know sarvadharmasvabhāvavišeṣa.
Saeki quotes the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 43a11, “Is there a knowledge (jñāna) capable of
knowing all the dharmas? Yes, lokasaṁvṛtijñāna . (See Kośa, vii. 18c). TheFootnotes 1367
Samyuktahṛdaya (see above note 51), “One says universal knowledge (sarvajñāna) because
he knows all. By "all" one should understand the twelve ayatanas, their specific
characteristics and their general characteristics.” See vii. p. 1146 On the omniscience of the
Buddha, his knowledge of the future, etc., see Kośa i.1, ii.62 (p. 300), vii.30, 34, p. 1146, 37a.
69. The Buddhabhūmi, TD 26, p. 309c9, refutes this stanza.
"Those are vain words. The paracittajñāna (knowledge of the mind of another), at the
moment when it grasps a thing, does not grasp other things; because it does not know other
things, it is not universal knowledge. The series also does not grasp (all), because it knows
present being. In your system, it knows solely the general characteristics of a part of the
dharmas. And if this is the case, it is only by metaphor that the Tathāgata is called
omniscient...'
70. Mahāvastu, iii.327.
ye cābhyatītasaṁbuddhā ye ca buddhā hy anāgatāḥ /
yaś cāpy etarhi saṁbuddho bahūnāṁ śokanāśakāḥ //
Udanavarga, xxi. 10, frag. Stein, JRAS. April, 1924. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 322a22,
Samyutta, i.40, Anguttara, ii.21.
If the Buddha is a “self," it should enter into the fifth category, "the ineffable," distinct
from the three time periods and from asaṁskṛta (see above p. 1318).
71. Bhārahārasūtra (Sūtrālaṁkāra, xviii.102) or simply the Bhārasutta (Visuddhi, 479, 512).
bhāram ca vo bhikṣavo deśayiṣyāmi bhārādānaṁ ca bhāranikṣepaṇaṁ ca bhārahāram /
tac chṛṇuta sādhu ca suṣṭhu ca manasikuruta bhāṣiṣye / bhāraḥ katamaḥ / pañcopādānas-
kandhāḥ / bhārādānaṁ katamat / tṛṣṇä paunarbhavikī nandīrāgasahagatā tatra
tatrābhinandini / bhāranikṣepaṇaṁ katamat / yad asyā eva tṛṣṇāyāḥ paunarbhavikyä
nandīrāgasahagatāyās tatra tatrābhinandinyā aśeṣaprahāṇam pratiniḥsargo vyantibhāvaḥ
kṣayo virago nirodho vyupafamo'stamgamaḥ / bhārahāraḥ katamah / pudgala iti syad
vacanīyaṁ yo’sāv āyuṣmān evaṁnāmā evaṁjātya evaṁgotra evamāhāra evaṁsukhaduḥ-
khapratisamvedī evaṁdīrghāyur evaṁcirasthitika evam āyuṣparyanta iti (Vyākhyā; without
doubt the text of the Ekottara, TD 2, p. 631c16).
In the Samyutta, iii.25, there is the order: bhāra, bhāhāra, bhārādāna, bhāranikkhepana.
Numerous variants. The "bearer" is defined: puggalo ti ssa vacanīyam / yo yam evamnāmo
evamgotto ayam vuccati bhikkhave bhārahāro.
Discussed by Saṁghabhadra, xxiii.3, fol. 56a.
Nyāyavārttika (Bib. Ind.) p. 342; Bodhicaryāvatāra, ix.72, Madhyamakāvatāra, vi.42,
Bodhisattvabhūmi, I.xvii, Warren, 159, 240, Minayev, Recherches, 225; E. Hardy, JRAS.,
1901, 573 (who explains the Sūtra like Vasubandhu), Dialogues, i.27. The prāṇas and the
burden, Deussen-Geden, Upanişads, 221.
72. The phrases between parentheses are the additions by Hsüan-tsang.
Vyākhyā: yadi dravyasan syāt pudgalaḥ / bhāraḥāraḥ katamaḥ / pudgala iti syād
vacanīyam ity etāvad evoktaṁ syāt / tatra sûtre pareṇa sa na vibhaktavyaḥ syāt yo’sāv
äyuşmān iti vistareṇa yāvad evamāyuşparyanta iti / prajñaptisatpudgalapratipattyartham hy
etat parena višeṣaṇam ity abhiprāyaḥ.
If the pudgala exists as a thing, to this question "What is the bearer?", the Buddha would
simply respond, "What is suitable to be called the pudgala"; he would not add the
explanations, "It is such a venerable one, of such a name... of such an end of life." The aim
of these is to show that the pudgala exists only through designation.
73. The Tibetan, according to Stcherbatski, gives, “The earlier skandhas torment the later
ones; they are thus called burden and bearer of the burden." Paramārtha: the skandhas
torment (lit. destroy) the skandhas, namely the earlier ones torment the later ones; in order
to indicate that they present the characteristic of bearer and of burden, the text employs1368 Chapter Nine
expressions." It is thus that the Vyākhyā is understood: "The text has: among the skandhas,
etc. The skandhas which cause one to suffer, the causes of suffering, receive for this reason
the name of burden. The following, those which are tormented, receive for this reason the
name of bearer of the burden." (skandhānām iti vistaraḥ / tatra ye upaghātāya saṁvartante
duḥkhahetavaḥ skandhās te bhāra iti kṛtvoktāḥ / uttare ye piḍyante te bhārahāra iti
kṛtvoktāḥ).
74. On apparitional beings and the intermediate existence, see iii.8c.
75. According to the Sammitiyanikāyaśāstra, the Third Chapter.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 988a14, “This world does not exist; the other world does not exist;
there are no apparitional beings"; this is a false view, a negation of causes (Compare iv.78,
79b and v.7, p. 777). "There are no apparitional beings": there are some non-Buddhist
(bahya) masters who say that all beings arise by reason of seed and blood, etc.; that there are
no beings who arise without pratyayas, suddenly, of themselves. . . According to some,
apparitional beings are beings in the intermediate existence (antarābhava); to deny this
world and the other world is to deny upapattibhava; to deny apparitional beings is to deny
antarābhava.
text of the Karmaprajñāāpti (chap. Mdo, 62 fol. 218) differs from the usual
version, "There is neither gift, nor sacrifice, nor oblation, nor good action, nor evil action,
nor retributive result of good and evil actions. This world does not exist, nor does the other
one. There is neither father, nor mother, nor apparitional beings. There is not in this world
any well gone, well come Arhat, who knows and realizes by himself this world and the
other, thinking, 'My births are destroyed, the religious life well practiced … . . '
76. Kośa, Chap. v and vi, p. xvi. The pudgala, as you understand it, is not contained within
the Truths: it is not Suffering (=the skandhas of attachment), nor Arising, nor Extinction,
nor Path. Thus if the negation of the pudgala is, as you say, a false view (mithyādṛṣṭi), this
false view cannot be expelled by Seeing the Truths. In fact a "view" (dṛṣṭi) is expelled
through Seeing the Truth with which it is in contradiction (yasmin satye vipratipannā). On
the other hand, a defilement is abandoned through Meditation (bhāvanā) when this
defilement has for its object a thing abandoned through Meditation, a thing which is
necessarily included within the Truth of Suffering or of Arising (bhāvanāpraḥātavyo hi
kleśo bhāvanāprahātavyam eva vastu duḥkhaṁ samudayaṁ vālambate) ... Moreover no
"view" is abandoned through Meditation.
77. Ekottara, TD 2, p. 561a18, p. 569b20. Paramārtha: “A pudgala arises in this world;
arisen, it is for the use, profit, and happiness of many"= Anguttara, i.22, ekapuggalo
bbikkhave loke uppajjamano uppajjati babujanabitāya ...
This text is used in the Sāṁmitīyanikāyāśāstra.
78. The grain of tila is made up of eight substances, a word is made up of syllables.
79. Thus we recognize that it arises; but it is not, for that, "conditioned."
80. Paramārthaśūnyatāsūtra in the Samyukta, TD 2, p. 92c15: When the eye arises, Oh
Bhikşus, there is no place from whence it comes, and when it perishes, there is no place to
which it goes. In this manner the eye is not real and yet it arises (pu shih erh
sheng T
); having arisen, it perishes. There is retribution for action, yet
there is no agent: when these skandhas are destroyed, other skandhas continue (hsiang
bsu
): outside of any dharmasaṁketa. The ear . . By dharmasaṁketa (su shu
) we understand: if this is, then that exists. . . If ignorance exists, then
the saṁskāras exist. . .
fa
By bringing together the different fragments preserved in our sources, we obtain a
section of the Sūtra: cakṣur bhikṣava utpadyamānaṁ na kutaś cid agacchati / nirudhya-
mānaṁ ca na kva cit saṁnicayaṁ gacchati / iti hi bhikṣavaś cakṣur abhūtvā bhavati bhūtvāFootnotes 1369
ca prativigacchati (Kośa, v.27, trans. p. 814) / asti karma asti vipākaḥ / kārakas tu
nopalabhyate ya imāṁś ca skandhān nikṣipati anyāṁś ca skandhān pratisaṁdadhāti anyatra
dharmasaṁketāt (the text that we have here, and also Kofa, iii.18, Sūtrālaṁkāra, xviii. 101,
Bodhicaryāvatāra, ix.73 which presents some variants) / atrāyaṁ dharmasaṁketo yad
utāsmin satīdaṁ bhavati asyotpādād idam utpadyate (Kośa, iii.18, Bodhicaryāvatāra, ibid.) |
avidyāpratyayāḥ saṁskārāḥ …..
81. See Kośa, v.27, p. 814; Buddhaghosa, Visuddhi, 602, quotes the Ancients (Porāṇa):
kammassa kārako natthi vipākassa ca vedako. (We see, p. 513, that dukkha, kamma, nibbuti,
and magga exist, but not dukkin, kāraka, nibbuta ...)
Same doctrine, or same text, in the sources of the Mahāyāna, Madhyamakāvatāra, vi.84,
Śikṣāmuccaya, 244, 262, Sūtrālaṁkāra (which depends on Vasubandhu), xviii. 101.
82. The meaning of the expression anyatra dharmasaṁketāt (chos su brdar brtags pa ma
gtogs pa) is not in doubt. The Vyākhyā explains: dharmasaṁketād iti prātītyasamutpädala-
kṣaṇāt: "outside of the combination of the dharmas, that is to say, outside of the successive
causation of the dharmas”; and elsewhere (ad iii.18): saṁketa= hetuphalasaṁbandhavyavas-
thā. But Paramārtha understands saṁketa as “metaphorical designation," from whence the
translation, "One does not maintain the existence of an agent... except when, conforming
to worldly usage, one says that the dharmas are a pudgala."
83. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 182a17; Samyutta, ii.14. Paramārtha: “I do not say that a being, apart
from the series of the dharmas, takes up the elements." The Sanskrit edition has: upādatta
iti phālguna na vadāmi / ahaṁ ced evaṁ vadeyam upādatta iti atra te kalpaḥ syād vacanāya
ko nu bhadanta upādatta iti.
Note nevertheless that the Bhagavat speaks of the man "who casts off this body and
takes up another body," taṁ ca kāyaṁ nikkhipati aññaṁ ca kāyam upādiyati (Saṁyutta,
iv.60). (In the way that the flame which goes far without fuel has for the mind its support
(upādāna) so too the being who casts off this body and has not (yet) taken up another body
has thirst for his support, ibid. 400). We have seen above, note 41, the etymology of
pudgala: punaḥ punar...
84. Saeki quotes the Sāṁmitīyanikāya Šāstra, i.7 (fol. 2b).
85. Parinantum means to transform oneself, anyathātvamāpattum.
On pariņāma, iii.43a, 100a-b, v.26, p. 809; the saṁtatipariņāma of the Sautrāntikas is
very different, ii.36c, iv.4a.
86. On the relationship between the primary elements (mahābhūta) and secondary matter
(upādāyarūpa, bhautika rūpa), see i.35, ii.22, 65.
87. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 661c14: “Buddhadeva maintains that rūpa is solely mahābhūtas, that
mental states (caittas) are solely mind (citta); he says: upādāyarūpa is solely a type (višeșa)
of the mahābhūtas; the mental states are solely a type of mind . . . The mahābhūtas see
(when they form the organ of the eye) ... There is no upādāyaśabda apart from the primary
elements (that is to say: sound, fabda, is not a separate thing existing independently of the
primary elements). It is the primary elements which are called upādāyaśabda."
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 730b26: Buddhadeva says: Twenty-two names (mahābhūmikas, etc.),
but solely one real thing, the mana-indriya . . . The conditioned dharmas are of two natures,
mahābhūtas and citta. Apart from the mahābhūtas, there is no upādāyarūpa: apart from
citta, there are no caittas.
Compare i, note 146; ii, p. 188.
Saeki: "Vasubandhu mentions the opinion of Buddhadeva, etc., that the primary
elements and secondary matter do not differ; but, as this is not the "correct meaning"
(ch'engi E) of the Sarvästivādins, he says that it is doșa, an “error."
88. The Sutra of Vatsagotra, Samyukta, TD 2, p. 245c10. The Bhagavat said to the monk1370 Chapter Nine
Vatsagotra, "If one is of this opinion (dṛșți), "The world is eternal; this is true; any other
theory is false,' this is dṛṣṭiviparyāsa (v.9d), this is kuan-ts'a chien
(dṛṣṭiparāmarśa, v. p. 778). “The world is not eternal . . . the Tathāgata neither exists nor
does not exist after death': this is dṛṣṭiviparyāsa.”
89. On the "questions to be rejected,” Kośa, v.22, Nirvāṇa, 1925, p. 108, where we see that
Malebranche reasons quite closely to Vasubandhu.
90. We have Divya, 358: bahubollaka śākyaputrīya.
91. The present passage of the Kośa has been pointed out by S. Levi, AIBL., 1893, 232.
Chavannes has translated a very similar recension in Cinq Cents Contes, iii.120 (according
to Nanjio 1329, Ratnakaraṇḍa Sūtra (?), Tokyo, xiv.10, fol.39), the same recension in
Takakusu, "Chinese translations of the Milindapanho,” JRAS, 1896, p. 7. See Pelliot, "Les
noms propres du Milinda,”JAS, 1914, ii.380-381. (It appears indeed that the "Milindra" of
the Tibetan text of the Avadānakalpalatā is a rash correction by the editor). Finally, Paul
Demiéville, in a fine article on the Chinese versions of the Milinda, BEFEO, 1924, p. 64,
completes our information.
92. Compare Saṁyutta, iv.400. Saṁyukta, TD 2, p. 245b11: Vatsagotra asks, "Gotama, is
there an atman?" The Bhagavat does not answer. He asks a second, a third time; and the
Bhagavat, a second, a third time does not answer . . . And the monk Vatsagotra, in his evil
(pāpikā), false view, says, "The Śramaṇa does not know how to answer my question." The
Bhagavat says to Ãnanda, “If I were to answer him that there is an ātman, then I would
increase the false view that he already has; if I were to answer him that there is no ātman,
would his first folly-doubt not increase? Infatuated, he would say, 'The ātman, which
existed, is now annihilated.' The opinion that he has of the existence of an atman is the
opinion of permanence; to think that this ātman is annihilated is the opinion of
annihilation. The Tathāgata, avoiding these two extremes, teaches the Dharma of the
middle: if this is, then that exists . . . if ignorance exists, then the saṁskāras exist … … . '
93. Missing in Paramārtha.
"}
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 38a19: In the Brahmajālasūtra, it is said that the 62 dṛstigatas have
satkāyadṛṣṭi for their root; in the Sutra of the Lion's Roar, it is said all the diverse opinions
of the Brahmins and monks rest on two opinions, the opinion of existence and the opinion
of non-existence (bhavadṛṣṭi, vibhavadṛṣṭi, yu-chien
and wu-yu-chien
); what is the difference between the declarations of these two Sūtras? From the
point of view of arising (samutpāda), it is said that all the dṛṣṭigatas have satkāyadṛṣṭi for
their root; from the point of view "t'ui-ch'iu
(to thrust-search out), it is said
that the diverse opinions rest on the opinions of existence and non-existence. See above, p.
1336.
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 1002b6: Bhavadṛṣṭi is śāśvatadṛṣṭi, and vibhavadṛṣṭi is ucchedadṛṣṭi,
that is, the view of existence is the view of permanence or eternity, and the view of
non-existence is the view of annihilation. Although bad opinions (kudṛṣṭigata) are of
numerous types, they are all included by these two opinions.
94. Vyākhyā: Bhadantakumāralābhaḥ.On Kumāralābha, see Péri, Date de Vasubandhu, p.
22.
95. Vyākhyā: dṛṣṭir eva daṁstrā / tayāvabhedham apekṣya deśayanti buddhā dharmaṁ
nairātmyam tatpratipakṣena / bhramśam ca karmaṇām apekṣya kṛtavipraṇāśam apekṣya
pudgalästitvam iva darśayanto'nyathā deśayanti / vyāghrīpotāpahāravad iti / yathā vyāghri
nātiniṣṭhureṇa dantagrahaṇena svapotaṁ apaharati / nayati māsya daṁṣṭrayā śarīra [ 1
kṛtam bhūd iti / napy atiśithilena dantagrahaṇena tam apaharati / māsya bhramśaḥ
pato'smin vişaye bhūd iti yuktenaiva grahaṇenāpaharatity arthaḥ / tathārthadarśane
kāraṇam darśayann āha / ātmāstitvam iti vistaraḥ /Footnotes 1371
96. For the second stanza, the Vyākhyā is less clear: ātmāstitvaṁ pratipannaś cet kaścid
dṛṣṭidaṁṣṭrayā satkāyadṛṣṭilakṣaṇayā bhinnaḥ sa vineyajanaḥ syād aprāpya saṁvṛtīti (?)
(samvṛtinītim?) dharmasaṁketam ajānānaḥ kuśalapotasya kuśalakarmaṇo vyāghripotabh-
ütasya bhramśaṁ kuryān nāsti karmaṇaḥ phalam iti.
97. Vyākhyā: prājñaptika iti prājñaptau bhavaḥ prājñaptikaḥ saṁvṛtisann api pudgalo
nästīti kaścid gṛhṇīyād ity ato nāstīti nāvocat.
98. The Vyākhyā has the last pāda: omitted by Hsüan-tsang.
Paramartha: 3. This person is not capable of understanding the correct teaching of real
emptiness; thus, when he asked if, yes or no, there is a soul, the Buddha did not say there
was no soul. 4. And since he takes into consideration the intention of the questioner, if the
soul existed, why did he not say that it existed? So too, on the question of his non-existence
after Nirvāṇa, he said nothing because then the questioner would have fallen into
difficulties.
99. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 246b2: Vatsa asks, “By reason of the consciousness of which dharma
are you not of the opinion, you do not say that the world is eternal... that the Tathāgata
neither exists nor does not exist after death?" "By reason of the consciousness of rūpa,
vedanā, etc.”
"
100. Vyākhyā: nirgranthaśrāvakacaṭakavad iti / nirgranthaśrāvakeṇa caṭakam jīvantam
gṛhītvā bhagavān pṛṣṭaḥ kim ayaṁ caṭako jīvati na veti / tasyāyam abhiprāyaḥ / yadi
śramaṇo gautama ādiśej jīvatīti sa taṁ nipīḍanena mārayitvā darśayet / yadi punar
bhagavān evam ādiśen mṛta iti sa tam jīvantam eva darśayet / kathaṁ nāmāyam ajña iti
loko jānīyād iti tasyābhiniveśaḥ / bhagavatā tv asyāśayaṁ jñātvā na vyākṛtam /
tvaccittapratibaddham evaitaj jīvati vā na veti . . . nābhihitam / tadvad etan na vyākṛtam.
Perhaps according to Tokyo, xxiv, 9, J.As. 1925, i.38.
101. The catuṣka (group of four questions): "Is the world infinite (anantavān)? etc.” has the
same meaning as the catuṣka: “Is the world eternal (śāśvata)? …..”
"
If this is the case, how are there fourteen separate points, namely three catuṣkas and one
dvika (Is the vital principle the body? ... )? To this question the Vyākhyā answers:
paryayarūpatvavyavasthäne'pi caturdaśatvaṁ bhavatīty adoṣaḥ.
102. kun ta rgyu smra byed kyis. Chinese transcription: U-ti-chia J Stcher-
batski: Vatsa. The Tibetan version guarantees Uktika.
This is the Paribbājaka Uttiya of the Anguttara, v.193-195 (perhaps different from the
Uttiya of the Samyutta, v.22,166) who interrogates the Bhagavat on fourteen points
(beginning with the eternity of the world); the Bhagavat answers, “This is not explained by
me . . . “; Uttiya asks, "What do you explain?"; the Bhagavat answers, "I explain the
Dhamma ... for Nirvāṇa". Thereupon Uttiya asks, “Does the whole world, half the world,
or a third of the world attain to Nirvāṇa through this Dhamma?" The Bhagavat keeps
silent. Ananda then intervenes and explains to Uttiya that he is asking that which has
already been asked (To ask if the whole world attains to Nirvāṇa is to ask if the world is
eternal). The Bhagavat teaches how one attains to Nirvāṇa: all those who have attained to
it, are now attaining to it, and who shall attain to it, do so by the Path.
In Samyukta, TD 2, p. 247c18, Uktika's first question concerns the infinity of the world.
Do all beings attain to Nirvāṇa? Dīgha, ii.147 (yes), Mahāvastu, i.126 (yes), Milinda, 69
(no). Here we have the correct answer.
The redactor of the Brahmajāla understands the "infinity of the world" in the sense of
"infinite in space” (Dīgha, i.23: horizontal infinity, not towards the zenith or the nadir; on
this point Kośa, iii.3d, to the end); it varies its formulas: it examines whether the self and
the world are eternal, whether the world is infinite.1372 Chapter Nine
103. Uktika asks: kim tu sarvo loko'nena mārgena niryāsyati / āhosvid ekadeśo lokasya.
In the Pāli recension: sabbo ca tena (dhammena) loko niyyissati upaḍḍho vā tibhāgo vā.
104. On Maitreya, see Péri, BEFEO; xi.455, Przyluski, Aŝoka, 169, 171, 332. Madhyama, TD
1, p. 510b19 (66th Sūtra: he will come at a period when human life is 80,000 years long),
Dirgha, 6th Sūtra, TD 1, p. 41c29 and Dīgha, iii.76, Sālistambasūtra (see Kośa, iii. 28a-b).
We are reminded of Ajita and Tissametteya of the Suttanipāta, 1032, 1040. Milinda, 159;
Anāgatavamsa in Warren, 482; Mrs. Rhys Davids, Hastings, i.414. Ajita Maitreya and
Mithra Invictus?
105. Saeki quotes the Samyukta, TD 2, p. 244a14, “Gautama, is the vital principal the body?
This has not been explained. Is the vital principal something else? Is the body something
else? This has not been explained. It is strange that the monk Gautama explains, on the
subject of a deceased disciple, that 'Such a one is reborn in such a place . . . ` and that the
monk Gautama does not explain that the vital principle is something else, and that the body
something else again."
Samyukta, TD 2, p. 213a27, sermon to Nanda: The disciple endowed with an
unmoveable faith who desires long life and beautiful rūpa, shall obtain them. The disciple
endowed with the avetyaprasādas, is, at the end of his life, reborn among the devas and
obtains ten qualities (Samyukta, TD 2, p. 2, p. 215b10, c9 and following, Madhyama, TD 1,
p. 545b15 and following).
106. satyataḥ sthititaḥ.Hsüan-tsang: ti ku chu ku. Gloss of the Japanese editor:
chu ku= neng chu ku "capable of lasting." Paramārtha: i-shih i-chu £*££
107. astīty api dṛṣṭisthānam uktam. Hsüan-tsang: o chien ch'u
=kudṛṣṭisthāna.
This discussion is based on the Sāṁmitīyanikāyaśāstra.
108. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 255c13: The Bhagavat says, “You say that there is cause: I say so
also; you say that there is no fruit: this is a foolish doctrine." There are two doctrines, in all
two extremes: the Bhagavat avoids the extreme of annihilation and the extreme of
permanence, and he teaches the Middle Way. He also says, “I am not in contradiction with
the world; but the world is in contradiction with me."
Vibhāṣā, 77.17 “. . . he who says that (the jīva) is different from the body, is not the body,
enters into the opinion of permanence. He is not of non-Buddhist doctrines (bāhya mārga),
he is not of evil opinions (kudṛṣṭigata) who does not enter into the opinions of annihilation
or of permanence. All the Tathāgatas, in order to oppose this, teach the path between the
two, namely: rūpa and the mind are not annihilated, are not permanent." See above note 93.
109. Samyukta, TD 2, p. 42b3. Only Paramārtha quotes the Sūtra in full; Hsüan-tsang and
the Tibetan do not have the first phrase. Compare Samyutta, ii.78, iii.149: anamataggāyaṁ
saṁsāro pubbakoți na paññāyati avijjānīvaraṇānaṁ sattānaṁ taṇhāsaṁyojanānam
samdhāvataṁ samsaratam.
The same argument in the Sāṁmitīyanikāyaśāstra.
From the point of view of the Mādhyamikas, neither the permanent nor the
impermanent can transmigrate: nityasya samsṛtir nāsti naivānityasya saṁsṛtiḥ / svapnavat
samsṛtir proktā tvayā tattvavidāṁ vara (Catustava, quoting Bodhicaryāvatārapañjikā,
ix. 108).
110. Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 424c15. Sunetro nāma śāsteti saptasūryodayasütre’yam eva
bhagavān ṛṣiḥ sunetro nāma babhūveti.
The Saptasuryasütra of the Anguttara, iv.103, does not identify Sunetra with the
Bhagavat: bhūtapubbaṁ bhikkhave Sunetto nāma satthā ahosi titthakaro kāmesu vītarāgo..
. (Compare Anguttara, iii.371, 373). We also find some details in the Vibhāṣā on the rebirth
of Sunetra's disciples and on the rebirth of Sunetra (TD 27, p. 424c15 and following). There
is no mention of Sunetra in the fragments of the Saptasurya of the Śikṣāsamuccaya, p. 247
and the Karmaprajñapti, Mdo. 62, fol. 66a. In the Saundarananda, xi.57, we only see that
Sunetra is the Bhagavat.Footnotes 1373
111. Vyākhyā: ya ekeṣāṁ pudgalagrāha iti vātsīputrīyāṇām / ekeṣāṁ sarvanāstigrāha iti
madhyamakacittānām. This is the only reference to the Madhyamaka system that the work
of Vasubandhu contains.
The translation is according to Hsüan-tsang. Paramārtha: “Thus, without cause or
reason, one introduces the malady of opinion into the Good Law of the Tathāgatas: there
are some scholars who deny nairātmya and produce a belief in the existence of an ātman;
there are, furthermore, some masters who deny the existence and affirm the non-existence
of everything; the non-Buddhists believe in an ātman conceived as a separate thing. In the
Good Law, some masters produce a belief in an ātman and a belief in universal
non-existence. None of these masters obtain deliverance, because they do not differ from
one another."
112. Saeki quotes a Vijñaptimātra commentary: If the self is not real, who remembers, who
recognizes things, who recites and retains books, who repeats texts, who loves some and
hates others, who loves what is good and hates the rest? . . . The Vātsīputrīyas have a
reasoning: "(In the system of our adversaries) beings (sattvas) do not remember because
they are not selves, like space."
For eight different explanations of the cause of memory, see Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 55a18:
There are some masters who maintain that the self is by its nature real, namely the
Vätsiputrīyas who say, "We say that there is a self that remembers what has been done; first
oneself experiences, and then it is oneself that remembers. If there were no self, how could
one remember what has been done? . . ." Again there are some masters who say, "The
previous mind goes and says to the later mind: I did this; you, retain it and remember it...
It is thus that one remembers what has been done."
Vibhāṣā, p. 56a7, teaches the "right" doctrine of the Sarvāstivādins.
For an explanation of memory in the Madhyamaka school, see notably Bodhicaryāvatāra,
ix.24 (against the Vijñānavāda), 73 (against the Pudgalavāda), 101.
Milinda, 78-80; Demiéville, 161, Compendium, Introduction, p. 42 (according to the
Paṭṭhāna).
On memory, see Kośa, i.33 (p. 97), ii.24 (p. 190), 24a (p. 194), vi.15, p. 927.
113. Vyākhyā: smṛtiviṣayasaṁjñānvayāc cittaviśeṣād iti / smṛtiviṣayo’nubhūto'rthaḥ / tatra
saṁjñā sānvayo hetur asyeti smṛtiviṣayasaṁjñānvayaḥ / cittaviśeṣaḥ kiṁcid eva cittam na
sarvam ity arthaḥ / tasmāt smaraṇaṁ bhavati pratyabhijñānaṁ vā // evam ubhayaviseṣaṇe
kṛte pṛcchati kīdṛśac cittaviseșād iti / äha / tadabhoga iti vistaraḥ / yasmin smartavya
ābhogas tadābhogaḥ / sa ca tena sadṛśāḥ saṁbandhinaś ca saṁjñādayo ye te vidyante 'syeti
tadabhogasadṛśasaṁbandhisaṁjñādimāṁś cittavišeṣşaḥ / ādigrahaṇena praṇidhānaniband-
hābhyāsādigrahaṇam / āśrayaviśeṣaś ca śokaś ca vyākṣepaś cādir eṣām iti āśrayaviśeṣaśoka-
vyākṣepādīni / tair anupahataprabhāvaś cittaviśeṣaḥ sa evam anena pradaršito bhavati /
tasmād īdṛśāc cittaviśeṣāt smṛtir bhavati /
tad idam uktam bhavati / tadābhogavataḥ : yadi tatrābhogaḥ kriyate / sadṛśasaṁjñādi-
mataḥ : yatra sādṛśyāt smṛtir bhavati / sambandhisaṁjñādimataḥ : yatrāntareṇāpi sādṛśyam
dhūmādidarśanāt smṛtir bhavati / praṇidhānanibandhābhyāsādimataś ca : yatra
praṇidhānam atra kāle smartavyam abhyāso vāsya smaraṇe // āśrayaviśeṣādibhir
anupahataprabhavad iti / vyādhilakṣaṇena āśrayaviseṣeṇa śokena vyākṣepeṇa anyatra kāye /
ādiśabdagṛhītais ca karmavidyādibhiḥ /
tādrso 'pīti vistaraḥ / tadābhogavān (tatsadṛśa) saṁjñādimān anupahataprabhāvo'pity
arthaḥ / atadanvaya ity asmṛtivişayasaṁjñānvaya ity arthaḥ / bhāvayitum utpādayitum //
anyādṛśa ity atadābhogayāvatsaṁjñādimān upahataprabhāvo vā.
The commentators on Hsüan-tsang debate this. P’u-kuang (TD 41, p. 447a22-b10) has
three explanations of smṛtivisayasaṁjñānvaya, three explanations of resemblance (sadṛśa)
(that Fa-pao rejects, TD 41, p. 809a11 and following), two of necessary conjunction
(sambandhin), etc. (see Saeki, xxx, fol. 7a, 8b-9a).1374 Chapter Nine
114. The Vyākhyā explains (below p. 1342) the discussion relative to the question, "In the
absence of a soul, what knows?" evaṁ ko= vijānātīti vistaraḥ. It suffices to replace vijānāti
with smarati, vijñāna with smaraṇa.
115. Paramartha, "Not different from memory, for the memory grasps"; Hsüan-tsang, "No
difference of memory, only (grasping) comes from the agent,"
116. According to the commentators of Hsüan-tsang, these masters are the Sāṁkhyas;
according to the Vyākhyā, this formula is that of the Grammarians; for Stcherbatski,
Vasubandhu here continues his controversy with the Vātsīputrīyas: and in fact the Vyākhyā
says that this argument tends to prove the existence of the pudgala. See Kośa, iii.28a, for a
discussion of pratītyasamutpāda, and a refutation of the vaiyākaraṇacodya (objection of the
Grammarians), "There is no action (kriyā) without an agent (akartṛkā).” The bhūti is not
different from the bhavitar.
117. Vyākhyā: gacchatigamanābhidhānavad iti / yathā jvālā gacchati śabdo gacchatīti
gacchatiśabdābhidhānam / yathā jvālāyāḥ śabdasya vā gamanam evaṁ devadatto gacchati
devadattasya gamanam / anena dṛṣṭāntena vijānāti devadatta iti sidhyati.
It is the opinion of the Sarvāstivādins that gati (or gamana) is impossible, iv.2b, English
trans. p. 552-4.
118. Vyākhyā: parispandam akurvad apīty arthaḥ /
119. Vyākhyā: kāraṇasādṛśyena kāryāt malābhāt.
"Response to a seed," "to reproduce the seed," Hsüan-tsang: ch'ou
parallel, respond to.
=to make
The Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 480a14, explains that one cannot attribute the action of
samyoga, samanvāgama (ch'eng chiu
), Rosenberg, 204; see above, p. 1346,
samyoga (= ho A
) neither to a pudgala nor to the dharmas: the first does not exist,
the second are bare of any activity. No dharma is either the agent or the object of an action
of samyoga. But, as there is cause-result, defilement-purity, bond-deliverence, process-ceas-
ing, so too the quality of being samyukta or asamyukta exists.
120. The consciousness of blue has a blue "aspect."
121. Vyākhyā: kāraṇam kartṛbhūtam iti kṛtvā / tad yathā nādasya kāraṇaṁ ghanța iti
ghanto rautity ucyate.
122. Vyākhyā: yathā ca bhavitū rūpasya bhāvāj janitur jāteḥ sthātuḥ sthiter anarathāntarat-
vam evaṁ vijñāne’pi syād vijñātur vijñānasya vijñānād bhāvād anarthāntaratvam. (See the
opinion of the Sarvāstivādins on jāti, ii, English trans. p. 242).
"The existent," Paramārtha, neng-yu; Hsüan-tsang, yu . . . che. ħ . . . #
Paramārtha: As the world says, "physical matter exists, arises, lasts.” Now the existing
thing (bhavitṛ), etc., does not differ from existence (bhāva), and yet nevertheless one
employs two words. So too one employs two words for vijñāna.
123. According to Saeki. The Vaiseșikas, according to the Vyākhyā: vaiśeṣikamatānusārād vā
124. Why does one successively have gobuddhi, strībuddhi, mahiṣabuddhi, the idea of cow,
woman, and buffalo? Why does not the mahișabuddhi follow gobuddhi?
The Japanese editor understands, "Why is not the latter mind parallel to the former
mind, good, defiled, etc. . . . ?”
125. Vyākhyā: nikāmena paryāptena samāptena dhyānena samāhitānām . . .
126. See, for example, Kośa, ii. 71b.
127. Vyākhyā: gotraviśeṣād iti bhāvanāvišeṣāt. Below gotra is explained as bīja, “seed.” TheFootnotes 1375
gloss bhāvanāvišeṣāt gives a translation, "by reason of the particular manner in which they
perfume the series.”
128. Vyākhyā: strīcittad iti vistaraḥ / strīcittāt (= stryālambanāc cittād) anantaram
tatkāyavidūṣaṇācittam (= tasyāḥ striyāḥ kāyasya vidūṣaṇāyai yadi parivrājakasya anyasya vā
sādhoś cittam utpannam bhavati) tatpatiputrādicittaṁ vā (= tasyāḥ patiputrādayaḥ /
ādiśabdena duhitrādayo gṛhyante / tadālambanaṁ cittam tatpatiputrādicittam). Hsuan-
tsang, the mind of an impure body."
89
129. See ii. 36, English trans. p. 211.
130. Vyākhyā: tat paścăd utpannaṁ strīcittaṁ samartham bhavati tatkāyavidūṣaṇācittotpă-
dane tatpatiputracittotpädane vă / kasmāt / tatgotratvād iti / tatkāyavidūṣaṇācittam
tatpatiputrādicittaṁ vā gotraṁ bījam asyeti tadgotram.. anyathety atadgotram.
131. Vyākhyā: atha punaḥ paryayeneti vistaraḥ / paryayeṇa ayugapat / strīcittāt
tatkāyavidūṣaṇācittam / tatas tatpaticittam / tatas tatputracittam / tata eva ca
tadduhitṛcittam / tata eva ca tadupakaraṇādicittam utpannaṁ bhavati / tataḥ strīcittād
anantarotpannebhyaś cittebhyo yad bahutaraṁ pravāhataḥ paṭutaraṁ śaktita āsannataraṁ
vāsyotpādyasya cittasya tad eva cittam utpadyate / tadbhāvanābalapaṭutvāt (MS. - balaṁ
yastvāt) tasya bahutarasya patutarasyāsannatarasya vā bhāvanāyā balavattaratvāt /
On bbāvanā (bsiu 1 ,hsiu-hsi
) or vāsanā, see iv.27d, 123c, vii.28c, 30c,
32d, viii.3d.
132. Vyākhyā: evan hy ähur iti sthavirarāhulaḥ. See also Vyākhyā (Petrograd edition, 1918), p. 6:
sarvākāraṁ kāraṇaṁ ekasya mayüracandrakasyāpi /
nāsarvajñair jñeyaṁ sarvajñajñānabalaṁ hi tat //
133. An observation that one reads in the Atthasālinī, 142, Milinda, 87, Kośa, ii.24, English
trans. p. 190.
134. Vyākhyā: the Vaiśeṣika.
135. The version of Hsüan-tsang strays from the original on many points: "If they say that
the variety of the vijñānas (consciousnesses) depends (apekṣa) on the variety of the
conjunction (of the soul) with the manas, we answer: No; 1. because the conjunction of the
soul with another thing is not proved; 2. because the conjunction of two things is delimited
fen-hsien
) (that is to say two things can be joined on only one side). They
themselves define conjunction: "possession succeeding upon non-possession": the
conjunction of the soul and the manas should be delimited; 3. because, if the manas changes
(i-ch'uan
), the soul should also change; 4. or rather the soul should perish with
the manas. If they say that conjunction is partial, we answer: No. For there are not diverse
parts in one soul. To suppose that there is conjunction if the soul is permanent and if the
manas is not modified (pieh-i R ), how can conjunction be diverse? If they answer
that (this diversity) depends on the diversity of buddhi, the difficulty is the same (as when
they explain that variety depends on the manas): we then ask how buddhi is diverse. If they
say that, through dependence on the saṁskāras, the conjunction of the soul and the manas is
diverse (jo tai hsing pieh wo i ho che ØõÂ# ), it means that a single
mind, through dependence on a variety of saṁskāras, produces the variety of the vijñānas.
What then would be the purpose of the soul?"
136. Vyākhyā: na / anyasaṁyogāsiddheh / naitad evam / kasmāt / tābhyām ātmananob-
hyām anyasya saṁyogasyäsiddheḥ / na hi samyogo nāma bhāvaḥ kaścid asmākaṁ siddho'sti.
A Buddhist does not admit the existence of an entity called samyoga.
137. This is the definition of the Daśapadārthī, H. Ui, The Vaiśeșika Philosophy, 1917, p.
271. Stcherbatski quotes the Prasastapāda: aprāptayoḥ prāptiḥ saṁyogaḥ, and observes that
the Vaiseşikasūtra, vii.2, 9, differs.1376 Chapter Nine
138. Vyākhyā: paricchinnadeśatvaprasangaḥ / yatrātmā na tatra manaḥ yatra mano na
tatrātmeti. (Where the soul is, there is no manas).
139. An addition of Paramartha.
140. Vyākhyā: tato lakṣaṇād aprāptipūrvikā prāptiḥ saṁyoga iti manaḥsaṁcārād yaṁ yam
fariradeśam manaḥ saṁcarati tatas tata ātmā saṁcaraty apaitīti prasajyate / tadyatha yam
yam prthivipradeśaṁ puruṣaḥ saṁcarati tatas tata ātapo'pasarpati / tathā ca satiniṣkriyat-
vam asya bādhitam bhavatīti sa eva pratijñādoṣaḥ.
vināśasya vā / prasanga iti vartate / ātmana iti ca // yatra yatra manaḥ saṁcarati tatra
tatrātmā vinaśyatīti sa eva cătra pratijñādoṣa ātmano nityatvanivṛtteḥ.
141. Vyākhyā: pradeśasamyoga iti cet / syān matam ātmanā pradeśena samyogo manasaḥ /
ātmanā vā pradeśena manasā saha saṁyogaḥ / yasmin śarīrapradeśe mano'vasthitam
bhavati tadgatenātmapradeśena mano na saṁyujyate / pradeśāntarena tu parśvataḥ (MS
-ntapālvataḥ) samyujyate / tasmād aprāptipūrvakatve'pi samyogasya apräptenaiva
atmapradefena manaḥ saṁyujyata iti // tan na / tasyaiva tatpradeśatvāyogāt / na hy
atmano'nyapradeśā vidyante / na caivātmaiva ātmanaḥ pradefo yujyate.
One can suppose that the manas, when it occupies a certain part of the body, is not in
conjunction with the part of the soul which is found in this part of the body, but rather with
the other parts of the soul. Conjunction follows non-conjunction: the manas, being
displaced, is found in conjunction with a part of the soul with which it was not in
conjunction, namely that which occupies the part of the body that the manas has just quit.
142. Vyākhyā: astu vā saṁyoga iti vistaraḥ / abhyupetyāpi saṁyogaṁ tathāpi nirvikāratvād
avišișțe manasi kathaṁ saṁyogaviśeṣaḥ kathaṁ višiṣṭaḥ saṁyogo bhavati yata evam uktam
manaḥsaṁyogavišeṣāpekṣatvād iti / buddhaviśeṣāpekṣatvād iti cet sa evopari codyate
kathaṁ buddhiviśeṣa iti kathaṁ na nityam īdṛśam evotpadyate cittam avišișțe ātmanīti /
kāraṇaviśeşād hi kāryavifeṣa iṣyate śankhapaṭahādiśabdavat / saṁskāravišeṣāpekṣād
ātmamanaḥsamyogād iti cet / syān matam nityam avišişțe'py ātmani manasi ca
saṁskāraviteşāpekṣād ātmamanasoḥ saṁyogād buddhivifeṣa iti/ tad uktam bhavati
saṁskāravišeṣād bhāvanāvišeṣalakṣaṇād ātmamanaḥsaṁyogaviśeṣas tad (višeṣād buddhi)
višeṣaḥ / atra brūmaḥ cittād evāstv iti vistaraḥ /
143. Paramārtha: If there is no "earth" by itself independent of the quality of smell, etc.,
why does one say that earth has four qualities? In order to distinguish: in order that others
may know that smells, tastes, etc., receive the name of "earth,” etc., that there is not,
separately, earth, etc. In the same way one says: "the reflection of wood."
144. On samskāra, bbavanavisesa, see H. Ui, p. 162.
145. On the padārthas, guṇas, and dravyas, see H. Ui, p. 93 and foll. Discussion of the gunin
and the guna, Kośa, iii. 100a-b.
146. Hsüan-tsang: But the object of the notion of “I” is not of this sort. The text has na tv
ahaṁkārah; the Vyākhyā: na tv aham ity evamākāraḥ pratyaya ity arthaḥ.
147. See above, p. 1341, line 2.).
148. Vyākhyā: yathā tathoktam iti / yathā kṛtvāśrayaḥ ṣaḍāyatanam tathoktam tadvikāravi-
kāritvād āśrayas cakṣurādaya ity arthaḥ (i.45a) / Pañcaskandhakaṁ bhavān udāharatīty
adhikṛtam.
Vasubandhu is referring to his work, the Pañcaskandhaka.
149. According to Hsüan-tsang and to the Tibetan (Stcherbatski). Paramārtha: "Kartar is
one who creates that which did not exist; upabhoktar is one who presently obtains the result
of a former action."
150. Stcherbatski: the Logicians; Hsüan-tsang and Paramartha: "Those who explainFootnotes 1377
the dharmalakṣaṇas." But Stcherbatski states that the definition of these masters is that of
Pāṇini, i.4, 54: svatantraḥ kartā.
We see, Kofa, iii.27 (p. 413), that the Grammarians, or Vaiyākaranas, protest against
the thesis of "action without an agent” (akartṛkā kriyā). In the same passage, certain
masters (kecid vādinaḥ) maintain that pratītyasamutpāda supposes a support, namely an
atman.
151. Vyākhyā: tasya tu svātantryaṁ nāstīti darśayann āha trividhaṁ cedaṁ karmeti vistaraḥ
/ kāyasya cittaparatantrā vṛttiḥ cittapravartitvāt kāyakarmaṇaḥ / cittasyāpi käye vṛttiḥ
svakāraṇaparatantrā manodharmamanaskārādiparatantrā / tasyāpy evam / tasya
cittasvakāraṇasya svakāraṇaparatantrā vṛttir iti nāsti kasya cid api svātantryaṁ kāyasya
cittasya cittakāraṇasyānyasya vā / pratyayaparatantrā hi sarve bhāvāḥ
caturbhiś cittacaittā hi samāpattidvayam tribhiḥ
dvābhyām anye tu jāyante iti vacanāt (ii.65) /
ātmano'pi ca nirapekṣasya buddhiviśeṣādyutpattāv akāraṇatvābhyupagamān na
svätantryaṁ sidhyati / tasmān naivaṁlakṣaṇa iti svatantraḥ karteti.
152. Vyākhyā: tasyākāraṇatvaṁ upadarśayann äha/... pūrvaṁ smartavyārthe smrtir
utpadyate / smrteś chandaḥ kartukāmatā / chandād vitarkaḥ cetanāvišeṣo’bhisaṁskārala-
ksanab prajnavifeso’bbisamskāralaksanab prajnavifeso và yogācāranayena vaibbasikanayena
tv abhinirūpaṇāvikalpalakṣaṇaḥ (The MS is perhaps incorrect. Here Hsüan-tsang translates
vitarka with the two characters which, elsewhere give vitarka-vicāra. For the Vaibhāṣikas,
vitarka signifies here (abhi)nirūpaṇā vikalpa, one of the three vikalpas defined in Kośa,
i.33a; one type of prajñā (prajñāviśeṣa) which consists of examining, or deliberation. For
the Yogācārins, vitarka signifies prajñāvišeṣa abhisaṁskāralakṣaṇa: one prajñā which has
the characteristic of action or decision. For the author, vitarka is a cetană, "volition," the
characteristic of which is "to create” (abhisaṁskar) (Kośa, i.15a) / vitarkāt prayatno vīryam
/ prayatnād väyuḥ / tato vayoḥ karma deśāntarotpattilakṣaṇam iti kim atrātmā kurute.
153. Vyākhyā: vijñāne pratiṣedḥād iti yaivopalabdhis tad eva vijñānam / vijñāne cātmanaḥ
samarthyam pratişiddhaṁ cittad evästu saṁskāraviseṣapekṣan na hi... phuṭsvāhānām iti /
yathā tathoktam iti / tadvikāravikāritvād āśrayaś cakṣurādaya iti (i.45a-b) / yathā kaḥ
kasyāśrayaḥ... naiva sa evam āśrayaḥ (note 145).
154. According to the formula: na hi bhikṣavaḥ karmāṇi kṛtāny upaciṭāni bāhye
prthivīdhātau vipacyante / api tūpātteṣu skandhadhāt vāyataneṣu...(Divya, 54 and passim).
On sattvākhya, upātta, see Kośa, i.10b, English trans. (p. 65), 34c (p. 98), 39 (p. 107), iv.5d
(p. 569).
155. H. Ui, Vaiseșika Philosophy, 75, 98; Kośa, iv.2b (p. 555).
156. Above, p. 1347.
157. For the Sarvāstivādins, the cause of retribution "gives forth" its fruit when it is past
(ii.57, 59); as a consequence, the past exists (v.25a-b, p. 807). Vasubandhu remarked (v. p.
818) that the Sautrāntikas do not admit that the result arises directly from action. For the
different results of action, see iv.85.
See Madhyamaka, xvii. 6 and following, "If an action lasts until its retribution, it would
be eternal... "The doctrine that Vasubandhu presents here is refuted xvii. 12; the opinion
of Candrakīrti, xvii.13: When an action arises, there also arises in the series a dharma
unassociated with the mind, morally neutral, destroyed through bhāvanā, that is called
avipraṇāśa, which produces the result of the action.
From another point of view, the ankura cannot arise from either the destroyed bīja, or
from a non-destroyed bija; Catustava, quoted in Madhyamakāvatāra, 97, Bodhicaryavatāra-
panjikā, ix.108.
158. For karmasaṁtānapariņāmaviśeșa, see ii.36c (p. 211).1378 Chapter Nine
159. Hsüan-tsang: For example the mind "associated with attachment" at the end of life.
Although there are some traces (vāsanās) projected by all types of actions capable of
producing a new existence, nevertheless that which manifests itself (at death), is (the mind)
produced by heavy, near, and habitual action; not any other. There is a stanza . . .
160. Vyākhyā: yathoktam iti / sthavirarāhuleṇa / yad guru yac cāsanannam iti vistaraḥ /
ekasmin saṁtane catvāri karmāṇi gurv āsannam abhyastaṁ pūrvakṛtaṁ ca / eṣāṁ caturṇām
guru karma pūrvam iti tribhyas tat pūrvaṁ vipacyate / asannābhyastapūrvakrtānām apy
āsannaṁ pūrvam iti tat pūrvaṁ dvābhyāṁ vipacyate / abhyastapūrvakṛtayoś cābhyastam
pūrvam ity ekasmāt pūrvaṁ vipacyate / asatsu eteșu pūrvajanmakṛtaṁ vipacyate
aparaparya-yavedaniyam.
An ārya stanza, like note 166.
161. Better:... the capacity to produce the retributive result, the capacity that cause places
in the series . . . See Kofa, iii.37c. This problem has been pointed out ad iv.50, note 217,
where one will find a part of this bibliography. The Andhakas affirm that vipāka is a
vipākadhamma: retribution admits of a new retribution (Kathāvatthu, vii.10); the
Rajagirikas and the Siddhatthikas, warranted by Suttanipāta 654, affirm: sabbam idam
kammato; the Theravādin are made to ay that the murderer commits murder through
retribution for murder: and Nirvāṇa becomes impossible (Kathāvatthu, xvii.3). The
Madhyamakāvatara, vi.41, demonstrates that there is no new vipāka after vipāka. In the
Karmaprajñapti (Mdo. 62, fol. 249b), Maudgalyāyana refutes the Nirgranthas who maintain
that all sensation proceeds from previous actions (comp. Majjhima, ii.214): the sufferings of
penance that the Nirgranthas impose upon themselves are, say the Nirgranthas,
"retribution": "According to you, one experiences the retribution of a new retribution." "Do
you admit purification, deliverance, Nirvāṇa?" "Yes." "Then do not say that a new
retribution arises from retribution."
We have seen, iv.58, that daurmanasya and cittakṣepa are not retribution; but they can
necessarily proceed from troubled elements (mahābhūta), which is retribution.
162. Here we have several words which I have not translated. According to Hsüan-tsang:
ch'ieh fei pi yü shih fa chieh teng #
"The example is not
dharma-totally-similar," and according to Paramārtha: tz'u chung i-ch'ieh so-li-i yü pi-i
pu-pi hsi t'ung t+-50FTYHUNT/na "Here the meaning estab-
lished by all should not be totally parallel with the meaning of the example."
The Japanese editor puts this phrase in the mouth of Vasubandhu; the same for
Stcherbatski, who translates: "The example may not fit in every detail. But even supposing
it to be fitting, does it prove your tenet? Is new corn produced directly from old corn?"
Further, p. 1354 line 28 Hsüan-tsang, concluding his explanation of this example says:
ku yü t'ung fa
"Thus the example is parallel (sadharma)”;
Paramārtha: tz'’u pi yü li-i t’ung L
: “Thus the example is analogous
to the established meaning," or "Thus this example confirms our thesis."
=
163. We follow the version of Hsüan-tsang. Compare the whole of the paragraph of the
Bodhicaryavatāra, 472-473.
Vyākhyā: viklittiviśeṣajād iti bhūmyudakasaṁbandhāt phalasya sūkṣmo vikāro viklittiḥ
/ tasya višeṣaḥ / sa evätiprakṛṣtaḥ / tas māj jāto vikāravišeṣaḥ / tasmāt phalāntaram
utpadyate / kīdṛśād vikāraviśeṣād iti darśayann āha / yo hi tatra bhūtaprakāro’nkuram
nirvartayati sa tasya bījam iti tasyāṁkurasya bījaṁ nānyo bhūtaprakāro na pūrvabījāvastho
bhūtaprakāra ity arthaḥ // bhāvinyā tu saṁjñayeti / odanaṁ pacati saktuṁ pinaṣṭīti yathā
bhāvinyā saṁjňayā vyapadeśaḥ evaṁ pūrvako'pi samtāno aviklinnabījāvastho bījam ity
ākhyāyate / bhavinyā'nayā saṁjñayeti / sādṛśyād veti viklittivišeșajena bhūtavikāravišeṣeṇa
sadṛśaḥ sa pūrvakaḥ saṁtāna iti kṛtvā bījam ity ākhyāyate |
164. On vipākaja, see i.37 English trans. (p. 103), ii.10, 53b (p. 270), 54c (p. 275), 57a (p.
288), 71b (p. 315), iv.11.165. Vyākhyā: phale raktaḥ kesara iti phalabhyantare kesaraḥ / yatra bijapürakarase
amlo'vatiṣṭhate // na ca sa tasmāt punar anya iti / na rasaraktaḥ kesaras tasmād uktāt
kesarāt punar upajāyate kiṁ tarhi prākṛta evāraktaḥ kesara upajāyata ity arthaḥ // idam
atrodāharaṇam / yathā lākṣārasaraktamātulaṁgapuṣpaphalād (MS. lākṣārasaraṁ tat mãº)
raktakesarān na raktaṁ kesarāntaraṁ punar bhavati evaṁ karmajād vipākān na punar
vipākāntaram iti / āha cătra /
cittam hy etad anantabījasahitaṁ saṁtānato vartate /
tat tad bijam upaiti pușțim udite svapratyaye cetasi /
tat puștaṁ drumalabdhavṛtti phaladaṁ kālena saṁpadyate /
Footnotes 1379
rangasyeva hi mātulaṁgakusume'nyas tasya tatkesare // punar āha /
karpāsabije puspe ca mâtulangasya ranjite /
lākṣayā jāyate raktaṁ yathā karpāsakesaram //
tasminn astam ite range saṁtānād bhāvitakramāt /
karmaṇy astam ite caiva bhāvanātaḥ phalodayaḥ //
To these stanzas one should compare those quoted in the Sarvadarśana (beginning of
the chapter on Jainism):
yasminn eva saṁtana āhitā karmavāsanā /
phalam tatraiva badhnāti kārpāse raktatā yathā //
kusume bījapūrāder yal lakṣādy upasicyate /
faktir ādhiyate tatra kā cit tāṁ kim na paśyasi //
The first of these stanzas is quoted in the Bodhicaryāvatāra, ix, 73 (introduced by tad
uktam); compare Anandagiri ad 2.2.27 (vāsanāvaicitryāt), and the Ātmatattvaviveka
(Calcutta, 1873) p. 102 (lākṣārasāvasekād vā dhavalimānam apahāya raktatām upādāyanu-
vartamānaṁ kārpāsabījam . . . ). The first line of the second stanza is used by Kumārila,
Ślokavārttika, p. 267. On these different sources, see "Bouddhisme d'aprés les sources
brâhmaniques,” Muséon, 1902 (quoted in part, p. 63).
166. Forming without doubt part of the same work as the stanza, note 160.
Vyākhyā: karmeti sarvaṁ tadbhāvanaṁ karmabhāvanāṁ tasmād bhāvanāyā vṛttilābhaṁ
tadvṛttilābhaṁ tatas tadvṛttilābhāt phalam ity etac catuṣṭayam niyamena yadṛcchayā /
buddhād anyaḥ śrāvakādiḥ sarvathā sarvākāraṁ na prajānātīty arthād uktaṁ bhavati buddha
eva tat sarvam sarvathā prajānātīti.
167. Understand: "looks towards Nirvāņa" or "sees in this doctrine."
168. Paramārtha adds a stanza here: The Buddha Bhagavat says to Pūrṇa, 'Strive to keep
this Dharma, for he who cultivates insight and conduct according to this Dharma will of
necessity obtain the five qualities'.
169. Vyākhyā: a. itikaraṇaḥ parisamāptyarthaḥ / pradarśanārtho vā // eṣāṁ buddhānāṁ
pravacanadharmatāṁ suvihitena hetor märgeṇa hetumärgeṇa śuddhāṁ niravadyāṁ
nisamya dṛṣṭvā // andhās tīrthyā yathābhūtadarśanavaikalyāt / kutsitā dṛṣṭiḥ kudṛṣṭiḥ /
tasyāś ceṣṭitāni kudṛṣṭiceṣṭititāni / vividhäni kudṛrsticeșțitāny eṣām iti vividhakudṛṣṭicești-
tāḥ/ svargāpagargahetāv apratipannā mithyāpratipannāś cety arthaḥ // tasmād
evaṁvidhānāṁ kapilolūkādīnāṁ mataṁ darśanam apavidhya tyaktvā yānti saṁsārān
nirvāṇam iti vākyādhyāhāraḥ / ke te sattvāḥ / prajñācakṣuṣmanta āryaśrāvakāḥ // atha vā
tām eva pravacanadharmatāṁ yānti pratipadyanta ity arthaḥ /
pravacanadharmatā punar atra nairātmyam buddhānuśāsaṇī vā // anya āhuḥ /
pravacanam sutrādidvādaśāngavacogatam/ tasya dharmatā svākhyātatā yuktyupetatvān nirvāṇapravaṇ-
ată ca nirvāṇadyotanat / yathoktam / sarva ime dharmā nirvāṇapravaṇāḥ nirvāṇaprāg-
bhārāḥ nirvāṇam evābhivadanto’bhivadantīti / anātmasaṁjñinaś ca nirvāṇe śāntasaṁjñāḥ
samtiṣṭhante ātmocchedāśaṁkāpagamād iti tad evam anandhā eva yānti nāndhāḥ / andhās
tu bhramanty eva saṁsārārņave nairātmyam apaśyantaḥ / tad darśayann āha imāṁ
hitivistaraḥ /1380 Chapter Nine
b. iyaṁ nirātmatā / nirvāṇam eva puraṁ nirvāṇapuram / tasyaikā vartanīti
nirvāṇapuraikamārgo nānyo mārga ity arthaḥ // tathāgata evadityo gambhiradharmāva-
kāśakatvād ädityabhūtas tathāgataḥ / tasya vacāṁsi / tāny evāṁśavaḥ / tair bhāsvatī
ālokavatī tathāgatādityavacoṁśubhāsvatī // āryāṇāṁ sahasrair vāhitety äryasahasravāhitā
// vivṛtā samitā // imāṁ nirvāṇapuraikavartanīm tathāgatādityavacomśubhāsvatīm
vivṛtām api nirātmatāṁ prajñācakṣuso viśadasyābhāvād avidyākośapaṭala-paryavanaddha-
netratvād vā mandacakṣus tīrthiko vātsīputrīyo vā nekṣate /
trayaś ceha mārgaguṇā varṇyante / tadyathaikāyanatā abhipretadeśaprāyaṇāt / sālokatā
yato niḥśanko gacchati / yātänuyātatā ca parimarditasthāṇukaṇtakāditvād yena sukham
gacchati / tatsādharmyeṇeyam nirātmatā vartanī draṣṭavyā // caturbhiś ca kāraṇair mārgo
na vidyate sa (- -) tamaskatayā / prakāfito'py adityena avāhitatayā / bahupuruṣavāhito'py
āvṛtatayā vivṛto'pi draştur mandacakṣuşkatayā / teṣām iḥaikam eva kāraṇam asya
mārgasyādarśana uktam / yato draṣṭrdoṣeṇaivāyaṁ mārgo na dṛśyate na mārgadoṣeṇeti yata
eşa mandacakṣur etāṁ na paśyatīty avagantavyam/
c. iti digmātram evedam iti sarvam iti yathoktam / dig eva digmātram / evakārārtho
matraśabdaḥ / dik pramāṇam asyeti digmātram iti vā / mahato'bhidharmaśāstrād alpam
idam upadişṭam / mayeti vākyafeṣaḥ // keşām / sumedhasām matimatām ity arthaḥ /
tādarthye şaşthì / kiṁvad ity āha / vraṇadeśe viṣasyeva svasāmarthyavisarpiņa iti / yathā
vişaṁ svasāmarthyad vraṇadeśam prāpya sarveșsv angapratyangeṣv abhyantarvisarpatīti
matvā kena cit tasya vraṇadeśaḥ kṛtaḥ kathaṁ nāmedaṁ visarpatīti / evaṁ sumedhasaḥ
svasāmarthyavisarpitvād viṣasthānīyā ity atas tesāṁ sumedhasām udghaṭitajñānāṁ
prājñānām idam upadiṣṭaṁ mayā katham alpena granthena mahad abhidharmaśāstram
kāśmīravaibhāṣikanītisiddham arthataḥ pratipadyerann iti // apare punar vyācakṣate
digmātram evedam itīdam eva nairātmyapratiṣedham adhikṛtyoktam iti / kāśmīravaibhā-
şikanītisiddhaḥ prāyo mayāyaṁ kathito'bhidharma ity (viii.40) anenaivärthasyābhihitatvād
iti.INDEX
(This Index contains references to items in the text of the Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam,
as well as to significant entries in the Footnotes.)
A
abandoning (prahāṇa), 111-3, 157, 173-4,
209-10, 213-4, 217, 220, 227, 235,
263, 273-4, 282-3, 285, 290, 702,
859, 964-5, 906, 937-8, 944-5, 951,
978, 981,983,985, 990, 992-4, 1006,
1015, 1020-1, 1023, 1028, 1037-9,
1094, 1112, 1125, 1146-7, 1219,
1233, 1237, 1258, 1273, 1329, 1331,
1348; abandoning of defilements,
772-6, 779, 783-4, 786-9, 792-5,
804-5, 820-6, 828, 836-40, 844-6,
853-6, 860-4, 866-7, 872n., 890-2n.,
895, 918, 929, 940, 950-1, 953-5,
957-8,962-4, 973-5, 992-3, 994-5,
1004-5, 1008-9, 1018, 1035-6, 1038-
40, 1087, 1097-8, 1150, 1252, 1268;
Path of Abandoning, 672-3, 705,
1021, 1268, 1273; see also Irresisti-
ble Path; Right Abandonings, see
samyakprahaaṇas.
Ābhāsvara, 237, 375-6, 470, 477-8.
abhāva, see non-existence
abhibhvayatanas (dominent ayatanas),
87-8, 320, 1148, 1275-9.
Abhidharma, 56-8, 99, 193-5, 207, 233,
243, 286, 391, 405, 410, 429, 577,
768-9, 772, 908-9, 1008-9, 1237,
1281-2, 1310-1n., 1335; Abhidharma
Treatise, 86.
Abhidharmakośa, 55-6
Ābhidhärmikas, 80, 118, 130, 195, 255,
299, 357, 425, 439, 474, 605-6, 774,
791, 902, 903, 915, 941, 922, 1100.
abhidhya, see greed
abhijñā (higher knowledge), 87, 300, 371,
392, 1332; result of higher knowl-
edge (abhijñāphala), 315-8
abhimana, 784-5.
Abhimokṣas, 1137.
abhinirvṛtti, see re-existence.
abhisamaya, see comprehension.
Absence of Contention; see Samādhi
Absence of contention.
absolute truth (paramarthasatya), 910-11,
1108.
absorption (samāpatti), 66, 93, 98, 103,
129, 165-6, 170-1, 176, 178-9, 181,
189-91, 222-33, 236-7, 267, 270, 276,
290, 298-9, 305-6, 310, 325, 367-9,
376-7, 447-8, 562-4, 641-2, 655,
665-6, 672, 691, 694, 705, 762n.,
771-2, 785, 800, 830, 852-3, 862,
913, 922, 925, 935-6 941-2, 969,
975-6, 981, 984, 989, 999-1001,
1006-8, 1011, 1016-20, 1022-3, 1028,
1102, 1116, 1137, 1146, 1149, 1151,
1160, 1168, 1172-3, 1215-82 passim;
faculty of absorption, 130, 135, 157,
159, 162, 167, 182; two absorptions,
206, 223, 228-30, 232-3, 235, 254,1382 Index
301-2, 305; see also Ārūpya Samā-
pattis, asaṁjñisa- māpattis, niro-
dbasamāpatti, samādbi, Vajropa-
masamadhi.
abstention (akaraṇaniyama), 566-7,
609, 638.
Ācārya, 309.
accumulation (aupacayika). 103-5, 253-
4, 289, 924.
action (karma), 68, 73, 91, 103-4, 116-8,
165, 169-70, 173, 189-91, 197,
229, 233-5, 237, 275-7, 283, 289,
308-9, 372-3, 394, 399-404, 406-7,
413-5, 417-9, 422, 437-8, 551-708
passim, 767, 804, 807, 811, 813-4,
818-9, 848, 909, 937, 942-3, 961,
964-5,971, 1010, 1025, 1113, 1148,
1176, 1180, 1217, 1223, 1225,
1280, 1331, 1334, 1340, 1342-3,
1346, 1349, 1351-3, 1355; bodily
action, 65, 68, 71, 92, 112-3, 214,
275, 309, 552, 559, 561, 564-5,
568-9, 571, 574-5, 589, 618, 634-5,
638-9, 643, 655, 658, 671, 694-6,
700, 703, 707, 942, 1162, 1241,
1352; mental action, 441,
552, 559, 571, 634-5, 638-9, 685-9,
707,942, 1163, 1352; vocal action,
65, 68, 71, 92, 112-3, 214, 275,
309, 552, 559, 561, 564-5, 568-9,
571-2, 574-5, 589, 618, 634-5,
638-9, 643, 653, 655, 658, 671,
681, 694-6, 700, 703, 707, 942-3,
1162, 1173-4, 1241, 1352; see also
avijñapti, mithyäkarmänta, Right
Action, vijñapti.
ādhārahetu (supporting cause), 309
adharma, 555, 650, 1352.
adhicitta śikṣa (higher mental learn-
ing), 1217.
adhicittam, 978, 984.
adhigama (holiness), 1281.
adhimāna, 784-6.
adhimokṣa; see aspiration, intention.
adhimukti, 335-6n., 918-9, 921, 1268;
see also approval, imagination.
adhipati, 263, 287, 303.
adhipatiphala (predominating result),
266, 279, 287-9, 291.
adhipatipratyaya (predominating
condition), 263, 296, 303, 305-6,
308.
ādhipatya (indirect predominance),
287.
adhiprajñām, 978, 984.
adhisilam, 978, 984.
adhisthana; see deeds.
adultery, 641, 644, 648, 664-5, 667, 787.
affection (preman), 87, 201-2, 835-6,
1113-4, 1146-7, 1338.
Āgamas (Traditions), 249, 996, 1281.
agent, 117-8, 256, 291, 578-80, 589,
591, 814, 1111, 1331, 1340, 1342-
3, 1351-2.
agradṛsti, 789
ahamkaravastu (idea of self), 916; see
also satkāyadṛṣṭi.
Airāvana, 787.
air, 922-3.
airyāpathika (mind), 169, 315-6, 318-9,
925; see also mind.
Ajätaśatru, 664.
Ājivika, 368-9
Ājīvikas, 816.
ājña, 163, 177, 184, 228.
ajñāsyāmi (pure organs), 183-4.
ājñāsyāmīndriya, 179, 182-4.
Ajñata, 592.
Ājñatakauṇḍinya, 592.
ājñātāvin, 163, 184.
ājñātāvindriya, 130, 157, 159, 162- 3,
177, 181-2, 184
Akanişthas, Heaven of, 366, 370, 467,
470-1, 967-9, 973, 975, 977, 979.
ākāra; see aspect.
akaranasamvara, 604ākāśa; see space
Ākāśānantyāyatana, 366, 471, 863,
1220, 1226, 1244, 1249, 1271.
Ākincanyāyatana, 178, 237, 322, 366,
471,954,987, 1017, 1220, 1224,
1226, 1249, 1251.
Akopyadharmans (Immovable Ones),
979, 991, 999-1003, 1007, 1011-
13, 1015-6, 1076-7n., 1132, 1149-
50, 1152, 1261.
akuśalamahābhūmikas, 189, 195, 198-
9, 850.
ālambaka, 304-5, 1117.
ālambana, see object.
ālambanapratighāta, 90.
alambanapratyaya (an object as condi-
tion), 279, 296, 302-5, 1321.
alcohol; see liquor.
ālokasaṁjñā, 851.
amaravitarka, 852.
Āmrapālī, 381.
Anabhisaṁskāraparinirvāyin, 966-7,
969-70.
Anabhrakas, 366, 469-70.
Anāgāmins, 178-80, 230, 331n., 386,
441-2, 628,731, 690, 973-81, 985,
987, 994-5, 999, 1015, 1019, 1091,
1131-2; types of Anāgāmins, 966-
81.
Anagamya, 178-80, 267, 321-2, 436,
585-6, 591, 716n., 792, 862-3, 936,
956, 981-2, 988-9, 1014, 1022,
1030, 1118, 1127, 1139, 1243,
1254, 1262, 1267-8, 1295-6n.
anājñātamājñāsyāmīndriya, 130, 157,
159, 162-3, 169, 171-2, 174, 177-8,
181.
Ananda, 402, 784, 904, 1335.
ānantaryamārga, see Irresistible Path.
ānāpānasmṛta, see breathing, mindful-
ness of.
anapatrāpya; see fear, absence of.
anāsrava, see Path, pure or transworldly.
Index 1383
anātman; see non-self.
Anavatapta, Lake, 456.
ancient Masters, 231.
androgynes, 171, 940.
Angārakarşüpama, 1009-10.
anger, 196, 198-9, 639, 659, 664-5,
667-9, 768, 772-4, 793-4, 798-9,
804-5, 837-8, 842-4, 849, 851-2,
961,964, 995, 1101, 1106, 1111,
1150.
animals, 256, 365, 371-2, 381, 386, 397,
451, 460, 472-3, 477-8, 634, 642-4,
668-9, 679, 681, 693, 798, 1130,
1337.
ānimittasamādhi, 1256-60.
Aniruddha, the Sthavira, 677-8
anityatā; see impermanence.
anivṛtāvyākṛtas; see dharmas, undefiled-
neutral.
aniyatas, 196-8
annihilation, 776-7, 782, 827, 1335,
1337.
antagrāhadṛṣṭi (belief in extremes),
197-8 673-4, 772-3, 776-7, 781-2,
790-1, 797-9, 827, 836, 838-9,
1005, 1109, 1334-7.
antaḥkalpas, 472.
Antara, Gods of, 387.
antarābhava (intermediate existence),
106-7, 154, 236, 310, 371-3, 375,
381, 383, 385-8, 390-1, 393-4, 399,
438-9, 441-2, 628-9, 959, 962, 966,
970-1, 974-5, 979-80, 1160, 1176.
antarakalpas, 471-2,m 475-9, 682.
Antaräparinirvāyins, 386-8, 442, 966,
969-74, 979-80, 999.
anulakṣaṇas, (secondary characteristics),
112, 239-41, 257-9, 261.
anumāna, see inference.
anupaśyanā, 927.
anuprāpti, (secondary possession), 112,
218.
anupūrvaka, 177-9, 868.1384 Index
Anurakṣaṇādharmans, 979, 1000, 1002-4.
anus, 158-60.
anufayas; see defilements.
anutpädajñāna; see Knowledge of non-
Arising.
anuvṛtti (supporting cause), 568.
anvayajñānakṣäntis; see Patiences of
Inferential Knowledge.
anyonyathātva (mutual difference),
808-9.
Aparāntakas, 598, 799.
apathy (middha), 196, 199.
apatrāpya; see fear.
Aparihāṇadharmans, 1007.
appearence (prabhava), 1113-4, 1259,
1343; aspect of appearence, 1110-
3, 1115.
application, 947.
application of mindfulness (smṛtyupa
sthāna); see also foundations of
mindfulness.
approval, 189-90; see also adhimukti.
apramada; see diligence.
Apramānābhas, 237, 366, 375, 470.
Apramānas; see immeasurables.
aprāpti (non-possession), 206-7, 210,
212, 215-20, 254, 662, 938.
apratisamkhyānirodha, 59-61, 134-5n.,
207, 21-3, 281, 575, 937, 1226,
12275.
aptitude; see prasrabdhi.
Ārāma, 918.
araṇasamātti, see samadhi Absence of
Contention.
arbuda (embryo), 262.
Arbuda (Hell), 459, 473.
Arhantis, 690.
Arhats, 75, 114, 162, 165-7, 177, 179,
181, 184, 207, 219, 227, 230-1,
244, 293-4, 297, 301, 310, 314,
322-5, 409, 411-2, 441-2, 446,
448-9, 455, 473, 484-5, 563, 596,
601-2, 615, 628, 631-2, 636, 638,
657, 675, 679, 685-7, 689-90, 699,
828, 867-8, 923, 954, 961, 963-4,
975-6, 979-81, 983, 985, 991, 998,
1006-13, 1015, 1034, 1076-7n.,
1090-1, 1124, 1134, 1136, 1149,
1165, 1176, 1249-50, 1261, 1335;
Path of Arhats, 961, 997, 1017;
types of Arhats, 999-1004.
arising, 60-1, 89, 109-111, 184-5, 188,
208-9, 218, 232, 252, 255-6, 258-
60, 263-6, 271-2, 278-9, 281-3,
288-9, 291, 294, 296-8, 300-1,
304-9, 383, 385, 410-1, 413-7, 442,
568-9, 616-8, 677-8, 767, 769, 771,
820, 854-5, 858-9, 898, 901, 912-3,
915-6, 924, 930, 932, 935, 938,
941-2, 944-8, 965, 967, 976, 981,
1010, 1018, 1036-7, 1113, 1126,
1134-5, 1153, 1226, 1239, 1257,
1259, 1268, 1324, 1330-1, 1341,
1346, 1353; arising of absorptions,
1244, 1246, 1248, 1261-2, 1280;
arising of conditioned dharmas,
238-50; arising of defilements,
826-8, 1247, 1275; arisung of minds,
310-23; arising of vijñapti and
avijñapti, 552-6, 568-9; aspect of
arising, 1110, 1112-3, 1115, 1258;
see also Arising, Truth of.
Arising, Truth of, 76, 201-2, 778-9,
793, 821-2, 825, 836, 853-4, 860,
865, 896, 898, 908, 946, 997, 1039,
1089-91, 1094, 1110-3, 1115, 1125,
1127, 1258.
arrogance, 204, 596-7.
arthābhijñā, 653.
Arthavargiya (stanza), 70.
Ārūpya Samāpattis, 1151, 1159, 1244,
1249-53, 1256, 1262, 1273, 1280;
see also Ārūpyas.
Ārūpyadhātu, 83, 93, 95, 106-7, 173,
176-7, 180-1, 183, 139, 202-3,
212-3, 215, 230, 234-7, 253, 256,Pengu
anal
268, 270, 276, 365-9, 373, 377,
388, 391, 401, 433-6, 442, 471,
495, 572, 591, 616, 618, 620, 622,
628, 635, 659-60, 665-6, 668-9,
771-2, 774-5, 790, 793, 797, 822-3,
825, 829-30, 840, 861-2, 867-8,
902, 924, 945, 961, 969-70, 973-5,
979-80, 987,999, 1015, 1090, 1096,
1107, 1118, 1121, 1151, 1160-1,
1219, 1221-6, 1241-2, 1245, 1247,
1252, 1271-3, 1275, 1277-80,
1284-5n.; description of Ārūpya-
dhātu, 366-8; types of mind in
Ārūpyadhātu,
Ārūpyaga (var. Ārūpyopaga), 969-70.
Ārūpyas, 87, 181, 267, 377, 388, 439,
572, 668, 793, 849, 863, 936, 956,
969, 981-2, 986-9, 1015, 1017,
1022, 1030, 1118, 1129, 1139,
1148, 1159, 1215, 1219-27, 1229,
1272-4, 1278, 1286-7n.; see also
Ārūpya Samāpattis.
ārūpyāyatanas, 88, 378.
Aryamārga; see Path of Seeing.
Āryans, 184, 207, 209-10, 216-7, 220,
224-6, 228-9, 273-4, 280, 284, 322,
331n., 377-8, 450-1, 466, 483, 585,
587-8, 591, 603-6, 611, 617, 621,
628, 634, 657, 668, 683, 696, 700,
708, 775, 783-4, 786-8, 865-8,
900-5, 915-6, 934, 937-8, 944, 968,
973-4, 984, 986-7, 1005, 1009,
1012, 1031-3, 1042n., 1113, 1123,
1149, 1156-8, 1162-3, 1221, 1243,
1251, 1254, 1274-5, 1279, 1281,
1325, 1343; Path of the Aryans,
216, 863, 957, 987; Truth of the
Āryans, 898, 901,1042n.; types of
Āryans, 1016-8.
Aryapudgalas, 164, 985.
Aśaikṣas, 114, 310-1, 314, 316-9, 325,
585, 983-4, 991, 1014, 1019, 1038-
9, 1130, 1133, 1243, 1259; quality
Index 1385
of aśaikṣs, 638,; aśaikṣa dharmas,
213, 675-6, 1003, 1013, 1017, 1020;
Asaikṣa Wisdoms, 1164-6; Path of
Aśaikṣas, 162-3, 268, 961, 997-8,
1003, 1013, 1017, 1020.
Asamayavimukta, 165, 167, 269, 1017,
1020, 1091, 1124, 1133, 1250.
āsaṁjnika (unconsciousness), 206, 221,
223-5, 228-9, 232-3, 254, 377, 1227.
asamjñisamāpatti (absorption of uncon
sciousness), 68, 222-30, 235-6,
275, 305, 377, 574, 678.
Asaṁjñisattvas (Unconscious Ones,
Unconscious Gods), 88, 221-4,
228-9, 232, 377-8, 620, 668, 679,
681, 924, 939.
Asamkhyeya Universe, 1178.
asamkhyeya kalpas, 479-80, 692-3,
755n., 1147.
asamprajanya, 194.
asamprakhyāna, 421.
asamskrtas; see dharmas, uncon
itioned.
asamvara (var. asamvarastha) (undis-
cipline), 580, 587, 590, 594-5.
afaya; see intention.
asceticism; clinging to asceticism, see
śīlavratapādāna; esteeming of
asceticism, see fīlavrataparāmarfa.
ascetics, 119, 161-3, 177-8, 223-4, 226,
229, 232, 310-1, 320-2, 397, 442,
562, 814, 817, 820, 865, 897, 913,
916, 918-20, 922-3, 928, 931-2,
936, 938, 940, 947-8, 952-6, 958-9,
981,985, 988-9, 991, 998, 1004,
1026, 1028, 1039-40, 1092-4, 1108,
1110, 1123-6, 1128-9, 1131-2,
1134-5, 1153, 1159-60, 1162, 1169--
70, 1175, 1193n., 1217, 1220, 1224,
1227-8, 1232, 1234, 1236, 1243-4,
1248-9, 1253, 1257, 1260, 1262-3,
1266-9, 1274-5, 1278, 1325, 1344-
5.1386 Index
Aśibandhaka, 692.
Asipattravana; see utsadas.
asmināna, 422, 784-6.
asmitā; see egotism.
aspect (ākāra), 206, 847-8, 902, 920,
922-3, 947, 981-2, 990, 996-7,
1091, 1096-7, 1098-9, 1143-4,
1257-60, 1264-6; sixteen aspects,
930-2, 951,993-4, 1021, 1098-1117;
aspects of the Four Truths, see
satyākārapravṛtta.
aspiration, 955, 1035.
āśraddhya; see disbelief.
āsravas; see cankerous influences.
aśraya; see support.
associated cause; see saṁprayuktahetu.
assurances (vaiśāradya), 1141-2.
aśubhā (loathsome things), 197, 320-1,
916-21,925, 941, 1264, 1271-2,
1275.
āsvādanasaṁprayuktadhyāna, 771.
Aśvajit, 199, 572, 846.
Aśvakarṇa, 452.
Asvalayanasütra, quoted, 386.
Aśvatara, 473.
Atapas, 366.
Aṭaṭa Hell, 459.
ātmabhāva, 910, 916.
ātmadṛṣṭi (idea of self), 789-90, 1005;
see also satkāyadṛṣṭi.
atman, 108, 197, 399, 416, 418-9, 781,
1004, 1113, 1333-4, 1336, 1342,
1344.
ātmātmiyagrāba, 777.
ātmatṛṣṇā, 789.
ātmavāda, 418-9.
āt mavādopādāna, 829, 832.
atmaviparyāsa (error with regard to
the self), 781.
atoms (paramāṇu), 65, 70-1, 79-80,
101, 120-4, 148-9n., 184-8, 191,
332-3n., 474, 491-3, 557-8, 687,
816, 911, 926.
attachment, 201, 241, 401-2, 404, 406-
9, 418-9, 635, 671, 768-72, 776,
863, 867, 910, 915, 929-30, 1005,
1272, 1349, 1353; attachment to
existence, see bhavarāga, attach-
ment to pleasure, see kāmarāgā
nuśaya; see also saṁyojanas,
wrapping of attachment.
attention, 189-90, 192-3, 922-3, 927-8,
1314; acts of attention, 320-3,
918-20, 928, 1320, 1324, 1339.
Aṭṭhakavagga, 70.
Atthasālini, 842.
auddhatya; see dissipation.
aupadhika punyakriyāvastus, 698.
Auttarakauravas, 469.
avarabhāgīyas, 861, 961, 965, 995; see
also cankerous influences.
Avaraccămaras, 455.
Avaragodānīya, 365, 455, 461, 469-70,
477-8, 490, 662.
āvaraṇapratighāta, 90-1.
āvaraṇas; see obstacles.
avarice, 835, 837, 842-3, 850.
avasthänyathātva (difference in condi-
tion), 808-9.
avetyaprasādas, 1031-4.
āveṇikadharmas, 603.
aversion, 835, 844, 849, 852.
Avici Hell, 365, 388, 456-7, 472, 682,
688, 834, 900.
avidhaugha, see views, flood of.
avidyā; see ignorance.
avidyāyoga; see ignorance, yoke of.
avijñapti (non-informative action), 63,
67-8, 70-4, 100, 112, 136-7n., 214,
252, 366, 552, 559-72 passim.,
575, 580, 583-5, 587-91, 613, 618,
638, 641, 643-4, 647, 652-3, 655,
666, 682, 686, 704, 802.
avinipatadharman, 961.
Avṛhas, 366, 977.
avyākṛtavastu (undefined points), 800.avyakşas, 691.
awareness, 1142-3, 1229-30, 1238.
Ayaḥśalmalivana; see utsadas.
Ayaścakravartin; see Cakravartins.
āyatanas; see organs.
ayogavihita (improper action), 677.
ayonisomanaskāra; see judgment, wrong.
ayuḥsamskāras; see vital energies.
ayus (life), 167, 233-6, 254.
B
Bahudhātuka, 88.
bālas; see powers.
bandhanas; see bonds.
beings; apparitional beings, 174-6, 214,
380-2,397, 1330; living beings,
65, 154, 158, 188, 207-9, 219-21,
253-4, 287-9, 607-12, 648, 680,
801, 842, 924, 1266-8, 1270, 1324,
1352; see also fictive beings, inter-
mediate beings.
Benares, Sermon of, 997.
Bhadanta, 78, 120, 140-1n., 565, 681,
1140.
Bhadrapada, 461.
Bhadravargas, 592.
bhajanaloka, 451.
Bhasyam, quoted, 1045-6n.
bhautikas; see elements, derived.
bhava; see existence.
Bhavāgra, 225, 227, 229, 236-7, 294,
305, 322, 366, 377-8, 380, 471,
628-9, 689, 775, 792, 834, 865,
900, 954, 956, 967, 969, 980-3,
985-8, 1013, 1031, 1036,1091,
1117, 1130-1, 1145, 1153, 1156,
1220, 1227, 1242, 1247, 1250-1,
1274.
Bhavagraparama, 960, 969, 973.
bhāvanā, see cultivation, meditation.
bhāvanāmārga, see path of Meditation.
Index 1387
bhāvanāmayī (wisdom of meditation),
912-13, 1122.
bbavanāpbala, 295.
bhavāṇagas, 407, 437.
bhāvānyathātva (difference in exis-
tence), 808.
bhavaraga (attachment to existence),
768-9, 771-2.
bhavāsrava; see existence, asrava of.
bhavatṛṣṇā (thirst for existence), 787-
8.
bhavaugha; see existence, flood of.
bhavayoga, see existence, yoke of.
bhikṣuṇīs, 562, 581, 584, 592, 652,
714-15n.
bhikṣus, 165-6, 168, 219, 228-9, 285,
368-9, 485, 562, 564, 581-4, 588,
592, 599, 600, 602-3, 608-9, 614-
16, 630-1, 655-6, 682-4, 714-15n.,
959, 961, 1010, 1035, 1218, 1331;
see also monks.
bhūmis, 126-9, 189, 223, 263-4, 267-8,
273, 366, 371, 429, 438-9, 447,
468, 571, 775, 792-3, 795-7, 849,
854,979, 988, 1091, 1117, 1127,
1261, 1280; see also spheres.
bhūtas; see elements.
bhūyovitarāga, 177-8, 956, 958, 985.
Bimbisärasutra, 1325.
birth (upapatti), 222, 248, 380-1, 383,
385, 394, 400-1,407, 412, 419, 442,
447-8, 465-6, 677-9, 691, 909, 924,
959, 966-7, 969-70, 973-4, 977,
1180, 1242-3, 1246, 1324, 1330-1;
a good mind acquired through
birth, 314-320.
Blessed one (bhagvat), 55-6, 58, 64, 70,
73, 87, 118, 158, 164-5, 168, 186,
216, 221, 226, 231, 233, 236-7,
241-2, 244, 247, 253, 286, 300,
379, 386, 394, 399, 405, 407, 409,
411-2, 415-7, 419, 429, 439, 441,
443, 450, 457, 464, 473, 485, 560,1388 Index
575, 578-9, 586, 592-4, 596, 599,
603, 606, 614-5, 621-2, 636, 645,
650-1, 654, 671-2, 678, 684-5, 688,
692-4, 698-9, 704, 772, 777, 782,
797, 802, 806-7, 813-4, 818, 829,
833, 838-40, 904, 907, 909-10,
915, 927-8, 973, 984, 995, 1006-7,
1018, 1033, 1099, 1140, 1143,
1147-8, 1218, 1225, 1237, 1239,
1263, 1280, 1321, 1323-4, 1327-
31, 1333, 1335-8; see also Buddha.
bliss, 976, 1006-7, 1011-2, 1074n.,
1115.
blood, 99, 381-2, 385, 395-6.
Bodhi, 191-2, 226-7, 321, 430, 480,483,
485, 597-8, 692, 694, 705, 941,
1023, 1036, 1087, 1281; see also
bodhipakṣikas, bodhyangas.
bodhipakṣikas (adjutants of Bodhi), 87,
1016, 1022-31, 1080-1n.
Bodhi Tree, 168.
Bodhisatta, 226-7, 236, 381-2, 390-1,
446, 455, 473, 480-1, 601, 689-94,
699-700, 817-8, 940, 1032, 1136,
1176, 1179-80, 1269; marks of the
Bodhisattva, 691-2, 706, 753-4n.
bodhyangas (parts of Bodhi), 1023-4,
1027-9, 1031, 1104, 1234.
body, 83, 85, 99, 101-2, 123, 126-9, 160,
166, 173, 191-3, 229, 231, 233,
235, 256, 372, 382, 444, 448-9,
491-4, 551-2, 559, 565-7, 571, 584,
638-41, 649-50, 804, 842, 908,
913, 918-9, 922-9, 977-8, 1025-6,
1119, 1136, 1147, 1159, 1162,
1168-9, 1221-2, 1226, 1232, 1234,
1240-1, 1270-1, 1276, 1318-9,
1331-3, 1343-4, 1346, 1349-51;
the body of the Bhuddha, 143-4n.,
1139-41, 1145.
bonds (bandhana), 767, 830, 835, 840,
906, 950, 953, 961, 965, 979-80,
994, 1017, 1034, 1146.
bones, 382, 918, 1174.
Brahma, 104, 165, 173, 374-5, 646,
790-1, 846, 995; see also brahma-
cakra, Brahmaloka.
brahmacakra (Wheel of Brahma), 995.
Brahmajälasūtra, 418, 776.
Brahmakāyikas, 237, 366, 374-5, 465,
470-1, 478, 968, 979.
Brahmaloka (world of Brahma), 106,
199, 366, 374-6, 468-9, 476-8, 570,
573.
Brāhmaṇas, 418, 691.
brāhmaṇya, 995.
Brahmapärisadyas, 471.
brāhmapuṇya (Brahmin merit), 706,
763n.
Brahmapurohirtas, 222, 237, 366, 470-
1, 478, 706, 980.
Brahmasutra, 485.
Brāhmins, 165, 386, 485, 488, 646,777,
1145, 1324-5, 1327.
breathing, 921-2, 924, 1239; mindful-
ness of breathing, 916-7, 921-5.
Bṛhatphalas, 222, 366,
Buddha, 55, 58, 66, 86, 143-4n., 216-7,
226, 229, 236-7, 269, 382, 388,
398, 455, 481-3, 495, 578, 592,
601-3, 631, 634, 651, 684-5, 700,
704, 941, 948-9, 961, 976, 993,
1011, 1016, 1031-3, 1093, 1125,
1137-49, 1151, 1154, 1157, 1162,
1166, 1168, 1173, 1177-8, 1200n.,
1323-8, 1332, 1334-5, 1345; see
also Blessed One, Buddhas.
Buddhadeva, Bhadanta, 100, 145., 809.
Buddhaghosa, 654.
Buddhas, 132n, 217, 236, 300, 370,
484-7,578-9, 601, 610-1, 684-5,
691-3, 940-1, 1015-6, 1269, 1282,
1328, 1334, 1338, 1355.
buddhi; see intelligence.
Buddhism, 819, 1313.
Buddhists, 491-4, 922, 1352.C
Caitra, 1340-2.
Caitraratha, 463.
caitta; see mental series.
Caityas, 696, 702-3.
Cakravāda, 452-4.
Cakravartins, 208, 236, 382, 394, 398,
473,484-7, 656-7, 698, 1140, 1176.
Cakravartisūtra, 208.
cakṣurabhijñā (supernormal seeing),
214.
cakṣurāyatana; see sight, organ of.
cakṣurdhātu, 76, 99.
cakṣurvijñānadhātu, 74.
calmness (famatha), 705, 852-3, 925,
978, 1021-2, 1103, 1151, 1218,
1227, 1229; aspects of calmness,
1111-2, 1114-6.
Câmaras, 455-6.
cankerous influences (äsravas), 829-31,
833-5, 861, 983, 991, 1009, 1134,
1143; destruction of the cankerous
influences, 1138-9, 1157-8, 1163-
7; see also avarabhāgiyas, Destruc-
tion of the Asravas.
Canura, 1140.
Căru, 381.
caste (jāti), 219, 404, 406,1145.
categories, 263-4, 270, 273, 290, 789-
20, 795, 824, 950, 956-7, 1117,
1121, 1156, 1226, 1255, 1269,
1318, 1320, 1345; categories of
Anāgāmins, 970, 972; categories
of Bhavagra, 981-3; categories of
defilements, 821, 835, 839, 855,
895, 953-6, 958, 962-5, 979-81,
985, 987,993, 995, 1036, 1097.
Cāturmahārājakāyikas, 365, 462, 465,
467, 469, 471-2, 476.
casuality, 257, 261, 779.
cause (hetu), 60-1, 81, 104-5, 247-8,
304-9, 406-7, 410-2, 416-7, 427,
Index 1389
552, 574-5, 660, 776, 778-9, 789,
797, 801, 811, 813, 859, 865-6,
896-7, 902-3, 907-10, 982, 1008-9,
1021, 1096-7, 1113-4, 1151, 1155,
1223, 1225, 1259-60, 1260, 1275,
1313-4, 1316, 1321, 1323-5, 1340-
6, 1350-3; aspects of cause, 1110,
1112-3, 1115; cause of defilements,
828, 1269; cause of destruction,
552-6; perfection of cause, 1146-8;
six causes, 254-96, 352-3n.
cause as condition; see hetupratyayatā.
certitude; see niyāma.
cetanā; see volition.
Cetanādharmans, 979, 1000-4.
cetanakarman, 559.
cetanakrta, 571.
cetayitva karman, 559.
chanda (desire for action), 104, 189-90,
419, 1113, 1352.
chandarāga, 282, 419, 833.
characteristics (lakṣaṇas), 112, 206,
254, 257-9, 275-6, 302, 305, 320,
782, 806, 808-10, 813, 837, 912-3,
925, 944, 947, 1089, 1093-4, 1098-
9, 1103, 1107, 1112, 1257, 1268,
1316, 1339; absence of character-
istics, see animittasamadhi; char-
acteristics of conditioned dharmas,
238-50; characteristics of results,
288-91.
cheating, 844, 846, 850.
chiliocosm, 468-9.
Cinq centes contes, 595.
cinta; see reflection.
cintamayi (wisdom of reflection), 912-
3, 1122.
citta; see mind.
cittadhātavaḥ, 92.
cittadhātus, 91.
cittaikāgratā, 1229, 1231.
cittasamanantara, 301.
cittaviparyasa (error of thought), 782-4.1390 Index
cittaviprayukta saṁskāras; see saṁskā
ras, cittaviprayukta.
clingings; see upādānas.
co-existent cause; see sahabhūhetu.
co-existent item; see sahabhū.
collision; see striking.
color (varṇa), 64-7, 69, 71, 86, 89,
99-100, 187, 256, 280, 427-8, 556-
8, 625, 697, 917-8, 920, 1159,
1175, 1178, 1264, 1315, 1318-21,
1332, 1347.
companions of the mind, 257-9.
compassion (karuṇā), 691, 693-5, 702,
1136, 1143-5, 1264-6, 1268, 1270;
absorption of compassion, see maitrī-
samāpatti; Meditation of Com-
passion, 695, 702, 1266.
comprehension (of the Truths), 227,
897-8, 943, 946-50, 996, 1031,
1033, 1057-8n., 1125-8, 1262-3.
concept (vikalpaviseşa), 171.
conception, 175-6, 234, 325.
conditioned things; see things, conditi-
oned.
conditions (pratyayas), 255, 279, 360-
1n., 414, 808-10, 1114, 1259, 1321,
1324, 1345-6, 1351, 1354; condi-
tions as aspect, 1110-4; four con-
ditions, 296-325.
conduct, 583, 590.
conjunction (samyoga), 1346-7.
connection, 926-7.
conciousness (vijñāna), 61, 63-7, 73-4,
76-80, 82-5, 88-9, 93, 95, 98, 100-
1, 113, 122-3, 125-9, 153, 156, 190,
192, 204-5, 231, 233-4, 279, 281-2,
284, 300, 372, 377-80, 397-9, 401-
2, 404, 406-7, 415-9, 422-3, 428-
30, 440-1, 444, 447-9, 586, 801-2,
807, 815-7, 821-5, 849, 909, 978,
991, 1026, 1122, 1151, 1222-3,
1225, 1230, 1240-1, 1277, 1321,
1323-5, 1328, 1342, 1344-5, 1347-8,
1350, 1352; bodily consciousness,
1240-1, 1275, 1318; five sense
conciousnesses (vijñānakāyas),
60, 71, 75, 79, 89, 95, 97, 112, 114,
124-5, 131, 156, 160-1, 191, 287,
315, 578, 633, 665-6, 805, 822,
849, 1088, 1231, 1240, 1257, 1313-
4, 1322; object of consciousness,
238, 241-2, 286, 302, 767, 818,
823; six consciousnesses, 74-5, 95,
107-8, 111, 114-8, 124-5, 129-30,
165, 847, 1318-9, 1322; see also
hearing consciousness of; mental
consciousness, sense consciousness,
smell, consciousness of; taste,
consciousness of, touch, conscious-
ness of; visual consciousness.
Consecutive Knowledge (anvayajñāna);
see Inferential Knowledge.
consequences (anubandha), 769.
contact (sparsa), 101, 111, 121-2, 169,
189-90, 195, 231, 401, 403-4, 406-
9, 423-6, 427-30, 440-1, 444, 624-
5, 697-8, 917-8, 928, 1232, 1264,
1323-4, 1347.
contentment, 914-5.
continents; see dvipas.
Conventional Knowledge (impure
know
ledge), 1088-9, 1091,1094-7, 1101,
1117, 1120-31, 1133, 1137-8, 1143,
1149-50, 1153, 1158.
conversation (prātihārya), 1166-7.
corruption (kaṣāya), 373, 482, 634-5.
cosmic ages; see kalpas.
cosmic periods (prathamakalpikas),
381-2, 394, 440, 1225.
craving (râga), 273, 369, 404, 419, 421,
488,770-1,917-8, 961, 1035, 1038,
1040, 1099-1100, 1105-6, 1111,
1150, 1264, 1275; see also desire;
kāmarāga, lust.
creation; see nirmāṇacitta, and nirmita.
crookedness (kauțilya), 634-5, 844, 846,850.
Cullavagga, 459.
cultivation (bhāvanā), 191, 328n., 705,
911-2, 921-2, 948, 977, 1002, 1013,
1016, 1025, 1102, 1104, 1116,
1128-30, 1131-6, 1146, 1156,
1161-2, 1194n., 1233, 1242-3, 1249,
1272, 1279-80; cultivation of
absorption, 1262-3, 1299n., culti-
vation of the immeasurables,
1268-70; types of cultivation,
1135-6; see also meditation.
D
dandas, 688-9.
Daridra, 1325.
darśanamārga, see path of seeing.
darśanātmika, 117.
Dārṣṭāntikas, 262, 563, 626, 639, 1140,
1232-5.
Daśāśaikṣadharmasamanvāgamasutra,
208.
Dasottara, quote from, 1008.
daurmanasya-vedanīya, 169.
death, 168, 176-7, 222, 235-7, 243,
347-8n., 382-3, 385, 391, 401, 404,
406-7,412, 438-9, 443, 447-50,
473, 613, 616, 617, 641, 800, 924,
937,992, 1012, 1246-7, 1257, 1335,
1353.
deception (māyā), 196, 199.
deeds (adhisthanas), 700-1, 704, 1324,
1351.
defilements (asravas), 55, 57-8, 60,
62-3, 82-3, 112-3, 133-4n., 154-5,
157-8, 163, 167-8, 177-80, 196-8,
200, 203, 209-11, 218, 227, 280-4,
290, 299, 320, 373, 375, 379, 387,
399-400, 402-3, 406-7, 420-1, 437-
9, 450, 589, 618-9, 629-31, 637,
639, 672-3, 678-80, 705, 707, 790,
872n., 892n., 895, 910, 918, 929,
Index 1391
938-40, 949, 953-8, 962-5, 971,
973-6, 979-81, 985-8; anusayas,
112, 372, 767-893 passim., 967,
974,981; klesas, 218, 375, 402,
406, 437-8, 704, 707-70, 776, 780,
787, 796, 804-6, 819, 828-9, 839,
841, 843-56, 858-61, 863-5; upa-
klesas, 198, 200, 218, 619, 704,
767, 769-70 830, 835, 841-51.
definitive release, aspect of, 930, 932,
1111-2, 1115-6.
Dehas, 455.
dejection, 847, 849.
deliverence (vimukti), 88, 158-9, 223-5,
229, 285-6, 573, 585, 672, 707-8,
771, 778, 780, 797, 839, 905, 915,
942-3, 979, 990, 992, 1000-1,
1006-8, 1011-2, 1016-8, 1034-8,
1102, 1109, 1116, 1142, 1147,
1158, 1224, 1258-9, 1338; see also
Path of Deliverence; nirodha-
vimokşa, vimokṣas.
delusion (moha, müdi), 798-800, 960,
964,994, 1100-1, 1105, 1111.
demons, 458, 663-4, 681.
dependence, 406, 409-10, 412.
depedent origination; see pratītya
samutpäda.
desire (trsnā), 88, 95, 101, 104, 175,
195, 274, 292, 401, 403-4, 407-9,
418-9, 421, 466, 645-6, 648, 770-4,
787, 789, 795-6, 799, 838, 843,
905-6, 908-10, 913-7, 929, 961,
983, 1005, 1025, 1028, 1035, 1113-
4, 1228, 1251, 1264-5, 1323, 1328-
9; absence of desire, 1272, 1277-8;
attachment to desire, see kāmarā-
gānuśaya; desire for action, see
chanda; desire for deliverence,
943; sensual desire (kāmacchanda),
657, 838, 851-2, 961, 1008-9, 1129,
1218; see also thirst.
destruction (nirodha), 258, 281, 570,1392 Index
860, 865,983, 992-3, 1038, 1087,
1135, 1141, 1352-3; destruction of
attachment, 863, 867; destruction
of defilements, 852, 858, 1251-2'
destruction of skandhas, 852, 1111;
destruction of the universe, 489-
91, 494-5; cause of destruction,
552-6; see also Knowledge of
Destruction.
Destruction of the Asravas, 1138-9,
1157-8, 1163-7.
detachment (vairāgya, vītarāga), 154,
180, 208, 226, 274, 283, 285, 293,
323, 325, 447, 630, 687-8, 776,
866-8, 903-4, 920, 922, 938, 954,
956, 974, 979-80, 985-6, 988-9,
1015, 1017, 1038-9, 1122-3, 1128-
34, 1145, 1156-7, 1161-2, 1171,
1193n., 1242-3, 1254, 1268, 1279.
Devadatta, 379, 664, 776, 1342-3, 1351.
Devakulamkula, 963.
devas, 386.
devotion, 702-3.
Dharmapada, qoted, 992.
Dharma, 57, 164, 166, 376, 483, 555,
600-2, 683, 688, 704, 706, 802,
931,973, 1031-3, 1145-7, 1162,
1352.
Dharma Knowledge (dharmajñāna),
792-3, 853, 864-5, 943-6, 982, 994,
1039-40, 1089-93, 1095-8, 1101,
1116-21, 1123, 1125, 1128-30,
1138, 1153, 1158, 1189n., 1245,
1252; Dharma Knowledge of
Extinction, 866, 946, 981, 1123,
1130; Dharma Knowledge of
Origin, 946, 1039; Dharma know-
ledge of suffering, 268, 271, 945,
1039, 1123; Dharma Knowlege of
the Path, 866, 946, 981, 1123,
1130.
dharmadhātu, 73-4, 76, 92, 91-2, 96, 98,
100, 104-5, 109, 113-4, 129, 131.
Dharmadinnā, 592.
Dharmaguptakas, 117, 614.
dharmajñānakṣāntis; see Patiences of
Dharma Knowledge.
dharmakaya, 1145-6.
dharmajñāna; see Dharma Knowledge.
Dharmānusārins, 269, 473, 952-6,
1016-8.
dharmapravicaya (investigation into
dharmas), 597-8, 1024, 1027.
dharmas, 56-61, 69-70, 73, 76, 80-1,
85-6, 89, 91, 96-7, 101-2, 105, 108,
112-4, 116-7, 125, 130, 133-4n.,
154-5, 158, 165, 167, 174, 185,
189-90, 193-5, 200, 202-4, 212-3,
216-7, 220, 255-9, 261-7, 269-83,
286, 288-91, 293-306, 308, 322,
366-7, 369, 372-4, 377, 379-80,
383, 385, 399-401, 404-6, 409-14,
416, 421-5, 427-9, 431, 434-7, 439,
443, 453, 474, 481, 554, 557-9,
561, 563, 565, 567, 569, 573-9,
589-90, 601-3, 616-7, 624, 636-7,
654-5, 672-6, 678, 680-1, 689,
707-8, 785, 787, 796-7, 802-3,
806-13, 815-7, 820-4, 834-6, 841,
851-3, 856,858, 896-7, 899-900,
904, 908, 910-1, 922-3, 925-7,
929-32, 934-5, 940, 943-4, 946-8,
952, 957, 977, 984, 990, 992, 1008-
9, 1012, 1016, 1023, 1027-8, 1031,
1038-9, 1042-3n., 1053n., 1109-
10, 1117, 1119-22, 1127, 1134,
1136, 1142-3, 1151, 1153, 1159,
1162, 1170, 1178, 1216-7, 1228,
1233, 1235-7, 1239, 1252, 1259,
1261, 1272, 1278, 1280-1, 1319,
1323-7, 1331, 1333, 1338; conditi-
oned dharmas, 58, 61-3, 73, 76, 78,
82, 184, 188, 208, 232, 238-50,
254-7, 277-8, 283, 286, 291, 302-4,
320, 410, 417, 806, 812, 813, 824,
899-901, 908, 925, 967, 1252,1257-8, 1273, 1318, 1320, 1324,
1330, 1344; unconditioned dhar-
mas, 59, 73-4, 78, 81-2, 88, 96,
112, 185, 207, 213, 249, 252, 278-
80, 283-4, 286, 302, 304, 811,
857-8, 967, 1252, 1318; undefiled-
neutral dharmas, 112, 215, 254,
288, 572-3, 577, 589; dharmas not
associated with the mind, 206-
254, 768-70; saṁskṛtas, 232, 241-
2, 1252, 1330; see also dharma-
pravicaya; Dharma Knowledge;
Supreme Worldly Dharmas.
Dharmaskandha, 86; quoted, 372.
dharmasabhāgatā, 219-20.
Dharmasaṁgraha, 87.
dharmasila, 641.
dharmaskandhas, 86-7.
Dharmasubhūti, Bhandanta, quoted
391, 458.
dharmatā (nature of things), 476, 961,
1280, 1807-8n.
Dharmatrāta, Bhadanta or Sthavira,
58, 78, 140-1n., 422, 808.
dharmayatana, 73-4, 81, 85-6, 88, 276-
7, 315, 561, 566, 1221, 1323.
Dharmila, 236.
dharmopavicāras, 431, 433-6.
dhātugata, 387-8.
Dhātupāṭha, 153.
dhātus (realms), 55-131 passim., 167,
186, 219-20, 607-8, 1037-8, 1325,
1327.
Dhātus, 314, 368-74, 387, 433-6, 439-
42, 447, 468, 475, 571, 771-2, 774,
787, 789-90, 793, 797, 832, 835,
851,895, 914, 963, 975, 988, 1002,
1107, 1112, 1121, 1137, 1143-4,
1222-3, 1276, 1279; see also
Ārūpyadhātu, Kāmadhātu, Rūpa-
dhātu.
dhyāna, 93, 119, 559, 563, 597, 688,
694,771, 1176, 1179; discipline of
Index
1393
dhyāna, 580-1, 585-8. 591, 607-8,
616-7, 620, 641, 666, 668, 695.
dhyānāntara, 96, 178, 267, 321, 623,
632, 792, 863, 920-1, 936, 981,
989, 1014, 1022, 1030, 1118, 1127,
1139, 1254-6, 1262, 1267, 1295-
6n.
dhyānāntarikā, 222.
Dhyānas, 83, 87, 96-7, 106-7, 126-7,
129, 160-1, 165-7, 178-82, 199,
203-4, 223-5, 229, 232, 267, 270-1,
290-1, 295, 300, 305, 321, 366,
369, 371, 374-7, 330, 388, 417-8,
429, 432, 434-6, 439, 446-8, 466,
468, 471, 476-7, 490, 494-5, 562,
568-9, 572-3, 585, 591, 620-4, 632,
637, 666, 668, 792-3, 797, 846,
849-50, 862-3, 896, 906-8, 920-1,
924, 936, 938, 941, 956, 966-9,
975-7, 979-82, 986-9, 1006, 1014-
5, 1017, 1021, 1029-30, 1116, 1118,
1127, 1129, 1133, 1137-9, 1144,
1148-51, 1154, 1156, 1159-64,
1170-3, 1175-7, 1193n., 1215-20,
1222, 1224-5, 1227, 1229-42 pas-
sim., 1245, 1249-50, 1252-3, 1256,
1262-3, 1267-9, 1271-2, 1275,
1278, 1288-9n.; see also absorp-
tion; dhyāna.
Diamond Throne, 445.
difference (viseșa), 221, 785.
Digha, 87, 423, 468, 804; quoted, 402.
diligence (apramāda), 191, 194-5.
Dīpa (Dīpaṁkara), 693.
Dirgha, qoted, 376, 803-4; references
to, 461, 487, 548n.
disbelief (āśraddya), 193-5, 847.
discrenment, 56-8, 116-8, 129, 130,
155, 157, 159, 162, 182, 189-90,
193, 662, 1094, 1116; see also
Prajna.
disciplies, 685, 915, 1142, 1336.
discipline (saṁvara), 105, 154, 260,1394 Index
276, 567, 570, 580, 580-620 pas-
sim., 641, 585-6, 661, 665-6, 668-
9,972, 978-9, 1119, 1221, 1249;
discipline of fasting, 593-601; two
disciplines 257-8, 260, 309; see
also Prātimokṣa Discipline.
disconnection (visamyoga), 278-80,
290, 821, 858-9, 863, 865, 896,
949-50, 978,986-8, 995-6; see also
Nirvāṇa; pratisamkhyānirodha;
visamyoga.
discontent, 913-4.
discourse (vākya), 61-2, 250, 652, 655-6.
discriimination; see prajñā.
disgust, 855, 943, 973, 976, 999, 1038-9,
1260.
disjunction, 59-60; disjunction from
defilements, 177, 179; see also
pratisaṁkhyānirodha, visaṁyoga.
disobedience, 605-8.
displacement, 553, 556, 1168-9.
displeasure, 130, 155, 157, 192, 847,
1143; organ of displeasure, 181-2.
disrespect, 195, 199-201, 842-3, 845,
847, 850.
dissatisfaction (arati), 130, 155, 161,
163-4, 168-74, 199, 632-3, 847-50,
914, 1237, 1239, 1264; organ of
dissatisfaction, 181-3.
dissipation (auddhatya), 193-5, 330,
340, 842-3, 845-7, 850-3, 961.
distraction (vikṣepa), 194-5, 922, 1102,
1233.
Divya (Divyāvadana), 604, 698, 932.
dosas, 450.
doubt (vicikitsā), 198, 768-9, 772-4,
780, 788, 792, 799, 804, 818, 826,
832, 835, 838-9, 843, 848, 851-3,
948-50, 994, 1087.
dravya; see substance.
dravyadharama, 207, 232.
dravyapramāņu; see monad.
dread (udvega), 1258-9.
dreams, 851.
dṛṣṭasatyasūtra, 600.
drsti; see views.
dṛṣṭikaṣāya, 373.
dṛṣṭiparamaría (esteeming of bad or
wrong views), 198, 773, 776, 778,
781, 788-9, 793-4, 827, 836-9, 844,
1109.
Dṛṣṭiprāptas, 269, 473, 954-5, 1001,
1013, 1016-7, 1019, 1091, 1250.
drstiviparyāsa (error of views), 782-4.
drstiyoga; see views, yoke of.
dṛstiyogha; see views, flood of.
dṛṣṭyupādāna; see views, clinging to.
dṛṣṭyuttaradhyāyin (absorption of wrong
views), 800.
duḥkha, see suffering.
duḥkhaduḥkhatā, 899-900.
duḥkhe dharmajñāna (Dharma Know
ledge of Suffering; see Dharma
Knowledge.
duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti; see Pat
iences of Dharma Knowledge of
Suffering.
duration (sthiti), 188, 236-46, 248,
258-9, 1257; absorption of dura-
tion, 1242, 1247-8; cause of dura-
tion, see sthitihetu.
duration-modification; see sthityanaya-
thatva.
dūrībhāva-pratipakşa; see removal.
dvipas (continents), 167, 365, 452-5,
459, 468-70, 484, 486, 531n., 593,
662, 680, 684, 936, 943, 963, 966,
1018, 1150, 1249, 1261; see also
Avaragodānīya, Jambudvipa,
Pūrvavideha, Uttarakuru.
Dvisāhasra Universe, 1177-8.
E
earth, 68-9, 88, 99, 101, 411-2, 450,
495, 909, 1277, 1347-8.ear, 74, 123, 277, 1163, 1175,
1177, 1240-1, 1318-9; see also
hearing, organ of.
East, 370, 857.
effort, 192, 210, 226, 269-71, 938,
965-7, 1026, 1101, 1128, 1135,
1156, 1161-2, 1254-5, 1260, 1275,
1352; good mind acquired through
efforts, 314-20.
eggs, 175, 236, 397-8, 620, 939, 1330.
egotism (māna, asmitā), 787-8, 793-4,
798-9, 804, 832, 848.
ekadeśakārin, 599-600.
ekapadas, 216.
Ekavicika, 963-5.
Ekottara, quoted 103, 300; cited, 1148.
Ekottarāgama, quoted, 561.
Ekottarikā, quoted, 168.
elements, 63-4, 88-9, 257, 260, 450,
1315, 1352; deried elements, 187,
308-9; primary elements, 65-71,
84, 99-101, 104, 166, 185-8, 199,
232, 244, 257, 261-3, 276, 308-9,
395-6, 427-8, 440-1, 444-5, 566-
73, 575, 577, 633-4, 857, 923,
1925, 1141, 1177, 1221, 1332.
eloquence, 707; Unhindered Knowledge
of Eloquence, 1151-2.
embryo, 395, 400, 628, 686,; embryonic
being, 924; embryonic existence,
262.
empowerment, 1173-5, 1211n.
emptiness (śünyatā), 197, 248, 929-30,
1259, 1325, 1334; absorption of
emptiness (sünyatāsamadhi),
1256-9; aspect of emptiness, 1108,
1110-1, 1113, 1115, 1257-9.
energy, 130, 191-3, 694, 1023-8, 1035.
enjoyment, 1008, 1011, 1227-8, 1251,
1254-5.
enmity, 196, 844.
entities; see substantial entities.
envy, 835, 837, 842-3, 849.
Index 1395
equality, 1143-4.
equanimity (upekṣā), 161-2, 164, 169-
70, 173-5, 177-182, 192-3, 1229-
30, 1233, 1238-40, 1253-5, 1264-6,
1270; see also indifference.
erroneous attribution; see samāropa.
error, 80, 87, 193, 408, 420, 781-4, 839,
929, 1105, 1165, 1266.
esteeming, 835-6, 844; see also dṛṣți-
parāmarśa, parāmarśa saṁyogana,
śīlavrataparāmarśa.
eternity, 776-7, 780, 788, 827, 1335; see
also permanence.
eunuchs, 154, 619-20, 630, 662, 630-1,
940.
evolution, 242-3, 1115, 1353-4.
examination, 1025, 1087.
excellence; aspects of excellence, 1111-
2, 1115-6, 1260; excellence of
compassion, 1143-4.
exertions, 1022-6, 1028.
existence (bhava), 57, 63, 73, 75, 83,
157, 230, 234, 236-7, 262, 280-3,
307, 366-8, 372, 383-4, 386, 391,
401, 403-4, 406-7, 415-6, 419,
438-9, 441-4, 448, 574, 585, 625-
32, 670, 678, 767, 808, 817, 836,
881n., 900-1, 905, 909-11, 915-6,
920, 938,941-2, 959-61, 968-71,
973-4, 977,979, 1012, 1106, 1112,
1115, 1151, 1160, 1215-6, 1219,
1224-5, 1239-40, 1251, 1254, 1280,
1314, 1342, 1353; ásrava existence,
829-31; existence of time periods,
806-19; flood of existence, 829-32;
yoke of existence, 829-32; see also
bhavaraga; bhavatṛṣṇā.
explanation, Unhindered Knowledge
of Explanation, 1151-5.
extinction (nirodha), 59-60, 157, 207-8,
225, 231, 248, 284-5, 290-1, 792,
857, 901, 930, 934, 947-8, 977,
1018, 1111, 1120, 1137, 1252,1396 Index
1257, 1260, 1262-3, 1275; aspect
of extinction, 1111-2, 1114, 1116,
1260; knowledge of Extinction;
see Knowledge of Destruction;
sphere of extinction, see nirod-
hadhātu; see also apratisamkhyão
niroha; nirodhasamapatti
(Absorption of Extinction); nirodha-
vimokşa (Deliverence of Extinc-
tion); pratisamkhyānirodha; see
also Extinction, Truth of.
Extinction, Truth of, 201-2, 792-3,
822-5, 853-4, 860, 896, 898, 915,
934, 946, 967, 1039, 1089-91, 1094,
1098, 1111-2, 1114-6, 1125, 1127,
1257.
extremes, belief in; see antagrähadṛṣṭi.
evil, 799, 844, 849.
eye (cakṣur), 64, 78, 85-6, 90, 111, 118,
156, 256, 275, 277, 372, 419, 422,
424, 811, 814, 816, 909, 1163,
1175, 1177, 1240-1, 1318-9, 1321,
1323-4; eye dbātu, see cal survijnàng
dhātu; divine eye; see sight, divine;
see also sight, organ of.
F
factors (sambhāra), 1143-5.
faculties (indriyas), 130, 153-325 pas-
sim., 617, 848-50, 859, 952-6, 962,
964, 974, 976-7, 979-80, 982, 987,
989, 1001-4, 1007-8, 1010, 1013-7,
1019-20, 1022-4, 1026-8, 1091,
1130-2, 1137, 1232, 1237-8, 1243,
1313-4; moral or pure faculties,
80, 130, 157-60, 163-5, 171, 177-9,
181-4, 282, 952, 962-3, 965, 971,
1137; see also individual faculties,
i.e., happiness, sensation, satisfac-
tion, etc.
faith (fraddhā), 130, 155, 157-9, 162,
169, 171-4, 177, 181-3, 187, 191,
201-2, 589, 613, 618, 629, 642,
697, 955, 977, 1000, 1016, 1023-4,
1026-8, 1032-3, 1147-8, 1167,
1229-31, 1236-8, 1325; types of
faith, see avetyaprasādas.
falling away, 616-7, 627-8, 767, 829,
867-8,931-2, 935, 937-8, 951, 974,
976, 979, 991, 995, 1000-14, 1018,
1027, 1073n., 1076-7n., 1116, 1146,
1234, 1262; absorption of falling,
1242, 1247-8.
fasting, 593-601, 613, 617-8.
father, 686-7, 698, 700-1, 1264.
faults, 1239, 1270.
fear (apatrāpya), 191, 193, 619-20,
633-4, 704-5, 976; absence of fear
(anapatrāpya), 195, 199-201, 615-
6, 842-3, 845, 847, 850, 1136,
1142.
feet, 158-60.
fictive beings, 270-1.
fictive creative; see nirmita and nirmāṇa-
citta.
fields, 698, 703; fields of actions, 700-1;
fields of qualities, 629-30.
fire, 64, 68-9, 88, 99, 101-2, 186, 450,
477, 490-1, 494-5, 1277, 1315-7,
1339, 1343-4.
floods (oghas), 829, 831-5.
fluidity, 99-100.
"followers of the last place", 264-5.
following, 922-3.
food, 87, 93, 103, 153, 155, 199, 235,
256, 393, 438-47, 597, 851, 908,
915, 928, 1224, 1226, 1324.
fools; see Prthagjanas.
force, 155, 157, 159, 162, 182, 1030.
Foreigners (Foreign Masters), 198,
227, 1109.
foundation (vastu), 406-7.
foundations of mindfulness (smṛtyu-
pasthānas), 211, 704, 896, 921,
923, 925-35, 1016, 1022-6, 1028,1119, 1127, 1136, 1142-3, 1162-3.
Four Noble Truths; see Truths, Four
Noble.
frivolity, 1102, 1104.
fruition, 103-5, 1011-2.
friuits, 154, 177, 1352-4.
G
Gandhāra, Masters of; see Westerners.
Gāndhāri Wisdom, 1167.
Gandharvas, 154, 386, 393, 395, 440,
442.
generating cause; see jananahetu.
genre, genus; see sabhāgāta.
ghana, 262.
Ghoşaka, 166, 231, 687, 809, 862, 936,
996.
ghrāṇavijñānadhātu, 74.
gifts, 165, 167, 696-700, 702-3, 706,
797-8.
Gangā, 456. Gangila, 236.
Garbhāvakrāntisūtra, 101.
Garudas, 381-2.
gatis; see Rebirth, Realms of.
Gatisútra, 972.
Gautama, 485; see also Blessed One; Gṛhapatiratnas, 1176.
Buddha; Sakyamuni.
Gautamagotra, 1145.
giving (dana), 165, 693-703, 705-6,
797-8, 842.
God, 306-8.
Godānīya; see Avaragodānīya.
Godhike, 1007-8.
gods, 66, 154, 175, 222, 236-7, 365,
371-2, 374-6, 381, 387, 450, 462-
72, 476, 478, 487, 495, 551, 610,
619-20, 634, 662, 668, 671, 688,
691, 800, 922, 936, 943, 959-60,
963-4, 973, 996, 1174-6, 1180,
1224, 1261, 1337.
gold, sphere of, 452-5, 478.
good, 183, 616-7, 706-7, 767, 769, 1228,
1244, 1262-3; absolute good, see
samyaktvaniyāma; good minds,
314-8; see also roots.
Good Law (saddharma), 56, 382, 388,
600, 614, 616, 1167, 1281-2, 1308-
10n., 1333.
goodwill (maitri), 1264-9, see also
meditation of goodwill, mind of
goodwill.
Index 1397
gosava (a ritual), 646, 736-7n.
gotras (families, clans), 934, 940-1,
979-80, 982, 1001, 1003-4, 1010,
1015, 1017, 1124-5, 1145, 1159,
1324, 1329, 1344.
Grammarians, 413-4, 1351.
greed (abhidhya), 146, 211, 639, 643-4,
646, 648, 657-9, 664-5, 667-9, 669,
799, 850, 1101.
Grhapatis, 691.
growth cause (upabṛmhaṇahetu), 309.
guardians of hell (narakapāla), 458-9;
see also demons, Yamarakṣasas.
guņas; see qualities.
Hahva, 459.
hair, 99, 411-2.
hands, 158-60.
H
happiness (sukha), 60, 158, 161, 204,
432, 782-3, 847-8, 850, 901, 921,
929, 956, 976, 1116, 1218-9, 1229-
33, 1235, 1237-40, 1253, 1262,
1266, 1269, 1324; faculty of happ-
iness (sukhendriya), 160-1, 1229,
1231-2, 1237; see also sensation,
agreeable.
harm (vihimsā), 1264.
Hastipadopamasūtra, 411-2.
hatred, 87, 635, 645-8, 669, 671, 827-8,
832, 840, 843, 847, 1005, 1035,
1106-7, 1143-4, 1149, 1265.1398 Index
Heads (mürdhan); see Summits.
health, 450-1, 1033.
hearing, 63-4, 125, 129, 155, 210, 269-
70, 302, 321, 926, 936, 942, 999,
1025, 1160; consciousness of hear-
ing (auditory consciousness), 67,
98, 115, 128-9, 302, 653, 1163,
1177, 1240-1, 1314, 1318-9, 1322;
divine hearing, 1133, 1157, 1160-
4, 1176-8; organ of hearing, 76-7,
83-5, 88, 118-20, 122-3, 126, 128,
130, 153, 180-1, 287, 1322; see
also ear.
heat (uşma), 99-100, 186, 923, 930,
933-5,939-40, 1026, 1316-7; aspects
of heat, 930-1.
heaven, 106-7, 222, 365-6, 375, 386-7,
477-8, 705-6, 900, 963, 968-9, 979,
999, 1018, 1160.
hell, 236, 256-7, 307, 365, 371-3, 377,
381, 386, 388-9, 397, 445, 456-60,
472-3, 476-8, 627, 634, 637, 663-4,
666-70, 679-80, 689, 900, 943,
1179, 1337; see also guardians of
hell.
hermaphrodites, 619-20.
hermaphroditism, 613, 617.
hetu, see cause.
hetupratyayatā ( cause as a condition),
296-7, 304-6, 308.
hetusamutthāna, 576.
Himavat (Himālayas), 456.
hinderances; see obstacles.
honors, 917-8.
hostility, 192, 198-9, 844, 849, 1264.
householders, 236, 604-5, 961.
Hsüan-tsang, 1221, 1242-3.
Huhuva, 459.
humans, 220-1, 228, 230, 237, 365,
371-2, 374, 381, 386-7, 466, 469-
70, 476, 478, 487-9, 610, 619-20,
628-9, 634, 662, 668, 671, 680-1,
688, 691, 698, 801, 920-1, 936,
943, 959-60, 963-4, 966, 1014,
1122, 1150, 1179-80, 1249, 1261,
1270, 1279, 1330, 1337.
hunger, 66, 187, 445.
hypocrisy (śāṭhya), 196, 199, 635, 837,
842-3, 850.
I
ideas (saṁjñā), 61, 72-4, 81-3, 86, 101,
106, 184, 189, 195, 220-1, 230-1,
250, 298, 372, 378-9, 422, 782-4,
802, 804, 902, 1101, 1119, 1222-3,
1225-8, 1235, 1273-4, 1324, 1326,
1339-40, 1342, 1345, 1349-50.
idleness (kausidva), 193-5, 847.
ignorance (avidyā, moha), 55,158, 193-
6, 198, 200, 231, 241, 401-2, 404,
406-9, 411-13, 415-7, 419-22, 425,
512n., 577, 645-6, 648, 669, 671,
768, 772-4, 788, 792, 797, 799-
800, 804, 826, 829-33, 835, 837,
840, 843, 845, 847, 850, 909, 1005,
1023, 1035, 1105-6, 1139, 1144,
1164-6, 1337; asrava of ignorance,
829-31; flood of ignorance, 829,
832; yoke of ignornace, 829.
İkşaṇikā Wisdom, 1167.
Īkṣaṇikaśāstra, 1179.
ill-will (vyāpadā), 1264-8.
imagination, 320,922, 1352; see also
vitarka.
Immeasurables (Apramāṇas), 87, 320,
1133-4, 1148, 1263-71, 1320n.
immorality, 572, 590, 614, 703-5, 857.
immovability, 1129-32.
Immovable ones; see Akopyadharmans.
Impenetrability, 90-1.
Impermanance, 188, 238-42, 245-6,
259, 279, 783, 787, 902, 904-5,
920, 929; aspects of immperman-
ence, 930, 933, 1110-2, 1115,
1257-9.indifference (upekṣā), 83, 130, 155,
157, 162, 171, 176-8, 181-2, 417-8,
434-6, 447-8, 768, 830, 848-50,
921,989, 1008, 1023-4, 1142-3,
1230, 1323; see also equanimity.
indolence, 1101, 1104.
Indra, 787, 1110.
indriyas; see faculties.
indriyasaṁcāra (perfection of faculties),
130, 617, 859, 1243.
inference (anumāna), 284, 300, 1151,
1313-4.
Inferential Knowledge (anvayajñāna,
pure knowledge), 1088-92, 1094-
8, 1101, 1118, 1120-1, 1123-4,
1128-30, 1134, 1138, 1153, 1158,
1245, 1252; Inferential Know-
ledges, 793, 853, 861, 864-5, 945,
982, 994, 1275; inferential Know-
ledge of Arising, 866, 946, 981,
1124, 1127; Inferential Knowledge
of Extinction, 866, 946, 982, 1124,
1127; Inferential Knowledge of
Suffering, 945-6, 950, 981, 1124,
1127; Inferential Knowledge of
the Path, 867-8, 946, 951, 954-5,
959, 982, 1125, 1128-9.
Injitasutra, 622.
insight (vipaśyanā), 705, 853, 925, 947,
989, 1021-2, 1094, 1103, 1218;
insight comprehension, 947-8,
1355.
intellectuals, 682-3.
intelligence, 220, 694, 943, 997, 1021-2,
1031, 1094, 1347; see also prajñā.
intention, 566, 611-2, 617, 619-20, 630,
662, 667, 688, 700, 703, 1016,
1038, 1168-9, 1266, 1269; absorp-
tion of the absence of intention
(apraṇihitasamadhi), 1256-60.
intermediary (madhyastha), 588-90.
intermediate beings, 383, 385-8, 388-9,
390-4, 396-7, 440, 442, 628-9,
Index 1399
1178, 1222, 1330.
Irresistable Path (ānantaryamärga),
177, 179, 227, 278, 585-6, 855,
944, 949-50, 957, 976, 981,983,
988-90, 992-3, 996, 1013-5, 1020-
1, 1107, 1129, 1131, 1133, 1164,
1220, 1252, 1273.
İşādhāra, 370, 452, 454.
Iśvara, 778-9, 789, 1005, 1115.
I-tsing, quoted, 595.
J
Jambudvipa, 365, 446, 453, 455-6,
459-61, 467, 469-70, 476, 478,
490, 662, 684, 691, 1139.
janakapratyaya (generating condition),
815.
jananahetu (generating cause), 309.
janapadavitarka, 852.
janmahetu (cause of arising), 309.
jarā; see old age.
Jatakas, 698.
jāti; see caste.
jealousy, 196.
jewels, 452-3.
jihvāvijñānadhātu, 74.
Jivaka, 236.
jivitas, 167-8, 233; jivita samskāras,
167; jīvita skandhas, 168; see also
ayus.
jivitendriya; see vital organ.
jñāna; see knowledge.
jñānaparijñā, 859.
Jñānaprasthāna, quoted, 165-7, 179,
193, 207, 215-6, 223, 228, 235,
243, 262-6, 275, 278, 286, 623-4,
643-4, 768, 779, 1036, 1094, 1101,
1109; reference to, 219, 255, 280,
772, 774, 783, 785-6, 956, 1060n.,
1094-5, 1243; defined, 56-7, 133n.
jñātivitarka, 852.
joy (priti), 80, 161, 192, 204, 1023-4,1400 Index
1030, 1104, 1142-3, 1218-9, 1224,
1229-31, 1233, 1235, 1237-9, 1253,
1264-7, 1270-1.
judgement, 114, 195, 948, 1268; incor-
rect judgement, 194, 408-9, 767,
828, 909, 1009.
K
kāla; see time.
Kalala, 262, 395-6, 400, 628-9.
Kalāsūtra, 365, 457, 472.
Kalinga, King of, 1332-3.
kalpas (cosmic ages), 83, 168, 175,
470-3, 475-80, 483, 485, 487, 489-
90, 495, 682, 688, 691-2, 694, 706.
Kāma (a god), 468.
kāmacchanda; see desire, sensual.
Kāmadhātu, 83, 93, 96-7, 106-7, 126-7,
129, 161, 172-3, 175-6, 178, 180,
182-5, 187, 191, 196-9, 202-3, 209,
212, 213-5, 220, 222, 228, 231,
235-6, 253, 268, 270, 275, 290,
297-9, 365-6, 368-71, 374, 377,
391, 393, 401, 417-8, 429, 432-6,
439-40, 442, 446, 448, 465-6, 469-
72, 476, 478, 483, 488, 559, 568-
73, 579-81, 607, 620-4, 627-8,
634-8, 642, 655, 657, 659-60, 667-
8, 690, 696, 771-6, 790, 792-3,
797-8, 822-4, 829, 832, 835, 837-8,
845-8, 851, 853, 860-4, 866, 868,
909, 914, 918, 920-1, 932-3, 936,
943, 945-6, 950, 953-6, 960, 962,
965, 967, 973-6, 985-6, 988, 996,
998-9, 1002, 1015, 1017-9, 1031,
1089, 1092, 1095, 1097, 1107,
1109, 1117-8, 1121-2, 1125, 1127-
9,1132-3, 1139, 1145, 1150, 1153-
6, 1159, 1162, 1169, 1171, 1173,
1177, 1222-4, 1234, 1238, 1242,
1251-2, 1262, 1264, 1267-8, 1272,
1278; description of Kāmadhātu,
365-71; types of minds in
Kāmadhātu, 310-25.
kāmādhyavasāna, 833.
kāmagṛddha, 833.
kāmaguņas, 175, 771.
kāmamithyācāra (sexual misconduct),
603-4.
kāmamürchā, 833.
kämanandi, 833.
kāmaniyanti, 833.
kāmaparigardha, 833.
kāmaprema, 833.
kāmarāga, 768-71, 833, 1264.
kāmarāgānufaya (attachment to desire),
81, 768-71, 783-4.
kāmas, 368-9, 418-9, 833, 860.
Kāmas, 174-5.
kāmāsrava, 829, 831.
kāmaugha, 829, 831-2.
kāmavītarāga, 956, 958, 985.
kāmayoga, 829, 831-3.
kāmopādāna, 829, 823-3.
kāmecchā, 833.
Kaṇabhuj, 491.
Kapotamalini, 381.
kāraṇahetu (reason for existence),
255-7, 277-80, 287, 292, 297, 303-
4, 309.
Kārikās (quoted again in the Bhāṣyam),
177, 183-4, 188, 190, 200, 277,
291, 302, 384, 403, 462, 552, 560,
623, 632-3, 656-7, 689, 801, 963,
1117, 1163.
karma; see action.
Karma (a rākṣasa), 378.
karmabhava, 372-3, 386.
karmakleśa, 367.
karmapatha, 847, 564, 584, 657-8.
karmaphala (knowledge of retribution),
1137, 1142.
karmavācanas, 647.
karmāvarṇa (obstacle of action), 678-80.
Karoţapāṇis, 462; see also terraces.
1
įKaśmir, Masters of, 236, 1094, 1108-9;
Vaibhāşikas of Kaśmir, 109, 118,
120, 227, 259, 273, 600, 614, 799,
830, 1136, 1282, 1310-1n.
Kāśmīrians, 366, 372, 598, 614-6.
Kāśyapa the Great, 1174.
Kāśyapagotra, 1145.
Kāśyapiyas, 960.
kathāvastus, 62.
Kātyāyāniputra, 58.
Kathavatthu, 229, 236.
kaukṛtya; see regret.
Kauṇḍinya, 996, 998.
Kauravas, 455.
Kāyasākṣins (bodily witnesses), 977-8,
1016, 1019.
kāyavijñāna; see touch, consciousness
of.
kāyavijñānadhātu, 74.
kāyāyatana; see touch, organ of.
Khadirka, 452.
khalabila, 707.
killing, 582-3, 585, 598-9, 610-2, 641-5,
647-51, 658, 664-5, 667-71, 681,
685-7, 689-90, 701, 703, 734-5n.,
738n., 787-8, 802; see also murder.
kings, 208, 487-9, 645-6, 656-7.
kleśāvasthā, 402.
kleśakaṣāya, 373.
klefamahābhūmikas, 189, 193-5, 198,
847,851, 1104.
kleśamalas, 841, 843-5, 846.
kleśas; see difilements.
kleśāvarṇa (obstacle of the defilements),
678-80.
knowledge (jñāna), 775, 778, 862, 864,
913, 945-6, 949-52, 993-4, 997,
1017, 1023, 1034, 1036, 1039,
1087-1181 passim., 1181n., 1215,
1246, 1262, 1274, 1300n., 1321,
1328, 1330, 1332, 1345; Knowl-
edge of the Truths, 1128-30; ten
knowledges, 1095-7, 1117-36; vidyā,
Index 1401
419, 425, 577; see also abhijñās;
Conventional Knowledge; Infer-
ential Knowledge; parijñā; Right
Knowledge; Supernormal Know-
ledges; Unhindered Knowledges.
Knowledge of Death and Rebirth,
1138-9, 1157, 1163-5.
Knowledge of Destruction (kşayajñāna),
163, 226-7, 301, 665-6, 923, 941,
983, 999, 1023, 1027, 1036, 1087,
1090-1, 1093-7, 1107-8, 1118,
1120-1, 1131-4, 1136, 1138, 1153,
1157, 1243.
Knowledge of Dharmas; see dharma
jñāna.
Knowledge of Extinction, 1088,
1090, 1094-8, 1118-20, 1123-4,
1137-8, 1153.
Knowledge of Former Abodes, 1138-9,
1157, 1159-61, 1163-5, 1178-80.
Knowledge of Non-Arising (anutpāda
jñāna), 163, 268, 281-2, 295, 601,
665-6, 897, 923, 941, 991, 999,
1023, 1027, 1036, 1087, 1090-1,
1093-7, 1107-8, 1118, 1120-1,
1124, 1132-3, 1135, 1138, 1153.
Knowledge of Origin, 1090, 1095-8,
1118, 1120-1.
Knowledge of Suffering, 1090, 1095-8,
1118-21, 1123.
Knowledge of the Mind of Another
(paracittajñāna), 230, 1091-3,
1095-9, 1105, 1107, 1118-22, 1124,
1129-31, 1133-4, 1157-9, 1161,
1166, 1178-9.
Knowledge of the Path, 1090, 1095-9,
1101, 1118-21, 1123, 1137, 1158.
Knowledge Resulting from Resolution,
1148, 1150-1, 1155, 1157.
Krakucchanda, 388.
Krīdāpradūşika gods, 236.
Krīdāpramoşakas, 465.
Kṛṣigrāmaka, 446.1402 Index
kṛtsnāyatanas (All-Encompassing Ãya-
tanas), 87-8, 320, 1148, 1277-80,
1306-7n.
kṣānti; see patience.
Kşatriyas, 386, 488, 691, 1145.
kṣayajñāna; see Knowledge of Destruc-
tion.
Kṣudrakāgama, 70, 1325.
Ksudravastuka, 841.
Kṣuramārga, 457; see also utsadas.
Kukūla, 457; see also utsadas.
kulamkula, 962-3, 965.
kumāra, 262.
Kumāra, 236.
Kumāralābha, Bhadanta, quoted, 91-2.
Kuņupa, 457; see also utsadas.
Kuru; see Uttarakuru.
Kurus, 455, 470, 619, 684, 668, 679,
939, 943; see also Uttarakuru.
kusalamahābhūmikas, 189-90, 194,
197, 202, 1239.
kuśalasāsravas, 112, 289, 577.
Kuvera, 787.
L
lakṣaṇānyathātva (difference in charac-
terisics), 808-9.
lakṣaṇas; see characteristics.
langour, 842-3, 845-6, 850-3.
Law, 693, 700, 1334.
laziness, 199, 487-9, 1100, 1103-4.
leaving, aspect of, 1260.
legalists, 644-5.
libertation; see deliverence.
life, 206, 233, 1222-3, 1226, 1276; see
also ayus; jivitas.
lifespan, 470, 472-3, 478-9, 482, 489,
670-1, 1324; life span of the Bud-
dhas, 1145.
light, 1177, 1318, 1320.
liquor, 582-3, 596, 605-7, 908.
loathesome things; see aśubhā.
Logicians, 261.
lokadhātus; see universe.
lokasaṁvṛtijñāna (worldly knowledge),
775, 911.
lotus (arbuda), 262, 459.
lust (rāga), 196-8, 201, 273, 792-3,
798-9, 804-5, 827-8, 832, 835,
840-1, 843-4, 847, 964, 994, 1140;
see also craving.
lying, 582-3, 641, 644, 646, 648, 652-3,
655-6, 664, 667, 669, 679, 681-2,
688, 701, 787; see also transgres-
sions, vocal.
M
mada; see pride-intoxication.
madhya, 262.
Madhyadeśa, 592.
Madhyama (Madhyamāgama), quoted,
374, 376, 432, 523n., 625, 663,
699, 803-4, 927, 1050n., 992, 1028.
Madhyamagama, 207, 227.
Madhyamakavritti, quoted, 900, 1043n.,
references to, 295.
magic, 369-70, 468, 1339, 1347; magi-
cal beings, 371.
mahābhūmi (great sphere), 189.
mahābhūmikas, 189-90, 193-5, 197-9,
258-9, 334n., 429, 1217.
mahābhūtas, 185, 257.
Mahābrahmā, 199, 375, 472, 572, 847,
968, 1256; gods of, (Mahābrah-
mas, Mahābramanas), 222, 237,
366, 470, 472, 940, 968.
Mahādeva, 306.
mahākalpas (great kalpas), 471-2, 475,
479-80, 483.
Mahākarmavibhāgasūtra, 776.
Mahākāśyapa, 592.
mahākleśabhumi, 193.
mahakleśadharmas, 193.
Mahanagna, 1140.Mahānāmasutra, 598-600.
Mahānidänaparyāyasūtra, 402.
Mahāpadma, 459.
Mahaprajāpatī, 592.
Mahāpuruṣa; see marks.
Mahārājikas, 462; see also terraces.
Mahāraurava, 365, 457, 472.
Mahāsāṁghikas, 803, 1328.
Mahāsaṁmata, Rāja, 488.
Mahāśünyatāsūtra, 636.
Mahāvyutpatti, 645, 842, 1034.
Maheśvara, 778.
Mahiśāsakas, 464, 491.
maintaining cause; see upastambhahetu.
Maitreya, 1174, 1335.
maitrīsamāpatti (absorption of com-
passion), 631.
Majjhima, quoted, 386, 506n., referen-
ces to 573-4, 640.
Mālādharas, 462.
malas; see kleśamalas.
māna; see pride.
mana-āyatana; see mental organ.
Manaḥpradūṣika gods, 236.
manasamcetanā (mental volition), 440,
443-4.
manas (mind, mental organ), 72, 74-5,
140n., 204, 272, 276, 301-2, 423,
426-7, 431-2, 442, 449, 552, 559,
578, 683, 805,807, 846, 850, 1232,
1240, 1326, 1330, 1346-7; see also
mental organ, mind.
manascitta (mental thought), 632.
manaskāras; see attention, acts of.
mānātimāna, 784-6.
mānavidhā, 785.
Māndhātar, 381, 1176.
manodhātu, 74-5, 96, 105, 108, 140n.
manomaya (mind-created), 411-2.
manopavicāra, 431-3.
Manoratha, 458, 514n.
mānottaradhyāyin (absorption of pride),
800.
Index 1403
manovijñāna; see mental consciousness.
manovijñānadhātu, 74, 96, 105.
mantras, 1176, 1179.
Manu, 1324.
Manuşyakulamkula, 963.
Mara, 165, 168, 388, 1325.
marks, 960, 1147, 1257; marks of a
Bodhisattva, 690-2, 706, 753-4n.;
marks of a Mahāpuruṣa, 94, 104,
244, 487; marks of Muni, 487.
Marus, 694.
mass (amūrta), 569.
Master, 57, 199, 600, 602, 615, 683,
703, 1011, 1168, 1173, 1177, 1281-
2, 1336, 1338; see also Blessed
One, Buddha.
Masters of the West, 226, 295.
mata, 653-5.
material beings, 367.
mati; see prajñā.
matricide, 679, 685-6, 689.
matter, 60-1, 63, 68, 81-6, 89, 91-3, 95,
99-101, 185-8, 231, 1320-1; derived
matter, 259-61; primary matter,
99-101; secondary matter, 99-101;
see also rūpa.
Maudgalyāyana, 381.
mauladhyānas (principal absorptions),
862.
malārūpyas, 863.
māyā; see deception.
mayanā, 422.
meditation (bhāvanā), 60, 111-2, 173-
4, 195, 209-10, 213, 263, 270, 295,
322, 328n., 372, 576-9, 619, 631,
638, 661, 676, 694-5, 702, 705,
773-6, 783-4, 786-9, 795, 822-4,
845-7, 854, 861, 866, 895, 911-3,
916, 926, 942, 951, 953-5, 958,
962,993, 1004-5, 1016, 1025, 1028,
1129-30, 1132-3, 1150, 1175-7,
1179-80, 1269, 1275, 1330, 1344;
meditation of compassion, 695,1404 Index
702, 1266, 1270; meditation of
equanimity, 1266; meditation of
goodwill, 1266, 1269; meditation
of joy, 1266, 1270; meditation of
the Truths; see Truths, medita-
tion on; see also Meditation, path
of.
Meditation, Path of, 111, 162-3, 196,
213, 268, 820-1, 862, 864-5, 867,
895, 923, 948, 951-2, 959, 985,
994,997-8, 1017, 1020, 1026-9,
1039, 1088, 1097-8, 1107, 1125-6,
1128-9.
memory, 97-8, 130, 155, 157, 159, 162,
182, 189-90, 194-5, 321, 633, 770,
815-6, 1339-42, 1348-50, 1352; memory
of last lives, see Knowledge of
Former Abodes.
mental consciousness (manovijñāna),
74, 78, 89, 95-7, 98, 105, 109-10,
112, 114, 116, 124-6, 129, 156,
190, 196, 231, 256-7, 272, 302-3,
305, 315, 425, 427, 558, 578, 632-
4, 653, 665-6, 805, 807, 815-6, 846,
849, 1088, 1240, 1313-4, 1318-9,
1323, 1326.
mental organs, 72, 74-6, 83-5, 88, 95-6,
104-5, 108, 110-3, 118-9, 122, 124,
130, 154, 156, 158-9, 162, 164,
168, 170-8, 180-3, 231, 272, 276,
425, 427,815, 1322-3, 1326, 1346-7.
mental series (caittas), 101, 184, 367,
383, 563-5, 567, 579, 631-2, 767,
834-5, 1279, 1339, 1345.
mental states, 72, 78, 81, 90-1, 99, 101,
106, 124, 153, 160, 184, 188-206,
221, 223, 225, 230, 240, 247, 257,
261, 272-3, 275-6, 294, 296-7,
301-2, 304-6, 310, 333-4n., 367,
379, 563, 569, 574, 783, 805, 841,
946-50, 1097, 1099, 1107, 1116-7,
1143, 1162, 1215, 1235, 1237,
1273, 1319, 1327, 1331, 1346.
mental trouble, 632-4, 1339.
merit, 650-1, 563, 631, 692, 694-5, 698,
702-3,706-7, 756n., 1144-6, 1148-
9, 1264, 1352; Brahmin merit
(brāhmapuṇya), 706, 763n.
Meru, Mt., 393, 452-5, 460, 462-3,
467-9, 477-8.
middha; see apathy.
mind (citta), 67-8, 72, 74, 78, 83, 89-91,
96-101, 104, 108, 154-5, 157-8,
165, 169, 174, 176, 184-5, 188-90,
192-3, 195-206, 214, 221, 223-5,
227, 230-2, 240, 243-4, 247, 251,
253, 257-9, 261, 270-3, 275-6,
285-6, 290-1, 294, 296-306, 367-
70, 372, 379, 423, 444, 448, 559,
569, 573, 575-6, 578-80, 583, 585-
6, 590, 609-12, 633-4, 638-40,
664-6, 681-2, 699, 705, 768-70,
784-6, 795, 825, 833, 841-2, 852,
856, 913, 921-6, 929, 961, 979,
1009, 1025, 1028, 1033, 1035-7,
1085n., 1097, 1099-1107, 1109,
1116-7, 1121, 1134, 1139, 1147-8,
1156, 1159-62, 1166-8, 1170-5,
1215-9, 1225-6, 1129-31, 1233,
1239, 1247, 1266-7, 1269, 1273-4,
1319, 1325-7, 1331, 1339-40, 1344,
1346, 1350-1, 1353-4; deliverence
of the mind, 1000, 1006, 1008,
1011, 1026, 1035-7; types of mind,
310-25; see also mental conscious-
ness, mental organ.
mindfulness (smṛti), 586, 596-7, 704,
916, 921,927, 1005, 1009, 1012,
1023-4, 1026, 1142-3, 1229-30,
1235, 1238; see also breathing,
mindfulness of; foundations of
mindfulness.
Miśra, 463.
mithyadhimokṣa; see wrong resolution.
mithyādṛṣṭi, see wrong views.
mithyājīva; see wrong livelihood.mithyākarmānta; see wrong action.
mithyāmāna; see wrong thought.
mithyāvāc; see wrong speech.
moha; see error.
mokṣa, 585; see also deliverence.
mokṣabhāgiyas, 451, 707, 764., 939,
942-3.
molecules, 185, 187-8.
moments, sixteen, 865-6, 950-2, 954-5,
959, 975-6, 993, 996, 1010, 1093,
1123-9, 1132.
monad (dravyaparamāņu), 70, 185; see
also atoms.
monks (bhikṣus), 165, 309, 614-6, 647,
651, 684, 777, 852-3, 1327, 1331-
2; see also bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs.
moon, 64, 460-2, 468-9.
morality (fila), 87, 228, 572, 581, 583-
6, 596, 612, 614, 641, 668, 693-5,
697, 703-5, 778-9, 947, 984, 1023-
5, 1030-3; see also śīlavrataparā-
marśa, šīlavratopādāna.
mortal transgression; see transgressions,
anantarya.
mother, 236, 698-701, 1264; moth of
the Buddha, 390-1; killing of one's
mother, 686, 689.
motion (samjñāna), 99-9100, 189.
Mountain of Perfume (Gandhamädana),
456.
mountains, 452-4, 456, 462.
movement, 552-3, 556, 819.
mover, 578-80.
mucus, 99, 412.
mūḍi; see delusion.
Mūla Abhidharma, 194-5.
müladharma, 218, 240, 259.
müladhyāna, 1171.
mūlaprāpti, 218.
Mülaśāstra; see Jñänaprasthāna.
Muni, 86, 226-7, 487, 578, 638, 1282.
murder, 564-5, 582-3, 611, 629, 641,
644, 648-51, 658, 665, 670, 679,
681, 685-7, 689, 738n.; see aslo
killing.
mūrdhān; see Summits.
Index 1405
N
vāgra.
Nāgas, 381-2, 437-8, 473, 579, 620,
688,787, 1175.
Nāgasena, 1332-3.
naivaśaikṣanāśaikṣas, 213.
Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatna; see Bha-
Naivasaṁjñānâsaṁjñāyatanopagas, 88.
naivasamvaranāsaṁvara, 580.
nāmakāya, 206, 250, 255, 648; see also
năman.
nāman (name, word), 250-4, 418, 422-
3, 648,912, 1152-4, 1222-3.
nămarūpas, 211, 401-2, 404, 406-7,
418-9, 422-3, 648, 928.
nānāvasa, 647, 737n.
Nanda, 475.
Nandana, 463.
Nandikasūtra, 606.
Nārāyaṇa, 1139-40, 1147.
nasaṁjñānāpyasamjñākah; see Neither-
Ideas-Nor-Absence-of-Ideas.
nature, 605-8.
negation, 659-60, 776, 848.
Neither-Ideas-Nor-Absence-of-Ideas,
1226-7.
Netrīpadaśāstra, quoted, 226.
nikāyas; see categories.
nikāyasabbāga, 154, 219, 234, 281, 615,
649, 937; see also existence.
nikāyasabhāgacitta (homogeneous exis-
tence), 243.
Nimindhara, Mt., 452, 454.
nimittakāraṇa (instrumental cause),
491.
nirantaratva, 120.
Nirarbuda, 459, 473.
Nirgranthas, 418, 650.1406 Index
Nirgranthaśrävaka, 1335.
nivrta, 572, 589.
nirmāṇacitta, 270-1, 291, 295, 311, 315, nivṛtāvyākṛtas, 113, 293, 299, 573.
323-5, 1170-2, 1175, 1241.
niyāma (certitude), 944, 956, 1053n.,
Nirmāṇaratis, 365, 465-6, 469.
nirmita (fictive creation), 1168-70,
1172-5; see also fictive beings,
nirmāṇacitta.
nirodha; see extinction.
nirodhadhātu (sphere of extinction),
1038.
nirodhasamāpatti (absorption of ex
tinction), 68, 223, 225-31, 235,
276, 299, 305, 377, 574, 629, 631,
977-9, 1016, 1018-9, 1273-4.
nirodhavimokṣa (Delivernce of Extinc-
tion), 1279.
nirupadhiśeșanirvāṇa, 157.
nirūpaṇāvikalpa, 97.
Nirvāṇa, 57, 59, 62, 86, 92, 157, 159,
225-6, 228, 236, 256-7, 280, 282-3,
285, 294, 297, 322, 370, 382, 386-
8, 391, 410, 442, 448, 450-1, 573,
601-2, 610-1, 631, 651, 699, 704-8,
795-6, 815, 898, 901, 939, 943,
958, 960-3, 965-70. 974, 978-9,
984, 999, 1004, 1008-9, 1021,
1062n., 1112-2, 1115, 1138, 1142,
1148, 1153, 1257-8, 1262, 1335-6,
1354-5; Nirvāṇa with remnant
(sopadhifesanirvāṇa), 966, 1062n.,
Nirvāṇa without remnant (niru-
padhiseșanirvāṇa), 966, 1021.
nirvedhabhāgīyas, 321-2, 446-7, 482,
935-42, 1026, 1052-3n., 1133, 1242,
1247-8.
niṣkramaṇacitta (mind of leaving),
319, 322.
niśrayahetu (tutlelage cause), 309.
niśrayas, 647.
nişyanda; see outflowing.
nişyandaphala (outflowing result), 258,
267, 287-8, 289, 292, 944, 993,
1354.
nīvaraņas; see obstacles.
1055-6n.
niyāmāvakrānti, 220, 224, 324.
non-anger (adveşa), 802.
non-arising (anutpāda), 281-2, 897,
991, 1087, 1135; see also Knowl-
edge of Non-Arising.
non-Ãryans, 214, 898, 937, 1010.
non-Buddhists, 399, 416, 445-7,491,
584-5, 656, 776, 779, 922, 961,
1314, 1338, 1345.
non-causality (ahetuvāda), 416.
Non-Conscious Ones; see Asaṁjñi-
sattvas.
non-consciousness; see āsaṁjñika.
non-desire, 197, 914-5, 920, 1228.
non-detachment, 1128.
non-exixtence (vibhava), 283, 285, 817,
916.
non-greed, (alobha), 802.
non-ignorance (amoha), 802.
non-diligence, 847.
non-observation (asamprajanya), 194.
non-possession; see aprāpti.
non-self, 781, 929-30, 947, 1122, 1259;
aspects of non-self, 1108, 1257-8.
non-separation, 120-1.
non-violence, 191, 193.
non-wisdom (avidyā); see ignorance.
nose, 74, 88, 94, 277, 1318-9; see smell,
organ of.
no-soul, aspects of 1110-1, 1113, 1115.
not-self; see non-self.
O
object, 60, 63-4, 72, 74-5, 84-5, 91, 112,
114-6, 124, 130, 155-6, 190, 192-3,
197, 205-6, 231, 251, 256, 265-6,
272, 302-3, 305, 315, 423-4, 428-
31, 572, 618, 625, 648, 655, 672,697-8, 768, 774, 787, 807, 815-6,
818, 820-1, 824, 826, 834-5, 840,
852, 856, 912, 916, 921, 967, 982,
1026, 1028, 1032, 1038, 1100,
1105, 1116-7, 1143-4, 1146-7,
1150, 1159, 1170-1, 1177, 1222,
1226, 1229-31, 1233, 1264, 1275-
6, 1278, 1313-5, 1321-2, 1324,
1328, 1339-40, 1343-4, 1349-50;
object of aśubha, 917-20; object of
consciousness, 98-100, 105, 107-
11, 238, 241-2, 286, 302, 767,
815-7, 823, 825; object of absorp-
tion, 1215-7, 1219, 1251-3, 1257-
60; object of defilements, 776,
789-90, 792-7, 804-6, 828, 853-4,
866, 1004-5; object of Deliveren-
ces, 1272, 1274-5, 1277; object of
desire, 175, 466, 910; object of
enjoyment, 235, 551, 648, 1228;
object of the Immeasurables,
1265-8; objects of the foundations
of mindfulness, 926-31, 934, 1162;
object of knowledge, 945, 1089-
92, 1096-7, 1099, 1119-22, 1128,
1139, 1150, 1152-3, 1159; object
of organs, 119-22, 125-6, 1322-3;
object of memory, 1339-41; object
of paths, 990, 996, 1021; object of
the Patiences, 943, 950; object of
pleasure, 829, 831-2, 903, 905,
907, 1103; Unhindered Knowledge
of Objects, 1151-4; see also ālam-
banapratyaya.
object as condition; see ālambana-
pratyaya.
observing, 922-3, 925.
obstacles (nīvaraṇas), 192, 226, 255-6,
278-80, 282, 287, 305, 678-81,
811, 834, 839, 851-2, 915-6, 921,
939, 962,964, 1006, 1020, 1036-7,
1129, 1139, 1146, 1273, 1355.
obtaining, aspects of 111-2, 1115.
Index
1407
ocean, 454, 857, 918; Great Ocean,
459-60, 477.
odors, 60,3-4, 66, 84, 92-5, 99-100,
129, 185, 187-8, 267-7, 302, 315,
370, 393, 396, 440, 654-5, 697-8,
1169-70, 1175.
oghas; see floods.
old age, 188, 238-43, 245-6, 248, 259,
401, 404, 406-7, 412, 443, 992.
Omniscient One (the Buddha), 1328,
1345.
opposition, 854-5, 857-9, 861, 914, 929,
1096-8, 1115-6, 1264-8, 1272,
1354.
organism, 569-70.
organs (āyatanas), 60, 63-5, 67, 72-80,
82-8, 90-1, 93-5, 99, 100, 102,
106-7, 109-12, 123-30, 158, 163-5,
176, 180-8, 190, 205, 219, 231,
276-7, 287, 303, 315, 366, 395-6,
401-4, 406-7, 418, 423-4, 432,
440-1, 444-5, 492-3, 556, 561, 563,
586, 607-8, 613, 816, 819, 1136,
1162-3, 1169-70, 1175-7, 1221,
1244, 1257, 1277, 1314, 1324-5,
1327, 1343, 1350, 1352; female
organ, 130, 143n., 173, 180, 182,
184; five organs, 92, 100-1, 104,
113, 153, 155-6, 160, 170, 174-6,
181, 184, 191, 906, 1313-4, 1322-
3; male organ, 130, 143n., 173,
180, 182, 184; objects of organs,
119-22, 125, 625, 650, 655, 662,
691; sense organs, 153, 160, 284,
847, 914, 1170; seven material
organs, 168, 171, 173, 1221, 1314;
sexual organs, 94-5, 154, 156,
158-60, 164, 170-4, 182, 184; six
organs, 83-5, 95, 101, 103, 107-8,
155-6, 158-60, 266, 834, 1322,
1352; see also abhibhvāyatanas;
hearing, organ of; kṛtsnäyatanas;
mental organ; sight, organ of;1408 Index
smell, organ of; taste, organ of;
touch, organ of; vital organ.
Origin, Truth of; see Arising, Truth of.
outflowing (nisyanda), 103-5, 253-4,
258, 260, 266-7, 287, 289, 294,
569-70, 843-4, 924, 944, 965, 1108,
1151; see also nişyandaphala.
P
pada; see phrases.
padakaya, 250, 253.
padārtha, 221.
Padma, 459.
pain, 160-3, 173, 1111, 1349.
Pañcala, King of, 381.
pandakas, 619.
Panini, quoted, 913; references to 658,
949.
paracittajñāna, see Knowledge of the
Mind of Another.
pārājika, 616.
parallel cause; see sabhāgahetu.
paramaiśvarya (supreme authority),
153.
paramarthasatya; see absolute truth.
paramaņu; see atoms.
parāmarśa-samyojana (attachment to
esteeming), 835-6.
Paramartha, quoted, 1045-6n.
Paramarthasünyatāsūtra, quoted, 814,
1331.
paramāvasthāvädin; see followers of
the last place.
päramitās, 693-4.
Paranirmitavaśavartins, 365, 465-6,
469, 472, 476, 478.
paravijñapana, 592.
Parihāṇadharmans, 979, 1000-4, 1007,
1015, 1017.
parihāṇi (loss through falling), 938-9.
Pārijāta, 463.
Pārijātaka, 463-4.
parijnā (perfect knowledge), 859-68,
895.
parijñāna (perfect consciousness), 320.
pariņāma; see transformation.
pariņāmaduḥkhatā, 899.
pariņāma-višeșa, 211.
Parinirvăña, 422, 685, 707, 1281.
Paripṛcchā, quoted, 231.
paripūrin, 401.
parish (sīmā), 684-5.
Parīttābhas, 237, 366, 375, 469-71.
parittaklefabhumikas, 189, 196.
parityāga, 650, 738n.
Parivrājakas, 418.
parks, 463-4.
Pāruşya, 463.
paryavasthānas; see wrappings of att-
achment.
past lives; see Knowledge of Former
Abodes.
Pāśupātas, 418.
Paśyin (Buddha), 693; see also
Vipaśyin.
pataniyas, 613-5; see also trangressions.
Path, impure or worldly, 187-80, 210-1,
227,863-4, 953-5, 965, 984-6, 990,
994-5, 1003, 1014, 1020, 1123,
1125, 1130, 1134; pure or trans-
wordly path, 177,-80, 216, 227,
660, 775, 863, 895, 961, 985-7,
989-90, 992, 994, 1003, 1014, 1020,
1031, 1130, 1134; Path of Absorp-
tion in the Truths, 184; Path of
Dharma Knowledge, 1040; Path
of the Saints, 211; path as aspect,
1111-2, 1115, 1258; see also 895-
1040 passim.; Irresistible Path;
Meditation, Path of; Path, Truth
of the; prayogamārga; Seeing,
Path of.
Path, Noble Eightfold; see Path, Truth
of the.
Path of Deliverance (vimuktimārga),
177, 179, 227, 855, 859, 944, 949-50, 957, 976, 983, 989-90, 992-3,
996, 1013-5, 1020-1, 1040, 1107,
1129-33, 1220, 1273.
Path of Distinction; see Path of Excel-
lence.
Path of Excellence (višeṣamārga), 855,
858, 1015, 1020, 1040, 1107, 1129,
1132-3.
Path of Meditation; see Meditation,
Path of.
Path of Seeing; see Seeing, Path of.
Path, Truth of the, 58-61, 82, 89, 96,
157, 201-2, 207, 209, 213-5, 217,
236, 267-9, 271, 278-9, 285, 321-5,
566, 581, 592, 597-8, 602-3, 615,
634, 683-4, 688, 699, 776, 778,
780, 792-6, 802, 823-4, 833, 836,
839, 853-5, 858, 860, 895-1040
passim., 1091, 1094, 1111-3, 1115-
6, 1120, 1123, 1125, 1133-4, 1137-
8, 1142, 1152-3, 1218, 1220, 1254-
5, 1258, 1260-1, 1282.
Patience (ksanti), 105, 216-7, 268, 636,
683, 690, 693-4, 750n., 775, 861-2,
864-5, 931-3, 935, 939-40, 943-6,
949-52, 961, 964, 1027, 1039,
1051n., 1087-8, 1124.
Patience of Consecutive Knowledge;
see Patiences of Inferential Knowledge.
Patiences of Dharma Knowledge
(dharmajñānakṣāntis), 271, 636,
775, 864, 943-4, 946; of Suffering,
105, 216-7, 268, 271, 290, 295,
300, 324, 943, 950, 1093, 1102,
1123-4, of the Path, 866; of Aris-
ing, 865-6.
Patiences of Inferential Knowledge
(anvayajñānakṣāntis), 775, 946,
950; of Extinction, 866; of Suffer-
ing, 865,946, 950; of the Path,
866, 951, 1124; of Arising, 866.
patricide, 679, 685-8.
pauruşa (virile result), 287-8, 295.
Index 1409
penitents, 397, 615-6.
penetration, 706-7.
penetrations; see nirvedhabhāgiyas.
perception (sākṣātkriyā), 978, 1116-7,
1313-4, 1319-22, 1339-40.
perfect consciousness; see parijñāna.
permanence, 779-81, 783, 791, 929,
1115, 1337; see also eternity.
permanent substance (dharma), 453.
Persians, 644-5.
personality, 779, 780, 827; sensation of
personality, 840; see also atman,
pudgala, self.
pesin, 262.
Phālguna, 461.
Phalgunasútra, quoted, 1331.
phonemes (akşaras), 250-4.
phrases (pada), 250-1, 253-4, 1152-4.
physical world (bhājanaloka); see world.
physical matter; see rūpa.
Piśācas, 382, 489.
pleasure. 81, 83, 130, 155, 157-8, 160-2,
164, 169-74, 177-80, 192, 426,
465-7, 623, 847, 849-50, 902-3,
905-8, 915, 1231, 1233, 1240,
1349-50; attachment to pleasure,
see kāmarāgānuśaya; objects of
pleasure, 829, 831-2, 1103; organ
of pleasure, 180-2, 331n., 906.
poetry (kävya), 707.
positions (īryāpatha), 903.
possession; see prāptis.
powers (balas), 262, 1023-4, 1026-8,
1137-41, 1158, 1178-80, 1196-7n.;
perfection of powers, 1146-7.
prabhava; see apperance.
practices, 639-40, 658, 789; ascetic
practices, 778-9; esteeming of
practices, see silavrataparāmarfa.
pradeśika (restraining discipline), 604.
Pradhāna, 306, 308.
pradhāna, 1115.
prahāṇa; see abandoning.1410 Index
prahāṇadhātu (sphere of abandoning),
1037-8.
prahāṇamārga; see abandoning, path
of.
prahāṇaparijñā, 859.
Prahāsakas, 465.
Prajapati, 778-9, 789. prajñā (discrimi-
nation), 56-7, 59, 87-8, 97, 114,
117, 130, 144n., 189-90, 193-5,
198, 200, 406, 420-1, 425, 662,
694, 799, 853, 912, 921, 926-8,
933, 943, 947, 955, 977, 984, 1016,
1023-5, 1028, 1035, 1087-8, 1116-
7, 1122, 1142, 1158, 1163-4, 1190-
1n., 1217, 1233, 1235, 1250, 1263,
1323; see aslo discernment, intel-
ligence, wisdom.
Prajñapati, quoted, 90, 265-6, 274,
371-2, 395, 461-2, 659; refered to,
465, 484, 495.
prajñaptidharma, 232.
Prajñaptipāda, 1154.
Prajñaptiśästra, quoted, 104, 235.
prajñāskandha (speculative conscious-
ness), 192.
Prajñāvimuktas, 1016-8, 1020.
prakara, 572.
Prakaraṇa, quoted, 286, 405, 830;
referred to, 63-4, 66, 69, 354-5n.;
see below next three entries.
Prakaraṇagrantha, quoted, 259, 372,
445.
Prakaraṇapāda, quoted, 62, 243, 273-4,
790, 1164; refered to 131, 167,
265, 786.
Prakaraṇapādaśāstra, 841-2.
Prakṛti, 416.
prantakoṭicaturthadhyāna, 966.
Prāntakoţika Dhyāna, 165-7, 1151,
1155-6.
killing), 650.
pranidhijñāna, 87, 300, 938.
prāpti (possession), 68, 106, 112, 188,
206-15, 217, 224, 228, 254, 260,
271, 275-6, 278, 285, 291, 293-4,
574, 577, 589-90, 619, 678, 767-9,
791, 834, 855-6, 933-5, 944, 949,
951,978,986-7, 994-5, 1036-7,
1105-6, 1134.
prāptiprāpti, 218.
prāpya, 791. prasākhā, 262.
prasrabdhi (var. praśrabdhi, aptitude),
191-3, 1023, 1104, 1231-2, 1234;
see also well-being.
prasrabdhisukha, 1233.
Pratāpana, 123, 365, 457, 472.
prathamābhinirvṛttas, 374, 501n.
Prātimokṣa Discipline, 224, 562, 567,
570, 579-81, 583-5, 587, 592-3,
601, 607-10, 612-7, 619, 647, 938.
pratipaksa, 572.
pratipannakamärga (path of the candi-
date), 617.
pratisamkhyā, 281-2.
pratisamkhyanirodha, 59-61, 92, 134-
5n., 207, 212-4, 278-9, 280, 283-4,
290-1, 602, 896,936, 993, 1035,
1120, 1349; see also disconnecton.
pratisamvids, 87.
pratisthähetu (supporting cause), 309.
pratiṣṭhāphala, 295.
pratiyasamutpāda (dependent origina-
tion), 87, 158, 401-19,437-9, 447,
1333.
Pratityasamutapādasūtra, 408-9, 418.
pratīyasamutpanna, 241, 410-2.
Prativedhanādharmans, 979, 1013.
pratyakṣa (direct perception), 220, 284.
pratyayas; see conditions.
pramādasthāna, 582, 606-7.
prāṇa (vital breath), 650.
prāṇāpeta, 598-600.
prāṇātipāta (destruction of prāņa, Pratyekabuddhas, 55, 216-7, 398, 482-
3,592, 940-1, 1016, 1023, 1032,
1092-3, 1125, 1140, 1169, 1177-8,1269-70; see also rhinoceros.
pratyudyāna, 486.
pravṛtti (projecting cause), 568.
prayoga, 1016, 1092-3, 1096-7,
1151, 1154-5, 1160, 1176, 1226-7,
1249, 1279.
prayogamārga (prepatatory path), 855,
1014-5, 1020-1, 1040, 1129, 1131-3.
prayogaphala, 295.
patipratyaya.
preman; see affection.
preparatory exercises; see prayoga.
preparatory path; see prayogamārga.
preparatory stages; see samantakas.
Pretas, 365, 371-2, 381, 386, 397, 451,
460, 472-3, 477, 478, 634, 668-9,
679, 681, 1337.
purifying, 922-3.
purity, 782-3, 794, 833, 929, 1021,
1036, 1227, 1229-30, 1238; inter-
preachers, 700, 1167.
precepts, 582, 698, 703, 705, 797, 857,
911, 1031-3.
nal purity, 1236-8.
Pūrṇāsa, Sthavira, 411-2.
predestination, 450-1.
Puruşa, 306, 308, 399, 416, 1111.
predomination condition; see adhi- puruṣakāra (virile activity), 288, 290-1,
pride (māna), 87, 198, 204-5, 422, 768,
772-4, 784-9, 827, 835, 840, 844,
846, 850, 961, 1005, 1149.
pride-intoxication (mada), 196, 199,
204-5, 582, 844, 846, 850.
prīti, see joy.
progress, absorption of, 1247-8.
projection, 166, 677-8.
Prthagjanas (ordinary persons, fools),
112-3, 164, 178, 180-1, 183-4, 207,
209-10, 215-7, 220, 224, 226-7,
229, 377, 417, 419, 446-7, 482,
601, 616, 627-8, 683, 696, 700,
775, 838, 865-6, 937-9, 944, 962,
984, 987,992, 999, 1010, 1016,
1056-7n., 1133, 1147-8, 1157, 1279,
1325.
Puggalapaññatti, 627.
Punyaprasavas, 366, 470.
Puraṁdara, 1110.
Pūraṇa, 664.
pṛthiviparpaṭaka, 488, 548n.
pudgala, 1016; refutation of the pud-
gala, 1313-55, 1356-8n.; see also
at man, personality, self.
Index 1411
purification, 82, 154-5, 157-8, 285,
638-9, 780, 786, 789, 794, 827, 1035,
1109, 1217, 1325.
672-6.
puruşakāraphala (virile result), 257-8,
266, 288, 291, 993.
pūrvakālabhava, 390-1.
Pūrvakathā, quoted, 483.
Pūrvavideha, 365, 455, 461, 469-70,
476, 478, 490, 662.
Pūrvavidehakas, 455, 469.
Puşya, 694.
qualities (gunas), 55, 200-1, 203-6, 226,
234, 269, 300, 629-30, 698, 704,
785, 938-9, 956-7, 964, 978-9, 995,
1007-9, 1011, 1025, 1134, 1146-9,
1156-7, 1263, 1279, 1282, 1325,
1347-8; qualities of Arhats, 995,
961,963, 966, 980, 998, 1006-8,
1010, 1013; spiritual qualities,
1133, 1136, 1215.
R
raga; see craving.
Rāhula, 1353.
Rājarși, 236.
Rākṣasas, 378, 456.
Rāma, Bhadanta, 1007.1412 Index
rationalists, 662.
Ratnaśikhin (Buddha), 663.
Raurava, 365, 457, 472.
ṛddhipāda; see supernormal powers.
reason for existence; see kāraṇahetu.
reasoning (anumeya), 187.
rebirth, 154, 170-1, 175, 383, 393-5,
402, 404, 689, 704, 767, 778-9,
800-1, 910, 939-40, 958-60, 962-5,
967-71, 973-4, 976, 987, 992, 999,
1113-4, 1148, 1219, 1225, 1242;
rebirth and action, 627-30; rebirth
in Hell, 388-9, 396-7, 439, 689;
also Rebirth, Realms of; transmi-
gration.
Rebirth, Realms of (gatis), 219-21,
224, 365, 371-4, 377-8, 380-3,
390-2, 395-7, 438, 445, 449, 451,
475, 619-20, 622, 627-8, 659, 666,
668, 681, 698, 705, 920, 939-40,
959-60, 967, 971-2, 1138, 1142,
1150, 1179, 1270; bad realms of
rebirth, 112, 1162; good realms of
rebith, 679, 691, 1147; heavenly
realms of rebith, 222, 1148; pain-
ful realms of rebirth, 472-3, 619-
20, 662, 664, 679, 690, 701, 800-1,
939-40, 961-2, 1147.
recognition, 1339-40, 1342.
re-exixtence (abhinirvṛtti), 442, 909-
10, 1113-4.
reflection (cintā), 210, 269-70, 321-2,
691, 911-2, 926, 926, 936, 942,
1005, 1016, 1025, 1179, 1217; see
also cintāmayi.
Refuges, formula of, 592, 598-9, 601-3.
regret (kaukṛtyai), 196-8, 787-8, 842-3,
849, 851-3.
reincarnation; see rebirth.
relative truth (saṁvṛtisatya), 910-1,
1108.
Religion, 684, 942; see also Buddhism.
religious life; see frāmaṇya.
remorse, 170, 701.
renunciation, 582-3, 596, 605, 671,
703-4.
residence, heavenly, 467-8, 495.
resistence, 70-1, 77, 82, 85, 90, 104,
259.
resolution, 194-5, 227, 1023-4, 1246,
1339.
respect, 191, 193, 201-2, 619-20, 680-1,
697, 1146.
result, 170, 258-60, 265-6, 269, 271-9,
290-5, 300-1, 308, 406-7, 410-2,
416-7, 427, 566, 617, 660, 669-71,
678, 687-8, 696, 703, 705-6, 791,
801, 807, 811, 813-4, 818-9, 848,
851, 859, 861-3, 865, 867-8, 896,
898, 947, 951, 955-6, 958, 965,
975, 978, 998, 1003, 1013, 1019,
1138, 1146, 1151, 1167, 1170-1,
1175, 1255-6, 1262-4, 1313-4,
1331, 1334, 1341, 1348-9, 1351-5;
result of Anāgāmin, 178-80; result
of Arhat, 177, 322; result of Sakṛ-
dāgāmin, 177-8, 975, 1243; result
of Srotaāpanna, 177-8, 859, 953,
975, 1243; result of causes, 286-
91; result of religious life, see
śrāmaṇyaphala; five results, 672-6.
retribution (vipāka), 92, 103-5, 165,
197, 222-5, 229-30, 234, 253-4,
258, 260, 270, 273-7, 283, 286-7,
309, 372-4, 377, 383, 394, 397,
438, 569-70, 575, 579, 621-6, 629-
37, 678-81, 688-91, 698-701, 706,
730n., 797, 799, 804, 924, 936,
965, 1148, 1223, 1273, 1280, 1354-
5; retribution and the indriyas,
165-77; see also karmaphala.
retributive cause; see vipäkahetu.
retributive result; see vipākaphala.
rhinoceros, 482-3, 941, 1177; see also
Pratyekabuddhas.
Right Action (samyakkarmānta), 561-2,566, 1024, 1030.
Right concentration, 1024.
Right Effort, 1024.
Right knowledge (samyagjñāna), 1036,
1087.
Right Livelihood (samyagājīva),
566, 1024-5, 1030.
561-2,
Right Mindfulness (samyaksmrti),
562, 1024.
Right Speech (samyagvāc), 561-2, 566,
1024, 1030.
Right Thoughts, 1024.
Right views; see samyagdṛṣṭi.
roots, 81, 92, 99, 113, 645-7, 767, 700;
roots of good, 191, 193, 264, 266,
292-3, 323, 325, 574, 596, 609,
613, 618, 659, 679, 707, 803, 915,
930-1, 933, 935, 939, 942, 961,
1027, 1101-2, 1266, 1270, 1272,
1278; roots of evil, 574, 659, 799,
1101; roots of defilements, 833-9,
841; cutting off of the roots of
good, 164, 181, 183, 210, 292-3,
659-64, 689, 939, 1102; see also
mokṣabhāgiyas.
rsis, 397, 445-7, 655.
Rudra, 307.
Rudrāyaṇa, 687.
rūpa (physical matter), 63, 68-73, 76,
77-9, 88-9, 102, 113, 119, 122, 175,
184-5, 187-8, 206, 214-5, 231, 252,
259-62, 276-7, 279, 282, 297-8,
305, 367-8, 372-3, 378, 384, 410,
418, 422, 474, 493, 556-7, 559-63,
566, 568-72, 576-7, 620, 703, 802,
806, 856, 902, 907, 911, 923-5,
1005, 1038, 1101, 1107, 1141,
1159, 1162, 1169-70, 1175-8, 1220-
6, 1257, 1271, 1274, 1276, 1286-
7n., 1303n., 1314, 1319-24; see
also Rūpadhātu, rūpāyatana.
Rūpadhātu, 66, 83, 90, 92-5, 154, 166,
172-3, 175-6, 180-1, 187, 202, 212,
215, 228-9, 231, 236-7, 253, 268,
270, 275-6, 365-9, 377, 387, 391,
401, 432, 433-6, 439, 442, 465-7,
469-71, 477, 487, 491, 571-2, 581,
616, 618, 620, 622, 635, 659-60,
669, 690, 771-2, 774-6, 790, 793,
797, 822-4, 829-30, 840, 846, 861-
3, 867-8, 902, 936, 945, 961, 964,
966, 968-70, 973-6, 979-80, 999,
1090, 1096, 1107, 1118, 1121,
1128, 1169-70, 1177, 1222-4, 1226,
1234, 1239, 1241, 1247, 1280;
description of Rūpadhātu, 365-6,
types of minds in Rūpadhâtu,
310-25.
rūpakāya, 601.
rupana, 70.
Index 1413
rūparāgakṣayaparijñā, 861.
rūpaskandha, 63, 76, 70, 72, 74, 76-7,
79, 85-7, 90, 164, 251, 1321, 1324.
rupaskandhasabhāgatā, 219.
rūpāyatana (visible matter), 63-7,77,
85-6, 100, 102, 105-6, 109-12,
114-20, 125-9, 255, 303, 440-1,
556, 561, 1274, 1278.
Rūpyacakravartins, 484, 486; see also
Cakravartins.
rūpyate, 560.
S
sabda; see sound.
śabdadhātu (audible matter), 92.
sabhāga (similarity), 108-11, 115, 123,
262.
sabhägahetu (parallel cause), 60, 104-5,
253, 255, 261-71, 277, 287, 289-
90, 292-4, 296, 304-5, 308-9, 811,
933, 1097, 1354.
969-70.
sabhāgatā (genre, genus), 206, 219-21,
254, 367.
Sābhisaṁskāraparinirvāyins, 966-7,1414 Index
sacetană (sensitive matter), 99.
Sadāmattas, 462.
sahabhū (co-existent item), 255, 259-
61.
sahabhühetu (co-existent cause), 255,
257-62, 264, 266, 272, 277, 292,
296, 304-5, 308-9.
Sahasra Universe, 1177-8.
Śaikṣas, 114, 181, 184, 213, 219, 226-7,
310-1, 314, 316-9, 323-5, 585, 602,
689, 784, 972, 974, 978, 983-5,
1002-6, 1008-10, 1013-5, 1018-9,
1033-4, 1037, 1105, 1130-3, 1148,
1243; Saikṣa dharmas, 675-6, 1031;
path of the Saikṣas, 1003, 1013.
Śaila, 381.
śailpasthānika, 169, 315-6, 319.
saints, 58, 109, 162-3, 167, 179-81, 207,
211, 216, 220, 227, 293, 314, 386-
8, 566, 602, 628-9, 689, 778, 868,
896, 1041 passim., 1091, 1105,
1132, 1275, 1327, 1327, 1355.
sakalabandhana-ādikṣaṇasthas, 207.
Śakara, 463, 973, 1110.
Sakṛdāgāmins, 177-8, 631, 953-5, 958,
961, 963-5, 972-5, 985, 994-5,
1243.
sākṣātkriyā, see perception.
Sākya (clan), 382.
Sākyamuni, 685, 692-3; see also Blessed
One, Buddha, Gautama.
Sākyans, 606.
salvation, 1167; aspects of 1111-2,
1115.
samādhi, 87, 189-90, 194-5, 204, 562,
570. 597-8, 705, 853, 922, 925,
1024-6, 1028, 1081-2n., 1104, 1107,
1137, 1146, 1168, 1216-8, 1229-
30, 1233-4, 1237, 1296-9m.; Three
Samādhis, 1148, 1256-62; see also
absorption.
Samadhi Absence of Contention, 87,
631, 1148-52, 1155-7, 1202n., 1275.
sāmagrīphala, 295.
samāhita, 369, 588, 705; see also absorp-
tion.
samantakas (preparatory stages), 642,
862-3, 902-1, 988-9, 1030, 1068n.,
1133, 1220, 1252-6, 1261-2, 1267-
8, 1273.
samantarapratyaya (immediately ante-
cedent condition), 124, 264-5, 277,
296-302, 304-6.
sāmänya; see sameness.
samāpatti; see absorption.
samāpatticitta (mind-in-absorption),
230, 232.
samāpattyävaraṇa (obstacles to ab-
sorption), 226.
samāropa (var. samāropikā; erroneous
attribution), 778, 782.
samatha, see calmness.
samvāyikarṇa (material cause), 491.
Samayavimukta, 269, 1017, 1020, 1091,
1124, 1133, 1250.
sambhavaişin, 441-2.
Sambuddha, 398.
Samcetaniyasútra, 639.
samdhicitta (initial mind), 372.
sameness (sāmānya), 219, 221.
Samghabhadra, quoted, 148-9n., 884-5.,
891n., 1286-7n.
Saṁghāta, 365, 457, 472.
samghātaparamāņu; see molecules.
Samgitiparyaya, quoted, 443; refered
to, 445.
samgraha, 76.
samgrahavastus, 76.
Samjīva, 365, 456-7, 472.
samjñā; see ideas.
saṁjñāgata, 387.
saṁjñākaraṇa, 423.
saṁjñāna; see motion.
saṁjñāskandha, 73.
samjñāveditanirodhasamāpatti (Ab-
sorption of the Extinction of IdeasNAMAN
and Sensations), 230-1, 1271, 1273.
saṁjñāviparyāsa (error of ideas), 782-4.
Sāṁkhyas, 453, 778, 780, 810, 1331,
1344.
saṁprajñānam, 1130.
samprakhyāna (discernment, know-
ledge), 421.
samprayoga, 856.
samprayuktahetu (associated cause),
225, 264, 266, 272-3, 277, 287-8,
292, 296, 304.
samprayuktas, 91, 112, 205, 218.
samprayuktasaṁskāras, 73.
1334-5, 1337.
samskäraduḥkhatā, 899.
saṁskāras, 73, 83, 112, 167, 184, 188,
206, 211, 234-5, 241, 243, 250-1,
253, 296, 299-300, 306, 322, 372,
378-9, 401-2, 404, 406-7, 409,
412-3, 415-7, 420, 422, 481, 593,
682, 802, 899-900, 904-5, 909,
1101, 1115, 1119, 1144, 1222-3,
1225, 1325, 1341-2, 1347-8; ayuḥ-
saṁskāras, 165, 167; cittaviprayukta
samskāras, 160, 184, 206; jīvita
saṁskāras, 167.
samskāraskandha, 73-4, 81-2, 86-7,
206, 841.
saṁskṛtalakṣaṇas, 106, 188, 241-2,
1112, 1257.
saṁskṛtas; see dharmas.
sāṁtānasabhāgikas, 299.
samudaya; see arising.
samutpäda, 410-2; see also pratiya-
samutpäda.
samutpanna, 410-2; see also pratītya-
saṁsāra, 159, 307, 409, 574-5, 707, samyaksamādhi, 562.
Samyaksambodhi, 485.
Samyaksambuddha, 802, 1092, 1336.
samyaksamkalpa, 562.
samyaksmṛti; see Right Mindfulness.
samyaktvaniyāma (absolute good), 321,
944, 1243.
samyojanas (connections), 42-1, 830,
835-40, 886n.
Index 1415
475-77.
samvṛtisatya; see relative truth.
samyagājīva; see Right Livelihood.
samyagdṛṣṭi (Right Views), 324, 562,
597-8, 601, 603, 665-6, 705, 794,
923, 972, 991, 1027, 1036, 1087-8.
samyagjñāna; see Right Knowledge.
samyagvyāyāma, 562.
samyakkaramänta; see Right Action.
samyakpradhanas; see exertions.
samyagvāc; see Right Speech.
samyakprahāṇas (right abandonings),
896.
samvara; see discipline.
samvartakalpa (kalpa of disappearance),
Samyukta (Samyuktāgama), quoted, 73,
77, (140n), 100-1, 116, 282, 285,
368-70, 422, (519n.), 443 (525n.),
561, 8ï8, (882n.), 834-5, (885n.),
928, 959 (1061n.), 1035 (1084-
5n,), 1321 (1361n.), 1327 (1366n.);
refered to, 429-30, 521-2n., 625,
967, 1035, 1037 (1085n.).
Samyuktägama, quoted 186, 292; refered
to, 1281.
Samyutta, quoted, 103, 620, 928, 1327
(1366n.); refered to, 87, 625.
samutpanna.
samutthāna, 576.
samutthāpaka (cause of the origin), Sańghānusmṛti, 704.
609, 645.
sandhas, 619.
Sangha (var: Saṁgha), 165, 167, 490,
592, 601-2, 630-1, 647, 689-90,
1031-3; schism in the Sangha,
681-5, 688.
fantanirodha (calm of extinction), 378.
sapratigha, 91-2, 115.
Saptabhavasūtra, quoted, 372 (500n.),1416 Index
386 (506n.); refered to, 373.
Saptakṛtaparamaḥ (var: Saptakṛtvaḥ
parama), 958, 962.
Saptasüryavyäkaraṇa, 376.
saumanasya; see satisfaction.
Sariputra, 229, 236-7, 368-9, 372-3, Sautrāntikas, 65, 79, 118, 155, 157, 166,
485, 1139.
Sarva, 419 (518n).
186-7, 191-2, 203-4, 207-9, 217,
220-1, 230, 232-4, 239, 241, 247,
251, 260-1, 279-83, 285-6, 300,
367, 376, 411-2, 420-1, 424, 427-8,
556, 558, 560, 562, 564-5, 577,
593-4, 597, 599, 611-2, 614, 626,
658, 677, 770, 806, 810, 812, 814,
818,978, 1006-7, 1102, 1116, 1126,
1216-7, 1236-7.
sarvānvayajñānapakṣa, 1252.
Sarvărthasiddha (Bodhisattva), 446.
sarvasamyojanaparyādāṇaparijñā, 861,
867.
Sarvāstivādin-Vaibhāṣikas, 207.
Sarvästivādins, 167, 192, 207-11, 216,
221, 232, 241, 243, 245, 248-9,
251-3, 260-1, 278-80, 282-5, 295,
373,411-2, 424, 558-9, 565-6, 770,
807-8, 812-5, 818-9, 881n., 1126,
1217, 1237.
sarvatragahetu (universal cause), 104,
255, 261, 273-4, 277, 287, 289-90,
292, 296, 304, 791, 865.
sāsrava, 660, 863, 895.
Šāstras, 429, 969.
Śāṭhas, 455.
sathya; see hypocrisy.
satisfaction (saumanasya), 83, 130, 155,
158, 161, 164, 169-71, 173-4, 177-
9, 181-2, 768, 847-50, 906, 1005,
1143, 1232, 1237-40, 1255, 1265,
1267, 1271.
(of the Truths).
satyäkärapravṛtta (aspects of the
Truths), 990.
satkāyadṛṣṭi (belief in a self), 197-8,
259, 265, 274, 354-5n., 673-4,
772-3, 777, 781, 785, 789-91, 795,
797-9, 826-7, 836, 838-9, 929, 994,
1004, 1088, 1109-10, 1327, 1338,
1349-50, 1355; see also ātmavā-
dopādāna.
Satprāṇakopamasútra, 1322-3.
Satsatkasutra, quoted, 770.
sattvākhya; see beings, living.
sattvasabhāgatā, 219-20.
sattvasamvartani, 477.
satyabhisamaya; see comprehension
schism, 679, 681-5, 688-90.
School, 65, 89, 123, 153, 189, 215, 220,
227, 236, 239, 694, 771, 798, 828,
831, 833, 848, 857, 921, 926, 942,
993, 1154, 1221, 1229, 1263; see
also Vibhāṣā; School of the Maha-
sāṁghikas, 281; of the Sammitiyas,
247; of the Vārṣaganyas, 818; of
the Vibhajyavādins, 783.
scripture, 67, 108, 116, 123, 237, 241,
383, 386, 388, 396, 419, 421, 490,
559-60, 606, 626, 706, 800, 807,
814, 819, 902, 952, 1006, 1008,
1016, 1235, 1328.
sea, outer, 454-5.
seeds, 210-2, 256, 277, 283, 293, 491,
703, 703, 770-1, 909, 1352-5.
Seeing, path of, 60, 105, 111-3, 157,
162, 173-4, 178, 181-2, 184, 209,
213, 216, 263, 268, 273-4, 575-80,
619, 631-2, 636-7, 661, 676, 772-6,
780, 783, 786, 789, 793, 804-5,
820-1, 828, 839, 845-6, 854, 860-1,
863, 865-8, 895-6, 911-2, 923, 933,
935-6, 938-40, 947-8, 950-4, 956,
959,985, 994-9, 1004, 1010, 1017-
8, 1020, 1026-9, 1039-40, 1041n,
1060n., 1087-8, 1090, 1092-3, 1097,
1107, 1109, 1123-8, 1131, 1133,1150, 1330, 1340; Seeing of Aris-
ing, 673, 773, 778-80, 789, 821,
825, 853-4, 860; Seeing of Extinc-
tion, 773, 780, 822-5, 853-4, 860;
Seeing of Suffering, 60, 290, 673-
4,773-4, 779, 789, 795, 820-2, 829,
839, 853-4, 860, 865; Seeing of the
path, 773, 780, 823-4, 839, 853-4,
860.
self, 108, 259, 776-7, 781-3, 795, 910,
925, 1005, 1110, 1113, 1115, 1122,
1327; belief in a self, see sat-
kayadṛṣṭi; idea of a self, see aham-
kārvastu and ātmadṛṣṭi; see ātman,
personality, pudgala.
semen, 381-2, 385, 395-6.
sensation (vedanā), 61, 72-4, 78, 81-3,
86, 101, 104, 106, 124, 130, 161,
168, 170-2, 178, 183-4, 189, 195,
230-1, 242, 248-9, 272, 276, 280,
282, 298-9, 302, 372, 378-9, 401-2,
404, 406-9, 417-8, 422, 426-30,
447, 622-4, 632-3, 670, 678, 783,
791, 795, 802, 804, 815-6, 836,
840, 848-50, 899, 901, 905-8, 911,
925-6, 928, 1101, 1119, 1162, 1222-
5, 1232, 1239-40, 1253, 1273, 1323-
4, 1349-50, 1352; agreeable sensa-
tion, 160-2, 173, 624-5, 655, 770-
1, 824-5, 847,850, 899, 901-8, 921,
1005, 1231, 1233-4, 1237; bodily
sensation, 160-2, 191, 194, 432,
632, 1232-4; disagreeable sensa-
tion, 160-2, 172, 840, 899, 902;
five sensations, 155, 157-9, 847,
906; mental sensation, 160-2, 191,
431, 632-3, 1233, 1237; painful
sensation, 160-4, 173, 921, 1005,
1323; organs of sensation, 182-3;
see also individual sensations, i.e;
dissatisfaction, equanimity, indif-
ference, pleasure, satisfaction.
sense consciousness, 74, 99-101, 109-
Index 1417
10, 129, 131, 153.
sensualists, 262.
separation, 859-8, 913, 965, 1009, 1220,
1223, 1238.
sermons, 707, 997.
service, 1145; perfection of 1146-7.
sex (gender), 173, 175-6, 219, 395, 397,
603-4, 667, 1264; illicit sexuality,
582-3, 646, 648, 651-2, 660; see
also organs, sexual.
shape (samsthāna), 64-7, 69, 86, 99,
552, 556-8, 917-8, 920, 1159, 1162,
1175, 1178, 1264, 1320-2.
Siddhanta, 791.
sight, 60, 63,997; consciousness of
sight, see visual consciousness;
divine sight, 392, 395, 1133, 1157,
1160, 1162-4, 1176-8, 1262; organ
of sight, 64, 71-3, 75-7, 83-5,
100-1, 106-7, 109-10, 113-20, 122-
30, 153, 158-9, 171-2, 176, 180-1,
183, 185, 261, 272, 295, 303, 315,
427-8, 807, 1322; see also eye.
Sikhaṇḍin, 687.
Śikṣamānā (probationer), 581, 592,
714-15.
śikṣas, 987-9, 983-4.
fila; see morality.
Šilā, 1325.
filaskandhikā, 672.
ilavrataparamarśa, 198, 375, 377, 483,
772-3, 776, 778-80, 782, 789, 791,
793-4, 827, 832, 836-7, 838-9,
1109.
śīlavratopādāna, 418, 829, 832.
silence, 638-9.
Silent One, 638.
similiar cause; see sabhāgahetu.
Sindhu (River), 456.
Sītā (River), 456.
Sitās, 454.
sitting (āsana), 227, 941.
skandhas, 56, 61-3, 72-83, 86-8, 167-8,1418 Index
211, 219-20, 223, 225, 228, 234,
262, 275-6, 294, 345n., 366, 373,
377-80, 383, 386, 388, 391, 395,
399-405, 411-2, 418-9, 422-3, 438,
479, 565, 601-2, 607-8, 648, 650,
696, 707, 777, 801, 804, 827, 852,
902, 909, 933, 936, 1035, 1091,
1101, 1111, 1128, 1215-6, 1219-
20, 1223, 1272, 1278, 1313-8,
1320-1, 1324-5, 1327-8, 1330-4,
1337-8, 1341, 1349-51.
skeletons, 918-9.
smell, 63-4, 88, 102, 105, 1110-1, 125,
154, 187, 653-4, 906-7, 911, 1319,
1347-8; consciousness of smell,
67, 98, 129, 302, 1318-9; organ of
smell, 76-7, 83-5, 93-5, 118-20,
122-3, 126, 128-30, 153, 180, 1175,
1322; see also nose.
smrti; see mindfulness.
fraddhā; see faith.
smṛtyupasthānas; see foundations of Śradhādimuktas, 269, 473, 954-5, 1000,
mindfulness.
1010, 1013, 1016-7, 1019, 1091.
Sraddhānusārins, 269, 473, 952-6,
1016-8.
199-200, 202, 212, 215, 219, 221,
223, 227, 229-30, 233, 253-4, 266-
8, 274, 300, 310-1, 314, 319, 323-4,
444, 568-9, 571-2, 620, 627-8,
659-60, 668, 680, 767, 774, 779,
790, 792, 795-6, 822-3, 830, 832,
840, 849, 853, 855, 860-1, 864-8,
909, 914, 920-1, 925, 932, 936-7,
949, 954, 956, 963-5, 973-4, 979,
982, 985-6, 988-90, 993, 996, 998,
1002, 1014-5, 1022, 1029-30, 1037,
1039, 1091, 1093, 1096-8, 1107,
1117-9, 1122, 1127, 1129, 1132,
1134, 1138-9, 1141-2, 1144, 1149-
53, 1156, 1158, 1160, 1163-4,
1171-3, 1220, 1222, 1224-5, 1236,
1240-55, 1258, 1261-2, 1267-8,
1273-6, 1278, 1280, 1322-3; see
also bhūmis.
Sodayin, 592.
solidity, 99-100.
soul, 904, 1115, 1313-4, 1326-7; see Śrāmaņa, 680, 992.
also ātman, pudgala.
śabdāyatna; see hearing, organ of.
sound (fabda), 60, 63-5, 92, 93, 98, 102,
104, 110-1, 120-2, 126, 128, 185-7,
251-3, 283, 302, 315, 428, 444,
491, 572-3, 817, 1155, 1162, 1169,
1175, 1177, 1257, 1321-2, 1343;
vocal sound, 251-2, 559.
South, 370.
space (ākāśa), 59, 83, 88-9, 101, 207,
280, 575, 858, 1226, 1275, 1277.
sparśayatanas, 197.
speech, 62, 203, 552, 575, 639-41, 1025,
1152-3, 1173-4, 1351; transgres-
sions of speech, 605, 647-8, 655-6,
669; see also Right Speech, Wrong
Speech.
spheres, 81, 91, 130, 172-6, 182, 189,
Śrāmaņera (novice), 581-3, 599-600,
609, 665, 714-5n.
śramanya (religious life), 859, 992-5,
998.
śramaṇyaphala (results of the religious
life), 177, 951, 992-5, 1158, 1281,
1349.
Śrāvakas, 55, 216-7, 482-3, 564, 783,
802, 806, 818, 940-1, 947, 1009,
1012, 1015, 1023, 1033, 1053-4n.,
1093, 1125, 1143-4, 1148, 1169,
1177-8, 1233, 1269.
Śrīlabha, Bhadanta, 93, 186, 424, 428-9.
Srotaäpannas, 177-9, 447, 629, 783,
838-9, 859, 953-5, 958-63, 965,
969, 972-5, 985, 1004, 1243.
srotrābhijñā (supernormal hearing),
214.2
śruta; see hearing.
śrutamaya, 322.
śrutamayi (wisdom of the teaching),
912-3, 1122.
stability, 1229-30.
stages; see bhūmis.
stains, 634-5.
stars, 64, 255, 460-2.
stealing, 582-3, 641, 645-6, 648, 651,
667, 669-70, 689, 701, 787.
sthānästhāna, 1137.
Sthitākampyas, 979, 1000, 1002, 1994,
1007.
sthiti; see duration.
sthitihetu (cause of duration), 309.
sthitis (abodes), 378-80.
sthityanayathātva (duration-modifica
tion), 238-9.
stilling; see calmness.
striking, 89-01.
Stūpas, 588-9, 651, 689-90.
styāna, see torpor.
śubhā, 295.
Subhakṛstanas, 366, 376-7, 470, 495.
substance (dravya), 65, 185-8, 206-7,
221, 266, 303, 453, 491-4, 567,
1230, 1316, 1338, 1348-9.
substantial entities, 280, 437-8, 770,
813, 1023, 1032, 1313-4, 1329-30,
1342.
Sudarśana, Mountain, 452; city, 463.
Sudarśanas, 366, 467.
Suddhāvāsas (also: Suddhavasikas).
366, 378, 495, 968-9, 976-7, 1160.
Sudharmā, 463-4.
śuddhidṛṣṭi, 789.
Śūdras, 386.
Sudṛśas, 366.
suffering, 63, 73, 167, 172-3, 201,
281-6, 307, 419, 426, 621, 670,
698, 779-80, 797, 802, 826-7, 841,
896-909,921, 929-30, 932, 936,
945, 947-8, 959, 962, 967, 981,
Index 1419
999, 1002-3n., 1112-6, 1143-5,
1147, 1149, 1179, 1237, 1239,
1260, 1270, 1274-5, 1324, 1337,
1350; aspects of suffering, 1110-1,
1115, 1257-9; faculty of suffering,
160; suffering of Kāmadhātu,
932-3,943, 945-6, 960, 973; see
also Suffering, Truth of.
Suffering, Truth of, 76, 201-2, 265, 274,
777, 779, 783, 793-5, 802, 820-2,
825-6, 836, 839, 853-4, 860, 864-5,
896, 898, 908, 935, 946, 948, 997,
1039, 1089-90, 1127, 1257-8,
1274-5; Seeing of the Truth of
Suffering, see Seeing, Path of.
sukha, see happiness, pleasure.
sukhopattis, 237.
Summits (mürdhan), 690, 930-2, 934-
5,939-40, 1027.
sun, 64, 255-6, 460-2, 468-9.
Sundarananda, 242.
Sunetra, 1337-8.
śūnyatā; see emptiness.
Supernormal Knowledge, 1129-30,
1132, 1148-9, 1157-67, 1170, 1175,
1178, 1180, 1262.
Supernormal powers (ṛddhipāda), 165-
6, 168, 776, 1022-8, 1081-2n.,
1157, 1160, 1162, 1166, 1168,
1176, 1178-80, 1205-6n., 1275.
support (āśraya), 158-9, 206, 265-6,
272-3, 285, 301, 303, 444, 448,
566, 572, 577, 602, 847, 912, 929,
1004-5, 1117-8, 1134, 1138, 1144,
1163, 1171, 1215, 1226, 1250,
1279, 1326, 1342, 1347-8, 1350,
1352.
Supreme Worldly Dharmas, 301, 933,
935-7, 943-4, 949, 1027.
Sutra of Man, quoted, 1324; refered to,
1329.
Sutra of the Five Nivaranas, 657.
Sutra of the Saptasatpuruṣagati, 973.1420 Index
Sutra of the Seven Existence; see Sapta-
bhavasutra.
Sūtra of the Seven Satpurușagatis, 387,
973.
Sutra of the Six Hexades, quoted, 424.
Sutra of the Three Characteristics, 244.
Sutra of the Twelve Parts, 405.
Sutra of the Viparyāsas, 781.
Sutra of Māra, 388-9.
sūtras, 86-7, 370, 372, 391, 620, 706,
819, 948, 952, 1008, 1281, 1324, 1326,
1362-4n.
Sūtra of the Sugata (=the Buddhist
Sūtras), 816.
Suvarnacakravartins, 484, 486; see also
Cakravartins.
svalakṣaṇamanaskāra, 320.
Svayambhūs, 398.
syllables, 652, 1152-4.
T
Tamracakravartins; 484, 486-7; see
also Cakravartins.
tandrī, 851.
tangibles (tangibles things), 60, 63-4,
67, 92-3, 99-100, 102, 105, 110-1,
126, 129, 154, 185, 188, 276-7,
280, 302, 315, 654-5, 917, 1141,
1169-70, 1175, 1234, 1278, 1316-
7, 1319.
Tapana Hell, 365, 457, 472.
taste, 60, 63-4, 66, 83, 88, 92, 99-100,
102, 105, 110-1, 125, 154, 185,
187-8, 276-7, 315, 370, 393, 487-9,
654-5, 697-8,906-7, 1169, 1175,
1347-8, 1351; consciousness of
taste, 67, 98, 129, 1318-9; organ of
taste, 67, 84-5, 93-5, 118-20, 122-
3, 126, 128, 130, 153, 180, 1322;
see also tongue.
Tathāgatas, 226, 412, 484, 486, 564,
679, 681, 683, 687-8, 690, 693-4,
804, 1146-8, 1324, 1335-6, 1338,
1355.
tatkṣaṇasamutthana, 576.
tatsabhāga, 108-11, 123, 1177.
teaching, 322, 706, 896, 911, 1166-7,
1280-1, 1313, 1354-5; wisdom of
teachings, see frutamayi.
teeth, 99, 160.
terraces (parişandās), 462.
Theist, 306-7.
thirst (desire, tṛṣṇā), 66, 95, 187, 282-3,
285, 403, 406, 445, 789-90, 843,
909, 916, 1028, 1228, 1251, 1329,
1337; see also bhavastṛṣṇā; crav-
ing; desire; tṛṣṇāvicaritas, tṛṣṇot-
taradhyāyin, vibhavatṛṣṇā.
Thirty-three Gods; see Trayas-
trimsas.
thought, 782-4, 913, 975-8, 1028, 1030,
1187n., 1324.
Three Jewels, 421, 629, 961, var. Three
Precious Ones, 191.
Three Refuges; see Refuges,
Formula of.
Three Vehicles, 1281.
time (kāla), 206, 592-4, 820, 857; mea-
sures of time, 474-5; time periods,
272, 277-8, 805-6, 808-16, 819,
1328.
Tirthikas (non-Budhists), 798.
tongue, 74, 85, 94, 123, 277, 1318-9.
torpor (styāna), 193-5, 830, 842-3,
845-7, 850-3, 1103-4.
touch, 63, 125, 129-30, 187, 302, 654,
698, 1347; consciousness of touch,
67, 98, 115, 129, 276-7, 302, 849,
1233-4, 1322; organ of touch, 64,
67, 83-5, 94, 99-100, 102, 116,
118-20, 122-3, 126, 128-30, 153-4,
156, 174-6, 180-3, 185, 449.
traces (vāsanās), 1139, 1143, 1146,
1225, 1348.
tranquility, 225, 1250; the Tranquil,1257.
transformation (parinama), 453,810,
899-900, 904-5, 908, 913, 1331,
1344-5, 1353; cause of transfor-
mation, see vikārahetu.
transgressions, 170, 200-1, 567, 582,
584-5, 590, 605-8, 619-20, 646,
648-50, 658, 666, 962, 972, 992;
mortal (ānantarya) transgressions,
154, 450-1, 663-4, 679-90, 748-
9n., 939; pataniya transgressions,
613-5.
transitional absorption (vyutkräntaka-
samāpatti), 1248-9.
transmigration, 55-6, 58, 81, 83, 159,
218, 220, 611-2, 834-5, 957, 960,
963, 968, 992, 1012, 1114, 1147,
1334-5.
Trayastrimsas, 365, 463-9, 471-2.
Treatise; see Jñānaprasthāna.
Trisahasra Universe, 485-6, 1177-8.
tṛṣṇā; see thirst.
tṛṣṇāvicaritas (modes of thirst), 282-3,
1114.
tṛṣṇottaradhyāyin (absorption of desire),
800.
Truths, Four Noble, 59, 73, 87, 111,
163, 177-8, 183-4, 191, 255-6,
283-4, 311, 320, 322, 354-5n., 372,
421, 600, 603, 614, 660, 784, 826,
837, 852, 867, 896-8, 910-2, 930-1,
934, 946, 951-3, 984, 990, 996-7,
1004, 1021, 1029, 1031-2, 1041-
2n., 1090, 1094, 1097, 1099, 1110,
1124-8, 1282, 1325, 1330; Medita-
tion of the Four Noble Truths,
157, 162-3, 178-9, 631, 651, 865;
aspects of the Truths, 1111-2,
1115-6; see also Arising, Truths
of; comprehension; Extinction,
Truth of; Path, Truth of the;
Seeing, Path; Suffering, Truth of.
Tuşita Heaven, 473.
Tuşitas, 365, 465, 469.
U
Index 1421
Ubhayatobhägavimuktas, 1016-8, 1020.
ucchedadṛṣṭi (view of annihilation),
782, 788, 797.
Udānas, 58.
Udanavarga, 58.
Udayisútra, quoted, 228-9.
Uktika, 1335.
ūnamāna, 784-6.
unconscious being; see Asaṁjñisattvas.
undiscipline, 580, 587-8, 590, 594-5,
608-12, 617-8, 618-20, 668, 680.
unhappiness, 851, 1266.
Unhindered Knowledges, 1148, 1151-
5, 1157, 1203n.
Uninterrupted Path; see Irresistable
Path.
universal cause; see sarvatragabetu.
universes (lokadhātus), 370-1, 468-9,
485-6, 1177-8.
Upācaru, 381.
upādānas (clingings), 829, 832-5.
upādānaskandhas, 63, 73, 76, 82, 443,
777, 781, 785, 789, 806, 898, 908,
1004, 1113.
Upadhyāya, 309, 647.
Upagupta, Sthavira, 226.
upaklefas; see defilements.
Upāli, 606.
Upālisútra, 606.
Upananda, 473.
upanidhyāna, 1217-8.
upapadhyparinirvāyin, 386-8.
Upapadyas, 387.
Upapadyaparinirvāyins, 966,969-70,
972, 980.
upapatipratilambhika, 322.
upapatti; see birth.
upapattibhava, 391, 442.
Upaśaila, 381.1422 Index
Upāsakas (pious laymen), 219, 581-3,
598-601, 603-5, 609, 665, 719-21n.
Upāsikā, 581.
upastambhahetu (maintaining cause), Vaijayanta, 463.
309.
Upavāsastha, 581-4, 609.
upavicāras, 431-7.
upekṣā, see equanimity; indifference.
ürdhvabhagīyas, 961.
Ürdhvasrotas, 960, 966-73, 980, 999.
uşmagatas, 923; see also heat.
Utpala Hell, 459.
utsadas, 456-8.
utsütra, 908, 1044n.
Uttara, 236.
Uttarakuru, 222, 236, 365, 455, 461,
469-70, 473, 478, 619, 657, 662,
667-8, 679-81, 920, 1018; see also
Kurus.
Uttaramantrins. 455.
vāc; see voice.
Vāgisa, 784.
vāha, 473.
V
1024-7, 1100, 1102-4, 1110, 1127,
1136, 1151, 1168, 1216-7, 1232-5,
1265, 1282, 1310-1n.
Vaibhāṣikadeśīya, 94.
Vaibhāṣikas, 58, 62, 65-8, 71, 77-9,
94-5, 97, 109, 115-8, 120-1, 155,
157, 168-9, 187-8, 192, 203-4, 207,
211-2, 220-1, 223, 227-8, 230-1,
233-5, 238, 244-5, 249, 259, 264-7,
273, 284, 286, 301, 322, 374, 376,
379, 394, 419, 427-31, 436, 441-2,
445-6, 465, 552, 554, 556-7, 560,
562, 564, 566-7, 570, 572-3, 575,
579, 592-3, 597, 600, 602, 604,
610-2, 614, 626, 638-9, 643-4,
654-5, 660-1, 680, 706, 769, 776,
778-81, 783-4, 790, 799, 801, 806,
816-7, 819, 821, 830, 842, 862,
912, 927-8, 933, 940, 959-60, 967,
973-5,978, 997, 1006, 1009-10,
Vaiseşikas, 221, 248, 491-4, 555, 1348-
52.
Vaisaravaṇa 694.
Vaisyas, 386.
Vaitaraṇī, River, 458; see also utsadas.
Vajrapāņis, 463.
vajropamasamadhi, 301, 455, 689, 694,
758n., 922, 981-3, 1036-7, 1091,
1134, 1262-3.
Vakşu River, 465.
vakya; see discourse.
Värṣaganyas, 818.
Vasubandhu, quoted, 121; refered to,
389, 554, 1106, 1340-1.
Väsudeva, 306.
Vasumitra, 121, 231-2, 298, 394, 309-
10; quoted, 889-90n.
Vatsa, 1334.
Vatsagotra, 1333.
Vatsagotrāsūtra, quoted, 1336-7.
Vatsiputriyas, 112, 117, 553, 818, 1314-
22, 1324-30, 1332-3, 1335-8,
1340-1.
Vatsiputrīyas-Sāṁmitīyas, 558.
vedanā; see sensation.
vedanāskandba, 72.
Vedas, 646.
veneration, 200-2.
Vibhajyavādins, 387, 808, 875n.
Vibhanga, quoted, 418.
Vibhāṣā, 293, 321, 386-7, 394, 644, 648,
1242; in this work, Louis de La
Vallée Poussin includes a large
number of passages translated
from the Vibhāṣā. These passages,
based on their location in the
Taishō Canon (TD) are as
follows:
7c3
p.1648b3
12a13
18c28
22a2
33b4
33c17
34a28
35a12
36a20
37a12
38a7
38a19
43a2
43a11
43b6
50a22
50c5
51b1
52a8
52a12
52a21
53a19
53b3
53b14
53b25
61c
63b14
63c22
65c12
71c5-72a29
73b6
74a20
75b20
75b29-c2
76a15
79a26
81b9
87a2
89a12
89b13
89c
93a
93a4
164
1055n., 1056n.
1192n.
531n.
1053n.
1052n.
764n.
942
1005
1365n.
1366n.
1370n.
1190n.
1366n.
1305n.
301
298-9
301
361n.
362n.
298, 361n.
321
322
322
322
147n.
148n.
71
67
352n.
155
62
879n.
879n.
803
360n.
355n.
264
270
360n.
693
791
791
94a5
97c7
98a7
98a11
109a18
114b2
119a2
120a29
132b1
133a5
134b11
135a15
135a27
138a9
138b9
138c26
147a6
147b7
151a8
151a15
155a8
164c16
165b6
167c13
175a12-18
177a16
177a27
177b8
177c21
178a24
180a17
183b5
183c8
183c16
184b17
198a15
200b2
200c19
201b7
205b13
206c11
214a17
217a12
Index 1423
877n.
357n.
277
677, 747n.
108
890n.
512n.
512n.
924
1049n.
921
922, 1049n.
923
219
876n.
876-7n.
1034
1062n.
201
339n.
1198n.
60-1
940
1063n.
892n.
722n.
602
602
723n.
723n.
200
660
661
750n.
660
350n.
108
240
239
1048n.
1048n.
1047n.
1050n.1424
Index
217c6
219b3
219b7
220a22
220b2
223b6
229c29-230b3
231a13
231b20
232b9
236b19
240c11
245b28
248a22
250c19
252b25
255a21
255c13
257a3
258c21
259c8-260a9
263a6
265a13
267a28
269b10
273c21
279a21
284a4
288b5
298b-c
312b9
313b15
315b11
316a4
316b28
318b11
319c13
320a22
321a21
322a15
324b6
336c28
352a14
912
339n.
144n.
195
336n.
204
715.
586
1056-7n.
216
885n.
1061n.
826
883 n.
889n.
838, 886n.
874n.
1372n.
884n.
837
878n.
621
954
1041n.
339n.
856
1061n.
833
286
286
1075n.
883n.
1003
1074n.
1073n.
1076n.
1002
1004
862
861
868
1069n.
940
352a17
352b18-366a1
368a21
368b13
380a18
383c24
384a18
385b18
387a9
388b5
388b19
389a8
390a1
391c6
391c7
394b19
394c5
396a10
396b18
397a26
399a23
401c27
402c10
402c17
403a4
404b11
405a27
406b9
407c9
408c9
408c25
411a18
411a27
412a26
420a28
420b8
423a2
424c15
425c13
427b14
427c
431b6
431b15
941
505-6n.
146n.
146n.
121
145n.
80
82
62
89
142-3n.
89
70
90
143-4n.
882-3n.
881n.
881n.
881n.
895, 1041-2n.
1043n.
1042n.
1043n.
1044n.
1044n.
897, 1041n.
1057-8n.
859
78
1187n.
1189n.
997
856
1289n.
912
1301n.
1049n.
1372n.
706
1302n.
1264
1285n.
1286n.
XGay davomid
432c3
434c1
440b17
444c21
449a16
449a25
452c20
464b8
465c11
489b14
489c19
495c23
496a23
496b18
497a4
497b16
509a22
515a18
515c7
518c25
525b15
533a22
533a24
536c8
538a27
543a27
583b12
585b27
586a8
589a18-21
590a1
590c5
584a15
596a23
596b13
598a24
601a2-7
601c6
602c5-13
605c14
605c16
608a20
608b20
1287n.
1304n.
1307n.
878n.
821, 1361n.
883n.
824
956, 1060n.
1059n.
147n.
117
572
1081n.
1080n.
1082n.
1029
497-8n.
1183n.
1093, 1183n.
1207n.
1054n.
1057n.
1058n.
875n.
1298n.
1298n.
735n.
465
576
671
637
637
730n.
729n.
623
742n.
680
750n.
684
671, 746n.
735n.
609
611
608c11
610a5
610a6
610c22
615c4
617a3
617a18
617b23-25
617c25
619a15
619c19023
621b15
623b19
630b15
645c19
646c10
647b23
647b29
648c19
648c29
657c5
657c10
611a16
661c14
662a8
663a11
663a26
663c12
674a1
676a26
676c25
678a26
681a17
683a24
683c24
684a2
684a11
692b19
700b23
702b21
707b6
708a14
714a7
Index
1425
616
714n.
578
577-8
624
643
565
687
655
349n.
686
752-3n.
610
295
598
715n.
719n.
595
620
596
329n.
329n.
363n.
145n., 1369n.
1048n.
69
68
65
445
445
445
446
69
120
148-9n.
121
121
495
542n.
306
376
377
146n.1426 Index
719c13
723b29-c6
726b16
726c4
728a28
730a29
730b26
731b5
731b11
731b12
731b23
732b27
741a10
746c1
767b5-11
771a7
772a29
774a7
774a14
777b18
779a28
779c4
780b10
780b26
782a22
782c27
784b5
784c8
814a23
819b10
821c2
821c14
822c14
863a11
866a15
866a21
868a6
871a11
866c22
887c5
895a16
897b24
897b26
1295n.
569
1026
1027
1205n.
153
145n., 1369n.
154
1365n.
154
154
167
713n.
93
183
347n.
236-7
347n.
1304n.
230
1239-40, 1255-6.
1307n. vice, 184, 255, 494-5, 563, 956-7, 983,
991, 1009.
vicikitsa; see doubt.
Videha; see Pūrvavideha.
Videhas; see Pūrvavidehakas.
Vidura, 388.
vidyā, 419, 422, 425, 577; see also
knowledge.
views (dṛṣṭi), 113-4, 198, 418, 420-1,
575, 577, 579-80, 639-40, 799,
804, 828, 832, 835-7, 844, 848,
955, 1088, 1095, 1115-6, 1250,
1326; clinging to views, 829, 832;
esteeming of views, see dṛṣṭiparā-
marsa; false views, 58, 200, 210-1,
644-6, 648, 657-61, 663-5, 667,
669-70, 688-9, 768, 772-3, 776-9;
see also Wrong Views; flood of
views, 829, 831-2; yoke of views,
829, 831-2; see also samyagdṛṣṭi.
vigatarāga (without craving), 1106.
445
227
226
347n.
631
222
222
1238
1302n.
1296n.
1293n.
1293n.
510-1n.
535n.
459
898b2
904a25
911c5
912c4
937a18
950a24
950c8
950c29
983b13
984c21
985a22
988a14
1002b6
531n.
144n.
753-4n.
754n.
1054n.
1202n.
1204n.
1070n.
1070n.
926
1185n.
1101, 1185n.
1185n.
362n.
716-7n.
286
1368n.
1370n.
vibhava, see non-existence.
vibhavatṛṣṇā (thirst for non-
existence), 787-8, 876-7n.
vicāra, 96-7, 193, 196-9, 202-4, 298,
339-40n., 572, 576, 580, 632, 1030,
1173, 1218-9, 1229, 1231, 1235-6,
1202-3n. vigilance (apramāda), 896.
vihāṇi (loss), 938-9.
361n.
1
1
1Vihāra, 918.
vijñāna; see consciousness.
vijñānadhātu, 74, 101.
vijñānakāyas, 74, 578.
1244.
vijñānaskandha, 74.
vijñānasthitis (abodes of conciousness),
83, 374-9, 909, 1223-4.
Vijñānavādins, 115.
Vijñānantyāyatana, 366, 471, 1226, viprayuktas, 73, 91, 112, 299, 302,
340n.
vijñapti (informative action), 68, 71,
252, 275-6, 552-3, 556 (709n.),
558-60, 564, 566-73, 575-7, 579-
80, 583-4, 587, 589-92, 603, 611,
613, 618, 641-4, 647, 652-3, 655,
682, 686-7, 704, 717n., 802, 1173,
124.
vikalpa, 97-8.
vikalpana (intellectual operation), 162.
vikarahetu (cause of transformation),
309.
vikṣepa; see distraction.
vimānas, 465, 771.
vimokşamukha, 197.
vimokşas, 87, 323, 1133-4, 1137, 1148,
1271-9, 1303-4n., 1332.
vimukti, 87.
vimuktijñānadarśana, 87.
vimuktimārga; see Path of Deliverence.
vimuktiskandha, 1035.
vimuktyāyatana, 88.
Vinataka, 452, 454.
Vinaya, 391, 592, 619, 1222, 1281.
Vinayadharas, 605.
vipāka, see retribution.
Index 1427
vipäkahetu (retributive cause), 255,
261, 264, 266-7, 274-7, 286-8,
295-6, 304, 309, 315, 807.
vipākaja, 103, 270, 315-6, 318-9.
vipäkaphala (retributive result), 258-9,
287, 289, 1354.
vipākāvaraṇa (obstacle of retribution),
678-80.
Viparitasútra, quoted, 1237.
viparyāsa; see error.
vipaśyanā; see insight.
Vipaśyin (Buddha), 693.
virāga, see detachment.
virāgadhātu (sphere of the absence of
craving), 1038.
virile activity; see puruṣakāra.
virile result; see puruṣakāraphala.
Viśākhā, 381.
visamyoga (disjunction from defile-
ments), 177, 280, 290, 949-50.
visamyogaphala, 258, 278, 290.
visayapratighāta, 90.
visayas; see spheres.
višeşamärga; see Path of Excellence.
visual consciousness, 66, 71-2, 77, 98,
106-7, 109, 111, 113, 115-9, 124-9,
155-6, 256-7, 271-2, 287, 295,
302-3, 424, 427-8, 493, 632, 849,
917, 1163, 1177, 1240-1, 1314,
1318-9, 1321-4.
Visuddhimagga, 620, 654.
vital energies (ayuḥsaṁskāras), 165,
235.
vital organ, 130, 154, 157-60, 163-8,
170-6, 180-3, 233, 276, 367, 393,
650.
vital parts (marmāņi), 449-50.
vital principle (jīva), 1324-5, 1332-4.
vītarāga, 178, 180, 776.
vitarka, 96-7, 192-3, 196-9, 202-4, 298,
339-40n., 573, 576, 580, 623, 632,
704, 917, 1154, 1173, 1219, 1229,
1231, 1235-6, 1234-40, 1254-6.
vitarkagata, 387.
vivartakalpa (kalpa of creation), 475,
477-9.
voice (vāc), 65, 86, 104, 158-9, 203,
251, 372, 552, 567, 571, 584, 638-
9, 641, 648, 1173, 1221.1428 Index
volition (cetanā), 73, 83, 106, 189, 195,
231, 274, 429-30, 440-1, 443-4,
505, 551-2, 553, 559-60, 563-5,
567, 571, 590-1, 594-5, 636-7,
639-40, 658, 664-6, 678, 689, 695,
700, 742n., 744n., 942, 1003, 1324.
vows, 613, 1269-70.
vṛddha, 262.
vṛddhihetu (cause of development),
309.
Vṛṣalas, 646.
Vyākhyā, quoted, 999, (1072n.); refered
to 795-6, 1045n.
vyañjanakāya, 250, 253; see also
phonemes.
vyāpādanivaraṇa, 192.
vyukrāntaka absorption, 229.
vyutthānacitta (mind of leaving), 230,
232.
W
warmth, 233-4, 248, 1222-3.
water, 68-9, 88, 99, 101, 186, 450-4,
477-8, 490-1, 494-5, 1277, 1348.
Way, 561-2, 566, 588, 679, 1325, 1335.
well-being, 158, 1167, 1231-4, 1233-4,
1238-9; see also prasrabdhi.
West, 370.
Westerners, 109, 1100.
Wheel of the Dharma, 164, 995-8; see
also below.
Wheel of the Law, 684-5; see also
above.
wickedness, 192, 639, 643-4, 646-7,
657-9.
wind, 65, 68-70, 88, 101, 121, 187,
450-4, 460, 463, 477-8, 490-1,
494-5, 917, 921, 923, 1254, 1277-
8, 1351.
wisdom, 1016, 1167; Aśaikṣa Wisdoms,
1164-6; three wisdoms, 912-3; see
also prajñā.
wombs, 175, 219, 236, 371-2, 380-3,
395, 397-400, 445, 510-1n., 686,
937, 1330.
women, 662, 667, 686, 787, 809-10,
936-7, 1345.
words, 62, 250-4, 666-7; see also nāman.
world (bhajanaloka), 63, 154, 306-7,
365-495 passim., 767, 778, 789,
804, 1307-8n., 1334-5.
worship, 702-3.
wrappings of attachments (paryavas-
thānas), 770, 787-8, 829-30, 832,
835, 837, 841-6, 850, 867, 869-
70n.
Wrong Action (mithyākarmānta), 671.
Wrong Livilihood (mithyājīva), 575,
671-2.
Wrong Resolution (mithyadhimokṣa),
194.
Wrong Speech (mithyāvāc), 671.
Wrong Views (mithyādṛṣṭi), 198, 772-
3, 777, 782, 788, 792, 796, 826-7,
836-9, 848, 853, 1109, 1162-3,
1325, 1330, 1333, 1335; see also
views, false.
Y
Yajñadatta, 1340.
Yakşas, 462-3, 784.
Yama, 389, 458, 460.
Yamarākṣasas, 458.
Yamas, 365, 465, 467-9, 471, 478.
Yasas, son of, 236.
yoga, 699, 1110.
Yogācārins, 462, 562-3, 711-2n.
yogas; see yokes.
yogavihita (proper action), 677.
Yogins, 319, 778.
yokes (yogas), 829, 831-5.
Yugandhara, 452-4, 460, 471.
yuvan, 262.
