Om. Homage to the Buddha.
1. He has, in an absolute manner, destroyed all blindness; He
has drawn out the world from the mire of transmigration: I
fender homage to Him, to this teacher of truth, before
composing the treatise called the Abhidharmakośa.
Desiring to compose a treatise, with the intention of making
known the greatness of his master, the author undertakes to render
him homage and to first present his qualities.
"He" refers to the Buddha, the Blessed One.
"He has destroyed all blindness,” that is to say, by him or through
him blindness with respect to all things is destroyed.
"Blindness" is ignorance, for ignorance hinders the seeing of things
as they truly are.
By this, the Buddha, the Blessed One¹ is sufficiently designated, for
he alone, through the possession of the antidote to ignorance (v. 60),
has definitely destroyed all ignorance with respect to all knowable
things, so that it cannot rearise.
But the Pratyekabuddhas and the Śrāvakas have also destroyed all
blindness, for they are freed from all ignorance defiled by the
defilements.
But they do not know the qualities proper to the Buddha (vii.28), ²
objects very distant in space or time (vii.55), ³ nor the infinite complex
of things; 4 therefore, they have not destroyed blindness in an absolute
manner, for the ignorance freed from the defilements is active in
them. 5
Having thus praised the Blessed One from the point of view of
qualities useful to himself, the author praises him from the point of
view of qualities useful to others: "He has drawn out the world from56 Chapter One
the mire of transmigration." Transmigration is a mire, because the
world is bound up in it, and because it is difficult to traverse. The
Blessed One, having pity on the world which finds itself drowned
without recourse in this mire, has pulled it out, as much as possible,6 by
extending to each one the hands of the teaching of the Good Law.7
"I render homage," by prostrating myself even to my head "to this
teacher of truth:"8 teacher of truth,” because he teaches in conformity
with that which is, without error. By thus qualifying the Blessed One,
the author indicates the manner in which the Blessed One is useful to
others. It is by the true teaching that the Blessed One, the teacher, has
pulled the world out of the mire of transmigration, not by his
supernatural powers, nor by the granting of favors.9
After having rendered homage to this teacher of truth, what will
the author do? "I shall compose a treatise." A treatise is that which
instructs disciples. Which treatise?
The Abhidharmakosa.
What is Abhidharma?
2a. Abhidharma is pure prajña with its following.
Prajñā which will be defined below (ii.24, vii.1) is the discernment
of the dharmas. 10
Pure prajñā is undefiled prajñā.11
The "following" of prajñā is its escort, namely the five pure
skandhas (i.7a) which coexists with prajñā. ¹2
Such is the absolute meaning 13 of Abhidharma.
2b. It is also prajñā, and the Treatise which brings about the
obtaining of pure prajñā.
In common usage, the word Abhidharma also designates all prajñā
which brings about the obtaining of Abhidharma in the absolute sense
of the word; defiled prajñā whether it is innate or natural, or whether
the result of an effort, the result of hearing, reflection, absorptionThe Dhātus 57
(śrutacintābhāvanā-mayī, ii.71c), receives, along with its following, by
convention, the name of Abhidharma.
One also gives the name of Abhidharma to the Treatise, ¹4 for the
Treatise also brings about the obtaining of pure prajñā: it is thus a
factor in Abhidharma in the absolute sense of the word.
Dharma is that which bears (dhāraṇa) self-(or unique) charac-
teristics.
The Abhidharma is called abhi-dharma because it envisions (abhi-
mukha) the dharma which is the object of supreme knowledge, or the
supreme dharma, Nirvāṇa; or rather it is so-called because it envisions
the characteristics of the dharmas, both their self-characteristics and
their common (or general) characteristics.
Why is the present work called the Abhidharmakośa?
2c-d. The present work is called the Abhidharmakośa because
the Abhidharma enters into it through its meaning; or because
the Abhidharma constitutes its foundation.
The Treatise that bears the name of Abhidharma enters by its
meaning into this work, which is thus the Abhidharmakośa, “the
sheath of the Abhidharma." Or rather as the Abhidharma is the point
of support of this work, one can say that this work is drawn from out
of the Abhidharma, as from a sheath; it is thus called the Abhi-
dharmakośa, "the work which has the Abhidharma for a sheath.”
Why was the Abhidharma taught? By whom was the Abhidharma
originally taught? The answer to these two questions will tell us why
the author piously undertakes the writing of the Abhidharmakośa.
3. Apart from the discernment of the dharmas, there is no
means to extinguish the defilments, and it is by reason of the
defilements that the world wanders in the ocean of existence.
So it is with a view to this discernment that the Abhidharma
has been, they say, spoken [by the Master]. ¹558 Chapter One
Apart from the discernment of dharmas, there does not exist any
means for the extinguishing of the defilements (v.1), and these are the
defilements which cause the world to wander in the great ocean of
transmigration. This is why, say the Vaibhāṣikas, 16 with a view to the
discernment of the dharmas, the master, the Buddha, the Blessed One,
spoke the Abhidharma. For, without the teaching of the Abhidharma,
a disciple would be incapable of discerning the dharmas.
However, the Vaibhasikas explain, the Blessed One spoke the
Abhidharma in fragments. And in the same way that the Sthavira
Dharmatrāta made a collection of the Udanas scattered throughout the
Scriptures, the Udānavarga, 17-in this same way the Aryan Kat-
yāyāniputra and the other Saints established the Abhidharma [by
collecting it into the seven Abhidharmas]. 18
What are the dharmas of which the Abhidharma teaches the
discerning?
4a. The dharmas are impure, "in a relationship with the
defilements," or pure,"with no relationship to the defilements."
This is the complete teachings of all the dharmas.
What are the impure dharmas?
4b-c. Conditioned dharmas, with the exception of the Path, are
impure.
With the exception of the Path, all conditioned dharmas are
defiled. Why is this?
4d. They are impure because the defilements adhere to them. ¹9
(For the samkṛtadharmas see i.7a, ii.45c-d. For the defilements, the
asravas, see v.40.)
Without doubt certain defilements, for example false views, can
have the Path or the unconditioned dharmas, for their object. This
does not make the Path or these dharmas impure, or in a (necessary)The Dhatus 59
relationship with the defilements, because the defilements do not
adhere to them. This point will be explained later in the Fifth Chapter.
What are the pure dharmas?
5a-b. The undefiled truth of the Path and the three uncondi-
tioned things are pure. 20
What are the three unconditioned things? 21
5c. Space and the two types of extinctions. 22
The two extinctions are pratisamkhyānirodha, extinction due
to knowledge, and apratisamkhyanirodha, extinction not due to
knowledge.
The three unconditioned things and the truth of the Path are pure
dharmas because the defilements do not adhere to them.
5c. Space is "that which does not hinder."
Space has for its nature not hindering matter which, in fact, takes
place freely in space; and also of not being hindered by matter, for
space is not displaced by matter. 23
6a. Pratisaṁkhyānirodha is disjunction. 24
(Conscious) disjunction (visamyoga, ii.57d) from the impure
dharmas is pratisaṇkhyānirodha (ii.55) [or Nirvana]. Pratisaṇkhyāna
or pratisamkhya signifies a certain pure prajñā, the comprehension of
the Truths. The “extinction" of which one takes possession by this
prajñā is called pratisaṁkhyānirodha; we could say pratisamkhya-
[prāpya]-nirodha, “the extinction obtained through pratisamkhyā,³
but the middle word (i.e., prāpya) is elided, as in the expression "ox-
cart," and not "cart hitched to oxen” (goratha = go-[yukta]-ratha).
Is there but one single pratisaṁkhyānirodha from all of the impure
dharmas?60
Chapter One
No.
Why is this?
6b. Each [disjunction occurs] separately.
Each disjunction taken seperately is pratisamkhyanirodha. The
objects of "disjunction" are as numerous as the objects of "junction." 25
If it were otherwise, if pratisamkhyanirodha were single, then a person
who has experienced the extinction of the defilement which is
abandoned by seeing the Truth of Suffering, would have obtained at
the same time the extinction of the defilements which are abandoned
by the Seeing of the other Truths, and by Meditation. It would be
useless for him to cultivate the part of the Path which is opposed to
these defilements. (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 164c16).
This does not mean that all extinction is alike, that there is not an
extinction corresponding to another extinction. This means that
extinction does not have a "cause corresponding to its effect
(sabhāgahetu)," and that it is not a "cause corresponding to its effect"
(ii.52).26
6c-d. A different type of extinction, which consists of the
absolute hindering of arising, is called apratisamkhyānirodha.
Apratisamkhyanirodha is an extinction which is different from
"disjunction;" it consists of the absolute hindering of the arising of
future dharmas. It is so called because it is obtained, not by the
comprehension of the Truths, but by the insufficiency of the causes of
arising. 27
For example, when the organ of sight and the mental organ are
occupied with a certain visible matter, other visible things, sounds,
odors, tastes and tangibles pass from the present into the past. It
follows that the five sense consciousness, the visual consciousness, etc.,
which have had for their object other visible matter, sounds, odors,
tastes and tangibles, cannot arise, for the sense consciousnesses are not
capable of grasping their object when the object is past. There is thus
an absolute hindering of the arising of the said consciousnesses, by
reason of the insufficiency of the cause of arising.The Dhatus 61
Here we have a four-fold alternative (Vibhāṣā, TD 27,p. 164c16):
1. solely pratisamkhyanirodha of the impure dharmas, past,
present, and destined to arise;
2. solely apratisamkhyanirodha of pure, conditioned dharmas, not
destined to arise;
3. pratisamkhyanirodha and apratisamkhyānirodha of impure
dharmas, not destined to arise; and
4. neither pratisamkhyānirodha nor apratisamkhyanirodha of pure
dharmas, past, present or destined to arise. 28
We have said that the impure dharmas are the conditioned
dharmas, minus the Path. What are the conditioned dharmas?
7a-b. Conditioned things are the fivefold skandhas, matter,
etc. 29
These are the aggregate of matter, the aggregate of the sensations,
the aggregate of ideas, the aggregate of mental formations, and the
aggregate of consciousness.
Samkṛta, conditioned, is explained etymologically as "that which
has been created (kṛta) by causes in union and combination." There is
no dharma which is engendered by a single cause (ii.64).
Even though the expression saṁskṛta signifies "that which has
been created . . ," it also applies to future dharmas and to present
dharmas, as well as to past dharmas; in fact, a dharma does not change
its nature by changing its time period. In the same way, one calls milk
in the udder dugdha, "that which has been drawn," and kindling
indhana, or "wood to be burned."
7c-d. Conditioned things are the paths; they are the founda-
tions of discourse; they are "possessed of leaving;” they are
"possessed of causes."
1. Conditioned things are paths-that is to say, the time periods,
the past, present and future-because they have for their nature62
Chapter One
having gone, of going, of shall be going. In the same way, one says that
a path led somewhere, that it goes, or that it will go to the town.
Or rather conditioned things are called paths (adhvan) because
they are devoured (adyante) by impermanence (ii.45c).
2. Discourse (kathā), means words, or speech (vākya); discourse
has names or words (nāman, ii.36) 3⁰ for its foundation.
Should one take literally the definition given by the stanza, and say
that conditioned things are words?
No. By "foundations of discourse" one should understand "the
foundations of discourse, that is, words, together with that which the
words signify." If we understand "foundations of discourse" to be only
words, we would be at variance with the Prakaraṇapada ³¹ which says;
"The kathāvastus, the foundations of discourse, are embraced within
the eighteen dhātus.” (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 74a20), ³2
3. Niḥsara signifies "leaving" (sāra = niḥsaraṇa) which is the
Nirvana of all conditioned things. As one should depart from
conditioned things, one qualifies them as "endowed with leaving." 33
4. Conditioned things are dependent on causes; they are thus
qualified as savastuka, that is, “having causes." 34
The Vaibhäşikas believe that, in the expression savastuka, vastu
signifies cause (hetu).35
Such are the diverse synonyms of "conditioned things."
8a-b. When they are impure, they are upādānaskandhas. 36
Impure conditioned things constitute the five upādānaskandhas.
Everything that is upādānaskandha is skandha, pure conditioned
things are included within the skandhas, but are not included within
the upādānaskandhas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 387a9).
The upādānas are defilements (kleśas, v.38).
The upādānaskandhas are so called (1) because they proceed from
the defilements, as one says "grass fire" or "straw fire;” (2) or rather
because they are governed by the defilements, as one says
"the king's
man;" (3) or rather because they give rise to the defilements, as one
says "flower-bearing tree" or "fruit-bearing tree."
8c. They are called "of battle.” 37The defilements are of battle because they injure oneself and
others. Impure conditioned things are qualified “of battle,” “in a
relationship with battle," because the defilements of battle adhere to
them; equally, as we have seen, they are qualified as "impure,"
"possessing impurity,"because the defilements adhere to them.
The Dhatus 63
8c-d. They are also suffering, arising, the world, the locus of
false opinions, existence.
1. Suffering, because they are odious to the Saints (vi.2).
2. Arising, because suffering arises from them (vi.2).
3. World, because they are in the process of decomposition. 38
4. Locus of opinions, because the five opinions abide in them and
adhere to them (v.7) (Prakaraṇa, p. 33b7).
5. Existence, because it exists. 39
We have seen that there are five skandhas (i.7, 20). Let us first
study rūpaskandha (i.9-14b).
9a-b. Rūpa, or matter, is the five sense organs, five objects, and
avijñapti. 40
The five organs are the organs of sight, hearing, smell, taste and
touch.
The five objects of the five organs are visible matter, sounds, odors,
tastes and tangibles.
And avijñapti (i.11); such is rūpaskandha.
We have enumerated five things, visible matter, sound, etc.
9c-d. The points of support of the consciousnesses of these
things, namely the subtle material elements, are the five
organs, the organ of sight, etc. 4164 Chapter One
The five which are the point of support of the consciousnesses of
visible matter, sounds, odor, taste and tangibles, and which consist of
the suprasensible subtle material elements, are, in this order, the
organs of sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch.
The Blessed One said in fact, "The eye, Oh Bhiksus, an internal
ayatana, a subtle matter derived from the primary elements . . ." 42
Or rather, (the point of support of the consciousnesses of these
organs, are) the points of support of the visual consciousness, or eye
consciousness, etc.4³ This interpretation is in conformity with the
Prakaraṇa (p. 692c12) which says: "What is the organ of sight? It is
the subtle matter which is the support of the consciousness of sight."
Let us now examine the five objects beginning with visible matter,
rūpāyatana.
10a. Visible matter is twofold. 44
1. Visible matter is color and shape. Color is fourfold: blue, red,
yellow, white; other colors proceed from out of these four colors. Shape
(saṁsthāna, iv.3c) is eightfold: long, short, square, round, high, low,
even, uneven. 45
10a. Or twentyfold.
2. Or there are some twenty types: the four primary colors, the
eight shapes, and eight more colors: cloud, smoke, dust, mist, shade,
hot light, light, darkness. Some make a color of the firmament [which
appears like a wall of lapiz-lazuli]; this would give us the number
twenty-one.
"Even" signifies "of even shape;" "uneven" is the opposite; mist is
the vapor which rises from the ground and from water; "hot light" is
the light of the sun; “light” is the light of the moon, the stars, fire,
grasses and gems; "shade"-arisen from an obstacle to light-is where
forms still remain visible; "darkness" is the opposite.
The other terms do not call for any explanation.
1The Dhātus 65
3. Visible matter can be color without being shape:46 blue, red,
yellow, white, shade, hot light, light, darkness.
There can be shapes without there being color: that part of the
long, of the short, etc., which constitutes bodily action (kāyavijñapti, 47
iv.2).
There can be color and shape at one and the same time: all the
other categories of visible matter.
Some other Masters maintain that only hot light and light are
exclusively color; for blue, red, etc., present themselves to the sight
under the aspect of long, short, etc.
4. But, say the Sautrāntikas, how could a single thing be (vidyate)
twofold, [color and shape together? For, in the system of the
Vaibhāṣikas, color and shape are distinct things, dravya, iv.3.]
Because color and shape are perceived in a single substance. The
root vid has here the sense of "to know," and not the sense of "to
exist."
But, reply the Sautrāntikas, you should admit that bodily action is at
one and the same time color and shape.
10b. Sound is eightfold. 48
1. It is fourfold: having for its cause present primary elements
forming part of the organs, having for its cause other primary
elements (upattānupāttāmahābhūtahetuka, i.34c-d), belonging to liv-
ing beings, and not belonging to living beings. 49 Each of these four
categories is agreeable or disagreeable.
First category: sound caused by the hand or by the voice.
Second category: sound of the wind, of the trees, of water.
Third category: sound of vocal action (iv.3d). Fourth category:
every other sound.
2. According to other masters, one sound can belong to the first
two categories at one and the same time, for example, a sound
produced by the coming together of a hand and a drum. But the School
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 663c12) does not admit that one atom [of matter]
has for its cause only two tetrades of the primary elements; thus one
cannot admit that one atom [of sound] is produced by the four primary66 Chapter One
elements of a hand and the four primary elements of a drum.
10b-c. Taste is of six types. 50
Sweet, sour, salty, pungent, bitter, and astringent.
10c. Odor is fourfold.51
For good odors and bad odors are either excessive or non-excessive.
But, according to the Prakaraṇa (p. 692c22), odor is threefold:
good, bad, and equal or indifferent.
10d. The tangible is of eleven types.52
1. Eleven things are tangible things: the four primary elements,
softness, hardness, weight, lightness, cold, hunger, and thirst.
2. The elements will be explained below (i.12). "Softness" is
smoothness; "hardness" is roughness; "weight" is that by which bodies
are susceptible of being weighed (i.36); “lightness" is the opposite;
"cold" is what produces a desire for heat; "hunger" is what produces a
desire for food; "thirst" is what produces a desire for drinking. In fact
the tangible which produces hunger and thirst is designated by the
word hunger: the cause is designated by the name of the effect. In the
same way that it is said "The appearance of the Buddha is (the cause
of) happiness; the teaching of the religion is happiness; happiness, the
harmony of the community; happiness, the austerities of monks who
are in agreement." 53
3. Both hunger and thirst are lacking in Rūpadhātu, 54 but the other
tangibles are found there.
It is true that the clothes of the gods of Rūpadhātu, individually,
have no weight; but, brought all together, they have weight.
It is true that bothersome cold is lacking in Rūpadhātu but
beneficent or pleasing cold is found there: such is the opinion of the
Vaibhāṣikas. [It is the absorption that the gods enjoy, not the cold.]
It is possible for one visual consciousness to arise from a single
thing, from a single category of visible matter: when a characteristic of
this thing (blue, etc.) is separately distinguished. In other cases, one
consciousness is produced by many things: when such a distinction isThe Dhatus 67
lacking; for example, when one sees the multiple colors and shapes
that an army or a pile of jewels present at a distance and bunched
together. The same remark is applicable to the auditory consciousness,
the olfactory consciousnesses, etc.
But one touch consciousness arises from only five things at most,
namely the four primary elements and one another of the other
tangibles, soft, hard, etc. Such is the opinion of certain masters.
But, according to another opinion, one touch consciousness can
arise from eleven tangibles at one and the same time.
[Objection]. According to what you say, each of the five sense
consciousnesses bears on a totality, for example the visual conscious-
ness bears on blue, red, etc.; consequently the sense consciousnesses
have "general characteristics for their object" and not, as Scripture
teaches us, "specific characteristic" (svalakṣaṇa).
[The Vaibhāṣikas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 65c12) answer that the
Scripture] means by specific characteristic not the specific characteristic
of things, but the specific characteristic of an āyatana (ii.62c). 56
When the organs of touch and of taste attain their object at the
same time (i.43c-d), which consciousness is the first to arise?
The one whose object is the strongest. But if the strength of the
two objects is equal, the consciousness of taste arise first, because the
desire for food dominates.
We have explained the objects of the five organs of sense
consciousness, and how these objects are preceived. Let us now
examine the avijñapti, which is the eleventh category of rūpaskandha.
11. There is a serial continuity also in a person whose mind is
distracted, or who is without mind, pure or impure, in
dependence on the primary elements: this is called the
avijñapti.57
"One whose mind is distracted" is one who has a mind different
from the mind that provoked the avijñapti,-for example, a bad mind68 Chapter One
when the avijnapti has been provoked by a good mind.
"One without mind" is one who has entered into one of the
absorptions of non-consciousness called asaṁjñisamāpatti [and niro-
dhasamāpatti] (ii.42).
"Also in a person . . :" the word "also" indicates that avijñapti also
exists in a person with a non-distracted mind, and in a person whose
mind is not in the two absorptions.
"A serial continuity" is a flux.
"Pure or impure" means good or bad.
"In dependence on the primary elements:" this in order to
distinguish the avijñapti series from the prapti series (ii.36). Avijñapti
depends on the primary elements, because they are its generating
cause, etc. (ii.65; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 663a26).
"This is called the avijñapti" in order to indicate the reason for the
name avijñapti.
This serial continuity, while being by its nature matter and
action,-like vijñapti, bodily and vocal action,-nevertheless does
nothing by way of informing another as vijñapti does.
"Is called," in order to show that the author here expresses the
opinion of the Vaibhāṣikas, and not his own.
In short, avijñapti is a rūpa, good or bad, arisen from vijñapti or
from absorption.
What are the primary elements?
12a-b. The primary elements are the elementary substance
"earth," and the elementary substances "water," "fire" and
"wind." 58
These four are the four dhātus, so called because they bear their
own unique characteristics, as well as derived or secondary matter.
They are called "great" (=primary) because they are the point of
support for all derived matter. Or it is because they assemble on a large
scale in the mass of the earth, the water, the fire and the wind, whereThe Dhātus 69
their modes of activity are manifested together (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
681a17, p. 663all). 59
What activity establishes the existence of these dhatus, and what is
their nature?
12c. They are proven to exist by the actions of support, etc.
The elements of earth, water, fire, wind, are, in this order, proven
to exist by the actions of support, cohesion, ripening and expansion.
Expansion signifies growth and deplacement. These are their actions.
12d. They are solidity, humidity, heat and motion.60
As for their natures, the earth element is solidity, the water
element is humidity, the fire element is heat, and the wind element is
motion. 61 Motion is what causes the series of states which constitutes a
thing to reproduce itself in different places; 62 in the same way that one
speaks of the motion of a flame (iv.2c-d).
The Prakarana63 and the Sūtra 64 say: "What is the wind element?
It is lightness;" the Prakarana also says: "Lightness is a derived rupa."
Consequently, the dharma which has motion for its nature is the wind
element: 65 its nature (lightness) is manifested by its act of motion.
What is the difference between the earth element, and earth, etc?
13a. In common usage, what is designated by the word "earth"
is color and shape.
That is, when one sees earth, one sees its color and its shape. As is
the case for the earth,
13b. The same for water and fire.
In common usage, that which one designates (by the word water or
fire) is color and shape.
13c. Wind is either the wind element,
But the wind element is simply called "wind" in the world.
13d. Or else [color and shape].6670
Chapter One
What is called "wind" in the world is also the wind element; in
fact, one speaks of "black wind," or “circular wind.”
Why do all these dharmas, from visibles to avijñapti, receive the
name rūpa? Why do they together constitute the rūpaskandha?
i. The Blessed One said: "Because it is incessantly broken, Oh
Bhiksus, one terms it rūpa upādānaskandha. By what it is broken? It is
broken by contact with the hand.” 67
"To be broken" signifies "to be damaged," as stated in the
Arthavargiya stanza of the Ksudrakāgama (=Aṭṭhakavagga, i.2):68 “If
the pleasures are lacking in a person who ardently searches out these
pleasures, such a person is broken, as a person pierced by an arrow is
broken." (Compare Mbh xiii. 193, 48).
But how is rūpa damaged?
By deteriorating, by being transformed.
ii. According to other masters, the quality that makes physical
matter rūpa, namely rūpaṇa, is not cutting off, deterioration, but
rather impenetrability, impact or resistance,69 the obstacle that a rūpa
opposes to its place being occupied by another rūpa (see i.43c-d). 70
[iii. Objections.]
1. If this is so, the rupa that constitutes an atom, a "monad," will
not be rūpa, for a monad, not susceptible to deterioration or resistance,
is free from rupana.
Without doubt, a monad is devoid of rūpaṇa; but a monad never
exists in an isolated state;71 in the state of agglomeration, being an
agglomerate, it is liable to deterioration and to resistance (Vibhāṣā, TD
27, p. 390al).
2. Rūpas of the past and the future are not rūpa, for one cannot say
that they are now in a state of resistance.
Without doubt, but they have been, and they shall be in this state.
Whether past or future, they are of the same nature as the dharma
which is now in a state of resistance. In the same way indhana is not
only (presently) kindled wood, but also (future) fuel.
1The Dhatus 71
3. Avijñapti is not rūpa, for it is devoid of resistance.
Without doubt, but one can justify the quality of rūpa attributed to
avijñapti:
a. Vijñapti, bodily or vocal action, from whence proceeds avijñapti,
is rūpa, thus avijñapti is rūpa, as the shadow moves when the tree
moves.
No. For avijñapti is not subject to modifications; further, in order
that the comparison be exact, the avijñapti should perish when the
vijñapti perishes, as is the case for the shadow and the tree.
b. Second explanation. Avijñapti is rūpa, for the primary elements,
which constitute its point of support, are rūpa 72
[Objection.] According to this principle, the five sense conscious-
nesses would be rūpa, for their point of support (the organ of sight,
etc.) is rūpa.
This response is not valid. Avijñapti exists dependent upon the
primary elements, as a shadow exists dependent on a tree, as the
brilliance of a jewel exists dependent upon the jewel. The visual
consciousness is not dependent upon an organ which is solely the cause
of its arising.
[Answer.] That the shadow, or the brilliance of a jewel exists
dependent upon the tree, or on the jewel, is a hypothesis that does not
conform to the principles of the Vaibhāṣikas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
63c22). The Vaibhāṣikas hold that each one of the atoms of color
which constitute shade and brilliance, exists dependent upon a tetrad
of primary elements. And even supposing that: "The shadow is
dependent upon the tree, since the shadow is dependent on the
primary elements which are proper to it, and these are dependent
upon the tree,”-the comparison to the shadow and avijñapti is
inadmissible. The Vaibhäşikas admit that avijñapti does not perish
when the primary elements which serve as its point of support perish
(iv. 4c-d). Consequently your refutation ("This response is not valid.
Avijñapti . . .”) is worthless.
Bu we would say, one can refute the objection: "According to this
principle, the five sense consciousnesses would be rūpa."
In fact, the support of visual consciousness is twofold: 1. the organ72 Chapter One
of sight, which is in a state of "impact” (i.29b), which is rūpa; and 2.
the mental organ (manas, i.44c-d) which is not rūpa.
Now the same does not hold for avijñapti whose point of support
is exclusively rūpa. Thus, from the fact that avijñapti is called rūpa
because its point of support is rūpa, one cannot conclude that visual
consciousness should be called rūpa. Therefore, the second explanation
is the right one.
The organs and objects which have been defined as rūpaskandha,
14a-b. These same organs and objects are regarded
ayatanas, ten dhātus.73
Considered as āyatana, origin of the mind and of the mental states
(i.20), they are ten āyatanas: cakṣurāyatana, rūpāyatana, . . . kāyāya-
tana, spraṣṭavyāyatana.
Considered as dhātu, a mine (i.20), they are ten dhātus: cakṣur-
dbātu, ripadbātu... kāyādbatu, sprastavyadbatu.
We have explained rūpaskandha and how it is distributed into
āyatanas and dhātus. We must now explain the skandhas.
14c. Sensation is painful impression, etc. 74
Vedanāskandha is the threefold mode of feeling or experiencing
sensation which is painful, pleasant, neither-painful-nor-pleasant. One
should distinguish six classes of sensations: those which arise from the
contact of the five material organs, the organ of sight, etc., with their
object; and those which arise from contact with the mental organ (ii.7
and following).
14c-d. Ideas consist of the grasping of characteristics.75
The grasping of the diverse natures-perceiving that this is blue,The Dhatus 73
yellow, long, short, male, female, friend, enemy, agreeable, disagree-
able, etc.-is samjñāskandha (see i.16a). One can distinguish six types
of samjña, according to organ, as for sensation.
15a-b. Samkāraskandha are the saṁskāras different from the
other four skandhas.76
The samskāras are everything that is conditioned (saṁskṛta,i.7a);
but the name is reserved for those conditioned things which are not
included in either the skandhas of rupa, vedanā, or samjñā, explained
above, or in the skandha of vijñāna explained below (i.16).
It is true that the Blessed One said in a Sūtra, “The saṁskā-
raskandha is the six classes of volition;"77 but this definition excludes
from saṁskāraskandha 1.) all the viprayuktasaṁskāras (ii.35), and 2.)
the samprayuktasaṁskāras (ii.23b, 34), with the exception of volition
itself. But the Sūtra expresses itself thus by reason of the capital
importance of volition, which, being action by its nature,78 is by
definition the factor which creates future existence. Also the Blessed
One said, "The upādānaskandha called saṁskāra is so called because it
conditions conditioned things,” 79 that is to say, because it creates and
determines the five skandhas of future existence. 80
If we take the definition of the Sūtra literally, we would then arrive
at the conclusion that the mental dharmas, with the exception of
volition, and all of the dharmas of the viprayukta class (ii.35), do not
form part of any skandha. They would thus not form part of the
Truths of Suffering and Arising: one would not either know them, nor
abandon them. Now the Blessed One said, "If there is a single dharma
which is not known and penetrated, I declare that one cannot put an
end to suffering" (vi.33). And again “If there is a single dharma which
is not abandoned . . .” (Samyukta TD 2, p. 55b7, b23). Thus the
collection of mental states and viprayuktas is included within the
samskāraskandha.
15b-d. These three skandhas, with avijñapti and unconditioned
things, are the dharmayatana, the dharmadhātu.
Vedanāskandha, saṁjñāskandha, saṁskāraskandha, plus avijñapti74 Chapter One
(i.11) and the three unconditioned things (i.5b), are seven things
which are called dharmayatana or dharmadhātu.
16a. Consciousness is the impression relative to each object. 81
Vijñānaskandha is the impression relative to each object, the "raw
grasping"82 of each object. 83 Vijñānaskandha is six classes of con-
sciousness, visual, auditory, olfactory, taste, touch, and mental
consciousness.
Considered as āyatana (i.20a),
16b. It is the mental organ.
Considered as dhātu (i.20a),
16c. It is seven dhātus.
What are the seven?
16d. The six consciousnesses and the manas.
That is to say: the dhātu of the eye or visual consciousness
(cakṣurvijñānadhātu), the dhātu of the ear or auditory consciousness
(srotravijñānadhātu), the dhātu of the nose or olfactory consciousness
(ghrāṇavijñānadhātu), the dhātu of tongue or taste consciousness
(jihvāvijñānadhātu), the dhātu of body or touch consciousness
(kāyavijñānadhātu), the dhatu of mind or mental consciousness
(manovijñānadhātu), and the dhātu of the mind (manodhātu).
We have seen that there are five skandhas, twelve āyatanas, and
eighteen dhātus.
1. Rūpaskandha is ten āyatanas, ten dhātus, and avijñapti.
2. The dharmayatana, or dharmadhātu is vedanā, saṁjñā and
samskārāskandha; avijñapti; and the unconditioned things.
3. Vijñānaskandha is the mana-ayatana; it is seven dhātus, namely
the six classes of consciousness (vijñānakāya = vijñānadhātu) and the
mental organ.
Could a manas or manodhatu be distinct from the six classes of
consciousness, distinct from the sense consciousness and from the
mental consciousness?
There is no manas distinct from the consciousness. 84The Dhatus 75
17a-b. Of these six consciousness, the one which continually
passes away, is the manas. 85
All consciousness which has just perished receives the name of
manodhātu, in the same way, a man is both son and father, the same
vegetable element is both fruit and seed.
[Objection.] If the six consciousnesses which make up six dhatus
constitute the manas, and if the manas is not a thing other than the six
consciousnesses, then there would be either seventeen dhātus,-by
excluding the manas which is co-functional with the six conscious-
nesses, or else twelve dhātus, by excluding the six consciousnesses
which are co-functional with the manas,-supposing of course that you
want to enumerate distinct things and not mere designations.
This is true; but
17c-d. One counts eighteen dhātus with a view to assigning a
point of support to the sixth consciousness.
The first five consciousnesses have for their point of support the
five material organs, organ of sight, etc. (see i.44c-d); but the sixth
consciousness, the mental consciousness, does not have such a point of
support. Consequently, with a view to attributing a point of support to
this consciousness, one calls manas or manodhātu, or again mana-
ayatana and mana-indriya, that which serves it as its point of support,
that is to say, any one of the six consciousnesses which depend on these
six points of support, and six objects.
[Objection.] If the consciousness or mind is called manas when,
having perished, it is the point of support of another consciousness,
the last mind of an Arhat will not be a manas, for it is not followed by
a mind of which it would be the immediately antecedent cause and
point of support (i.44c-d).
This last mind has indeed the nature of manas, the nature of being
a point of support. If it is not followed by a new mind, namely the
consciousness-of-conception of a new existence (punarbhava), this is
not related to its nature; rather, this results from the absence of other
causes, actions and defilements, necessary to the production of a new
thought.76 Chapter One
All conditioned dharmas are included within the totality of the
skandhas (i.7); all of the impure dharmas are included within the
totality of the upādānaskandhas (1.8); and all the dharmas are included
within the totality of the āyatanas and the dhatus (i.14). But, more
briefly,
18a-b. All the dharmas are included in one skandha, one
ayatana, and one dhātu.86
In rūpaskandha, mana-ayatana and dharmadhātu.
18c. A dharma is included in its own nature. 87
Not in another nature. Why is this?
18d. For it is distinct from the nature of others.
A dharma is not included (samgraha) in that from which it is
distinct. For example, the organ of sight is included within the
rūpaskandha, being rūpa by its nature; within the cakṣurāyatana and
within the cakṣurdhātu, for it is the cakşurayatana and cakṣurdhātu,
within the Truth of Suffering and Arising, for it is suffering and
arising; but it is not included within the other skandhas, ayatanas, etc.,
for it is distinct by its nature from that which is not itself.
Without doubt the assemblies are won over by alms-giving and
other samgrahavastus: 88 there is therefore samgraha of one thing by a
thing different from it.
But the samgraha is occasional and as a consequence, not real, but
conventional.
But, there are two organs of sight, of hearing, and of smell;
consequently one should count twenty-one dhātus.
19a-c. The organs of sight, of hearing, and of smell, although
twofold, form only, in pairs, one dhātu, for their nature, their
sphere of activity, and their consciousnesses are common.
The two organs of sight have a community of nature, for theyThe Dhatus 77
are-both of them-the organ of sight; community of sphere, for they
both have visible matter for their sphere; and community of con-
sciousness, for they are both the point of support of the visual
consciousness. Consequently the two organs of sight form a single
abấtu.
The same holds for the organs of hearing and smell.
19d. It is for beauty's sake that they are twofold.
Although they form only one dhātu, these organs are produced in
pairs, with a view to the beauty of the body. With but a single eye, a
single ear, or a single nostril, one would be very ugly (ii.la; i.43, 30).89
What is the meaning of the terms skandha, ayatana, and dhātu?
20a-b. Skandha signifies "heap," ayatana signifies "gate of
entry," "gate of arising," and dhatu signifies "lineage."
i. In the Sūtra, skandha signifies “heap:" "Whatever rūpa there is,
past, present, or future, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or
excellent, far or near, if one puts together all this rūpa, that which is
past, etc., one has that which is called rūpaskandha."
[According to the Vaibhāṣikas,] (1) past rūpa is rūpa destroyed by
impermanence,9¹ future rupa is rūpa which has not arisen, and present
rūpa is rūpa which has arisen and which has not been destroyed; (2)
rūpa is internal when it forms part of the series called “me” (i.39); all
other rūpa is external; or rather the terms internal and external are
understood from the point of view of ayatana: the organ of sight is
internal because it forms part of my series or of the series of another;
(3) rūpa is gross when it offers resistance; or rather these two
designations are relative and not absolute.
Should one say that, in this second hypothesis, the gross and the
subtle are not proven, since the same rūpa is gross or subtle according
to whether one compares it to a rūpa more subtle or gross?
This objection is invalid, for terms of comparison do not vary:78 Chapter One
when a rūpa is gross in relation to another ripa, it is not subtle in
relation to this same other rūpa: like father and son.
(4) Inferior rūpa is defiled rupa; excellent rūpa is non-defiled rupa;
(5) past and future rupa are distant; present rūpa is near. ⁹2
The same for the other skandhas, with this difference: gross
consciousness is that which has for its point of support the five organs;
subtle consciousness is the mental consciousness; or rather conscious-
ness is gross or subtle according to whether it belongs to a stage which
is inferior or superior.
According to the Bhadanta,⁹³ (1) gross rūpa is that which is
perceived by the five organs; all other rūpa is subtle; (2) "inferior"
signifies "unpleasant," "excellent" signifies "pleasant;"” (3) distant rūpa
is that which is found in an invisible place; near rūpa is that which is
found in a visible place.
[The explanation of the Vaibhāṣikas is bad, for] past rūpa, etc., has
already been designated by its name. The same for sensation; it is far
or near according to whether its point of support is visible or invisible;
it is gross or subtle according to whether it is corporeal or mental (ii.7).
ii. āyatana signifies "gate of entry or of arising of the mind and of
the mental states" (cittacaitta, ii.23). Etymologically, āyatana is that
which extends (tanvanti) the entry (āya) of the mind and of the
mental states. 94
iii. Dhātu signifies gotra, race, lineage.95 In the same way that the
place, the mountain, where there are many "families” of gems,-iron,
copper, silver, gold,-is said "to have numerous dhātus," in this same
way in the human complex or series, there are eighteen types of
"families" which are called the eighteen dhātus.
Gotra is thus a mine. % Of what is the organ of the eye the mine?
Of what are the other dhātus the mine?
The dhātus are the mine of their own species: the eye, being a
"cause similar to its effect" (sabhägahetu, ii.52) of the later moments of
the existence of the eye, is the mine, the dhatu of the eye.
But then unconditioned things, which are eternal, cannot be
considered as dhātu?
Let us say that they are the mine of the mind and mental states.The Dhātus 79
According to another opinion, dhatu signifies species. The specific
nature of the eighteen dhātus is what is understood by the eighteen
dhātus.
iv. [Objections.⁹7] 1. If skandha signifies "heap," the skandhas have
only a nominal existence, not a real existence, for collections are not a
thing: for example a pile of wheat, or the pudgala."
99 No, [reply the Vaibhāṣikas,] for an atom is a skandha.
As an atom in this hypothesis cannot have the quality of being a
heap, do not say that skandha signifies "heap."
2. According to another opinion (Vibhāṣā TD 27, p. 407c9),
skandha signifies "that which bears the burden, namely its effect." 100
Or else skandha signifies "part, section," 101 as one says in the world, "I
will lend you three skandhas, if you promise to return them to me." 102
These two explanations are not in conformity with the Sūtra. ¹03
The Sūtra, in fact, attributes the sense of heap to skandha and no other
sense: "Whatever rupa there is, past, present, or future, . . . if one puts
together all this rūpa . . ."
3. [The Vaibhāṣikas say: The Sūtra teaches that] all rūpa,-past
rūpa, future rūpa, etc.,—is, individually, called skandha, the same way
that it teaches that hair, etc., is earth-element (below, note 120); thus
each "real" (atomic) element of past rūpa, future rūpa, etc., receives the
name of skandha. Thus the skandhas have real existence and not
merely nominal existence.
This interpretation is inadmissible, for the Sūtra says ". . . if one
puts together all this rūpa, . . . one has that which is called
rūpaskandha."
4. [The Sautrāntikas:] If this is the case, then the material
ayatanas,-the organs and objects of the five sense consciousnesses,-
have only a nominal existence, for the quality of being a "gate of
arising of the mind or mental states" does not belong to atoms taken
one by one, which are solely real, but to collections of atoms which
constitute an organ of sight, a visible object, etc.
[Answer:] No, since each of these atoms individually possesses the
quality of being "a gate of the arising of the mind," of being the cause
of consciousness (compare i.44a-b.iii). If you do not accept this80
Chapter One
doctrine, you will refuse to the organ, in its totality, the quality of being
a cause of consciousness, for it does not produce a consciousness by
itself, without the cooperation of an object.
5. On the other hand, the Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 384a18) expresses
itself thus: "When the Abhidhārmikas 104 take into consideration the
fact that the term skandha is only the denomination of a heap, they say
that an atom is part of a dhātu, an āyatana, and a skandha; when they
do not take this fact into consideration, they say that an atom is a
dhātu, an āyatana, a skandha.” 105 In fact, one metaphorically designates
the part by the whole; for example, "The robe is burned," for "One
part of the robe is burned."
Why did the Blessed One give skandhas, ayatanas and dhātus as
the triple designation of the dharmas?
20c-d. The teachings of the skandhas, etc., because error,
faculty, joy are threefold. 106
1. Error is threefold: the first catagory of persons go astray by
considering mental phenomena as together constituting a self; the
second are similarly mistaken with respect to the material elements;
and the third similarly err with respect to both the mental and the
material elements.
2. The moral faculties (ii.3c-d), the faculty of speculative conscious-
ness (prajñendriya, ii.24d), are of three catagories, sharp, mediocre,
dull.
3. Joy is threefold: the first category of persons apply themselves to
that which is said in brief; the second to that which is said normally;
the third to that which is said at great length.
The teaching of the skandhas addresses itself to the first category
of hearers, to those who are mistaken with respect to mental
phenomena, who are of sharp faculties, and who are fond of a brief
teaching; the teaching of the āyatanas addresses itself to the secondcategory, and the teaching of the dhatus addresses itself to the third
category, 107
The Dhatus 81
Sensation and ideas each constitute a seperate skandha: all the
other mental dharmas (ii.24) are placed within the samskāraskandha
(i.15). Why is this?
21. The two mental states, sensation and ideas, are defined as
distinct skandhas because they are the causes of the roots of
dispute, because they are the causes of transmigration, and also
by reason of the causes which justify the order of skandhas.
(i.22b) 108
1. There are two roots of dispute: 109 attachment to pleasure, and
attachment to opinions. Sensation and ideas are, respectfully, the
principal causes of these two roots. In fact, if one becomes attached to
pleasures, it is because one relishes the sensation; if one becomes
attached to opinions, it is by reason of erroneous or false ideas
(viparītasamjñā, v.9)
2. Sensation and ideas are the causes of transmigration: those who
are greedy for sensation and whose ideas are erroneous transmigrate.
3. The reasons which justify the order of the skandhas will be
explained below (i.22b-d).
Why do unconditioned things, which form part of the dharmā-
yatana and the dharmadhātu (i.15d), not form part of the skandhas?
22a-b Unconditioned things are not named with respect to the
skandhas, because they do not correspond to the concept. 110
1. Unconditioned things cannot be placed within any of the five
skandhas, for they are not matter, nor sensation ...82
Chapter One
2. One cannot make a sixth skandha of the unconditioned: it does
not correspond to the concept of skandha, since skandha signifies
"heap," "capable of being put together." One cannot say of the
unconditioned what the Sūtra says of matter: "If one puts together all
this unconditioned, that which is past . . . , one has that which one
calls the a asaṁskṛtaskandha,” for the distinctions of past, etc., do not
exist with respect to unconditioned things.
3. Furthermore, the expression upādānaskandha (i.8a) designates
the totality of that which is the cause of defilements; the expression
skandha designates the totality of that which is the cause of defilement
(impure conditioned things) as well as the cause of purification (pure
conditioned things: the Path). Thus unconditioned things, which are
neither the cause of defilement, nor the cause of purification, cannot be
placed either among the upādānaskandhas nor among the skandhas.
4. According to one opinion, the same way that the end of a jug is
not a jug, in this same way unconditioned things, which are the end or
cessation of the skandhas, are not skandhas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
385b18). And so according to this reasoning unconditioned things will
be neither āyatanas nor dhātus.
We have defined the skandhas. We should now explain the order in
which the skandhas are enumerated.
22b-d. The order of the skandhas is justified by their grossness,
their defilement, the characteristic of the jug, etc., and also from
the point of view of their spheres of influence.111
1. Matter, being subject to resistance (i.29b), is the grossest of the
skandhas. Among the non-material skandhas, sensation is the grossest,
by reason of the grossness of its functioning: in fact, one localizes
sensation in the hand, in the foot, etc. Ideas are grosser than the last
two skandhas. The samskaraskandha is grosser that the skandha of
consciousness. The skandhas are thus arranged in order of their
diminishing grossness.The Dhātus 83
2. In the course of external transmigration, men and women are
mutually infatuated by their bodies (rūpas) because they are attached to
the pleasures of sensation (vedana). This attachment proceeds from
erroneous ideas (samjñviparyāsa), which are due to the defilements
which are saṁskāras. And it is the mind (citta) which is defiled by the
defilements. The skandhas are thus arranged according to the process
of their defilement.
3. Matter is the pot, sensation is the food, ideas are the seasoning,
the samskāras are the cook, and the mind is the consumer. We have a
third reason for the order of the skandhas.
4. Finally, in considering the skandhas on the one hand, and the
dhatus or spheres of existence (ii.14) on the other, one sees that
Kāmadhātu is characterized by matter, namely by the five objects of
sense enjoyment (kāmaguṇa: Dharmaskandha, 5.15, Vibhāṣā, TD 27,
P. 376all: compare
Kathāvatthu, viii.3). Rūpadhātu, that is to say the
Four Dhyānas, is characterized by sensation (organs of pleasure,
satisfaction, and indifference, viii.12). The first three stages of Ārūpya-
dhātu are characterized by ideas: ideas of infinite space, etc. (viii.4).
The fourth stage of Arūpyadhātu, or the summit of existence, is
characterized by volition, the saṁskāra par excellence, which there
creates an existence of twenty-four thousand cosmic ages (iii.81c).
Finally, these diverse stages are the "abodes of consciousness" (vijñā-
nasathiti, iii.6): it is in these places that the mind resides. The first four
skandhas constitute the field; the fifth constitutes the seed.
There are thus five skandhas, no more, no less. One sees how the
reasons which justify the order of the skandhas also justify the doctrine
that makes sensation and ideas seperate skandhas: they are grosser
than the other samskāras; they are the cause of the process of
defilement; they are the food and the seasoning; and they reign over
the two spheres of existence.
One should now explain the order in which the six āyatanas or
dhātus which are the six organs of consciousness, the organ of sight,84 Chapter One
etc., are enumerated: an order the function of which is to arrange the
objects (visaya) and the consciousnesses which correspond to these
organs (rūpadhātu, cakṣurvijñānadhātu . . .)
23a. The first five are the first because their object is present.
Five, beginning with the organ of sight, are called the first, because
they bear only on present, simultaneous objects. Conversely, the object
of the mental organ can be either (1) simultaneous to this organ; (2)
earlier or past; (3) later or future; (4) tritemporal, that is to say
simultaneous, earlier and later; or (5) beyond time.
23b. The first four are the first because their object is solely
derived or secondary matter.
The organs of sight, of hearing, of smell and of taste do not attain
to the primary elements (i.12), but solely to matter which derives from
the primary elements (bhautika, ii.50a, 65).
The object of touch is not constant (i.35a-b, 10d): sometimes
primary elements, sometimes derived matter, sometimes both at the
same time.
23c. These four are arranged according to the range and speed
of their activity.
Their activity is at a distance, at a greater distance, very rapid.
The organ of sight and the organ of hearing bear on a distant
object (i.43c-d). They are thus named first.
The organ of sight bears on objects at a greater distance than does
the organ of hearing: for one can see a river of which one cannot make
out the sound. The organ of sight is thus named before the organ of
hearing.
Neither odor nor taste are perceived at a distance. But the activity
of smell is more rapid than that of taste. The organ of smell perceives
the odor of food before the organ of taste perceives its taste.
23d. Or rather the organs are arranged according to their
position.The Dhatus
The point of support or the place of the organ of sight, that is to
say, the eye, is the highest; below that, the place of the organ of
hearing; below that, the place of the organ of smell; below that, the
place of the organ of taste. As for the place of the organ of touch, that
is to say the body, it is, for the most part, lower than the tongue. As for
the mental organ, it is not matter (i.44a-b).
Among the ten ayatanas included within rūpaskandha, only one
receives the name of rupa-ayatana. And although all the āyatanas are
dharmas, only one is called dharma-āyatana. Why?
24. A single ayatana is called rupa-ayatana with a view to
distinguishing it from the others, and by reason of its excel-
lence. A single ayatana is called dharma-āyatana with a view to
distinguishing it from the others, and because it includes many
of the dharmas as well as the best dharma. 112
The ten material ayatanas (i.14a-b) are, each one separately,
āyatana: five are subjects, and five are the objects of a specific
consciousness. They are not, in their totality, a single āyatana, a single
source of consciousness, so that they could be called a rūpa-āyatana.
Nine are individualized by specific names: cakṣurayātana, śrotrāyatana,
śabdāyatana . The ayatana which does not bear any of these nine
names, and which is matter, is sufficiently designated by the expression
rūpa-ayatana, without there being any need to give it another name.
name.
But the nine other āyatanas are also both ayatana and rūpa: why is
the name of rupa-ayatana given in preference to the object of the
organ of sight?
By reason of its excellence. It is rūpa, in fact, (1) by reason of
pratigha: being subject to resistance, it is "deteriorated" through
contact with the hand, etc.; (2) by reason of defanidarśana (i.13, p. 70):
one can indicate it as being here, as being there; and (3) by reason of
common usage: that which one understands in the world by rūpa, is86
Chapter One
visible matter, color and shape.
The dharmayatana (i.15b-d) is sufficiently distinguished from the
other ayatanas by the name of dharmayatana. Same explanation as
above. It includes numerous dharmas, sensations, ideas, etc.; it includes
the best dharma, that is to say, Nirvāṇa. This is why the general name,
dharmāyatana, is attributed to it par excellence.
According to another opinion, 113 visible matter is called rūpā-
yatana because it includes twenty varieties (blue, etc.), and because it is
the sphere of three types of eyes, a fleshy eye, the divine eye, and the
wisdom eye (māṁsa-, divya-, and prajñācakṣus; Itivuttaka, 61).
The Sūtras name other skandhas, other āyatanas, and other dhātus.
Are these included within the skandhas, ayatanas, and dhatus described
above?
25. The eighty thousand dharmaskandhas that the Muni
promulgated, depending on whether one regards them as
"voice" or as "name," are included within the rūpaskandha or
the saṁskāraskandha. 114
For the teachers who say "The word of the Buddha is, by its nature,
voice," these skandhas are included within the rūpaskandha; for those
who consider the word of the Buddha as “name," these skandhas are
included within the saṁskāraskandha (ii.36, 47a-b).
What is the dimension of a dharmaskandha?
26a. According to some, a dharmaskandha is of the dimension
of the Treatise. 115
That is to say, of the dimension of an Abhidharma Treatise known
by the name of Dharmaskandha, which is six thousand stanzas long. 116The Dhatus 87
26b. The exposition of the skandhas, etc., constitutes so many
dharmaskandhas. 117
According to another opinion, the exposition of the skandhas,
āyatanas, dhātus, pratītyasamutpāda, the Truths, the foods, the dhyānas,
the apramāṇas, the ārūpyas, the vimokṣas, the abhibhvāyatanas, the
kṛtsnāyatanas, the bodhipakṣikas, the abhijñās, the pratisamvids,
praṇidhijñāna, or araṇā, etc., are each one of them separately so many
dharmaskandhas.
26c-d. In fact, each dharmaskandha has been preached in order
to heal a certain category of believer.
Beings, with respect to their dispositions (ii.26), number eighty
thousand: some are dominated by affection, others by hatred, others by
error, others by pride, etc. Eighty thousand dharmaskandhas have been
preached by the Blessed One in order to cure them.
In the same way that the dharmaskandhas are included within
rūpaskandha or saṁskāraskandha,
27. In this same way the other skandhas, āyatanas and dhātus
should be suitably arranged within the skandhas, āyatanas and
dhātus as described above, by taking into account the charac-
teristics that have been attributed to them.
The other skandhas, ayatanas and dhatus which are mentioned in
other Sūtras should be arranged within the five skandhas, twelve
ayatanas and eighteen dhātus, by taking into consideration the unique
characteristics which have been attributed to them in these works.
There are five pure skandhas, śīla (iv.13), samādhi (vi.68), prajñā
(ii.25), vimukti (vi.76c), and vimuktijñānadarśana: the first forms part
of the rūpaskandha, the others of the saṁskāraskandha (Saṁyutta,
i.99, Dīgha, iii.279, Dharmasamgraha, 23).
The first eight kṛtsnāyatanas (viii.35), being by their nature88 Chapter One
absence of desire, form part of the dharmāyatana. If one considers
them along with their following, they are by their nature five
skandhas, and they are included within the mana-ayatana and the
dharmayatana.
The same holds for the abhibhvayatanas (viii.34).
The last two krtsnayatanas and the four ärūpyāyatanas (viii.2c) are,
by their nature, four skandhas, with the exclusion of rupa. They are
included within the mana-ayatana and the dharmayatana.
The five "gates of entry into deliverance” (vimuktyāyatana) 118 are,
by their nature, speculative knowledge (prajñā); they are thus included
within the dharmāyatana. If one considers their following, they are
included within the fabdayatana, the mana-ayatana, and the
dharmayatana.
Two other ayatanas are left: 1. the Asaṁjñisattvas (ii.41b-d), which
are included within the ten āyatanas, with the exception of smell and
taste; and 2. the Naivasaṁjñanāsaṁjñayatanopagas, which are in-
cluded within the mana-āyatana and the dharmāyatana.
In this same way the sixty-two dhātus enumerated in the Bahudhā-
tuka should be arranged within the eighteen dhātus by taking their
nature into consideration. 119
Among the six dhātus or elements mentioned in the Sūtra, ¹20—____
earth element, water element, fire element, wind element, space
element, and consciousness element-the last two have not been
defined. Is the space element the same thing as all space, the first of
the unconditioned things (i.5c)? Is all consciousness (vijñāna, i.16) the
consciousness element?
28a-b. Cavities are called the space element; it is, one says, light
and darkness.
[The cavity of the door, the window, etc., is the external space
element; the cavity of the mouth, the nose, etc., is the internal space
element.] 121According to the School (kila), the void of the space element is
light or darkness—that is to say, a certain type of color, of matter
(i..9b), for that which one perceives in a cavity is light or darkness.
Being by its nature light or darkness, the void will be day or night. 122
The void is called aghasāmantaka rūpa (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 388b5).
Agha, some say, is etymologically explained as atyartham ghātāt:
"because it is extremely capable of striking or of being struck.” ¹23 One
should thus understand agha as solid, agglomerated matter. The void is
thus a type of matter close (samantaka) to agha.
According to another opinion, [our own], agha signifies "free from
striking" (a-pratighātāt). A void is agha because other matter does not
strike it; it is at the same time close to other matter; it is thus both
agha and samantaka.
The Dhatus 89
28c. The consciousness element is an impure consciousness.
[Impure consciousness, that is to say, the mind which does not
form part of the Path.] Why is it not called pure?
Because these six dhātus are
28d. The support of arising.
The six dhātus are given in the Sūtra (note 120) as support, as the
raison d'etre of arising, that is to say, of the "mind at conception", and
of all existence until the “mind at death".
The pure dharmas are opposed to arising, to existence. Thus the
five sense consciousnesses, which are always impure, and the mental
consciousness when it is impure, give us the consciousness element
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 389a8).
Of these six dhatus, the first four are included within the tangible,
the fifth is included within visible matter, and the sixth within the
seven dhātus enumerated above i.16c.
Chapter One
Among the eighteen dhātus, how many are visible, "capable of
being pointed out?"
29a-b. Only rupadhātu is visible.
One can indicate its place, here, there. The other dhatus are
invisible.
29b-c. The ten dhatus which are exclusively material are
capable of being struck. 124
The ten dhātus which are included within the rūpaskandha are
capable of being struck. 125
1. Striking, or collision, is of three types: avaraṇapratighāta,
viṣayapratighāta, and ālambanapratighāta (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 391c6).
a. Avaraṇapratighāta, being struck by reason of resistance: the
quality that belongs to a body of making an obstacle to the arising of
another body in the place where it itself is found; impenetrability.
When a hand strikes a hand or a rock, when a rock strikes a rock or a
hand, it is counterstruck or repelled.
b. Visayapratighāta, the striking of the organ with that which is its
sphere of action. According to the Prajñapti: 126 "There is an eye, an
organ of sight, which is struck by water and not by dryness, namely the
eye of a fish; there is an eye which is struck by dryness and not by
water, namely, the eyes of humans in general, (with the exception of
fishermen); there is an eye which is struck by water and by dryness,
namely, the eye of a crocodile, a crab, a frog, or fishermen; there is an
eye which is neither struck by water nor by dryness, namely the eyes
which are not of the preceeding categories (for example, the eyes of
beings who perish in the womb). There is an eye struck by night,
namely the eye of a bat, an owl, etc.; there is an eye which is struck by
daylight, namely the eye of humans in general, (with the exception of
thieves, etc.); there is an eye which is struck by the night and by
daylight, namely the eye of a dog, a jackal, a horse, a leopard, a cat, etc.;
there is an eye which is not struck by either night or daylight, namely
the eyes which are not of the preceeding categories." 127
c. Alambanapratighata, the striking of the mind and mental statesThe Dhatus 91
with their object. (ii.62c).
What is the difference between a sphere, visaya, and an object,
alambana?
Visaya is the place where the organ exercises its activity, seeing,
hearing, etc.; ālambana is what is grasped by the mind and the mental
states. Thus, whereas the mind and mental states have both visaya and
alambana, the eye, the ear, etc., have only visaya.
Why term "striking" or "evolving" the activity of the organ or the
mind with respects to its visaya or alambana?
Because the organ does not proceed, is not active, beyond the
visaya: thus it is struck by the visaya (for one says in common usage
that one is struck by a wall beyond which one cannot "proceed"). Or
rather, “to strike” signifies “to encounter:" this is the process or activity
of the organ with respect to its own sphere.
2. When we say that ten dhātus are capable of being struck, or
sapratigha, "characterized by pratighata," we are speaking of avarana-
pratighāta: these bodies are mutually impenetrable, capable of collision.
3. Are the dharmas which are sapratigha through "striking the
sphere of action," also sapratigha through "impenetrability?"
Four alternatives: 1. the seven cittadhātus (i.16c) and one part of
the dharmadhātu, namely the samprayuktas (ii.23), are sapratigha
solely through "striking the sphere of action;" 2. the five spheres,
visible matter, etc. (i.9) are sapratigha solely through “impenetra-
bility;" 3. the five organs, eye, etc. (1.9) are sapratigha from the above
two points of view; 4. one part of the dharmadhātu, namely the
viprayuktas (ii.35), are not sapratigha through "striking the sphere of
action," but are sapratigha through "striking the object."
Let us now answer the second term of the question: the dharmas
which are sapratigha through "striking the object"are also sapratigha
through "striking the sphere of action": but there are dharmas which
are sapratigha through "striking the sphere of action" without being at
the same time sapratigha through "striking the object," namely the
five organs.
4. The Bhadanta Kumāralābha says: "Sapratigha is that in which
and with regard to which the consciousness can be hindered from92 Chapter One
arising by a foreign body; apratigha is the opposite."
Among the eighteen dhatus, how many are good, how many are
bad, and how many are morally neutral (avyākṛta, iv.8, 9, 45)?
29c. Eight dhātus are morally neutral.
What are the eight? These are the ten dhatus which are character-
ized as sapratigha (i.29b-c),
29d. Minus visible matter and sound, 129
"Minus visible matter and sound," that is to say, eight dhatus: the
five material organs, odor, taste and the tangible, are neutral, not being
defined as good or bad; or rather, according to another opinion, not
being defined from the point of view of retribution (vipāka).
30a. The others are of three types.
The other dhatus can be, according to the case, good, bad, or
neutral.
1. The seven dhātus (cittadhātavaḥ, i.16c). are good when they are
associated with the three good roots (iv.8), bad when they are
associated with bad roots, and neutral in all other cases. 130
2. The dharmadhatu (i.15c-d) includes (1) the good roots, the
dharmas associated with these roots, the dharmas that issue from these
roots, and pratisaṁkhyānirodha or Nirvāņa; (2) the bad roots, the
dharmas associated with these roots, the dharmas that issue from these
roots; and (3) neutral dharmas, for example space.
3. Rūpadhātu and fabdadhātu, the visible matter and the audible,
are good or bad when they constitute a bodily or vocal action (iv.26, 3d)
that issued from a good or bad mind. They are neutral in all other
cases.
Among the eighteen dhātus, how many exist in each sphere ofThe Dhātus 93
existence, Kāmadhātu, Rūpadhātu, and Ārūpyadhātu (iii.1-3)?
30a-b. All exist in Kāmadhātu. 131
All the dhatus are associated with, or bound to Kāmadhātu, not
disassociated from Kāmadhātu (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 746cl).
30b. Fourteen exist in Rūpadhātu.
There are fourteen dhātus in Rūpadhātu.
30c-d. With the exception of odor, taste, the consciousness of
odor, and the consciousness of taste. 132
1. Odor and taste are lacking there, for they are "morsel-food"
(iii.39) and no one is born into Rūpadhätu who is not detached from
this food. Since odor and taste are lacking, the consciousness of odor
and taste are lacking also.
Objection: Tangible things should be lacking also, for it is also
tangible food by the "mouthful."
No, for tangible things are not exclusively food. Tangibles which
are not food do exist in Rüpadhātu.
Objection: One can reason in the same way with respect to odor
and taste.
No. The tangible has a useful function apart from food: it serves as
the point of support of the organs; it serves as a support in general;
and it serves as clothing. Odor and taste have no function outside of
eating: they are of no use to beings detached from food.
ii. Śrilābha gives a different explanation: When a person in
Kāmadhātu enters into absorption or dhyāna, he sees visible matter;
he hears sounds; his body is comforted by a certain tangible which
accompanies physical well-being produced by the dhyana (vii.9b). One
can conclude from this fact that, in the celestial abodes of Rūpadhātu
which bear the name of dhyana (upapattidhyāna, iii.2, viii.1), there are
visible, audible and tangible things, but not taste and odor.
iii. We think that, if odor and taste are lacking in Rūpadhātu, the
organs of smell and taste should also be lacking, for they do not serve
any purpose. (Thus there are only twelve dhātus in Rūpadhātu.)94
Chapter One
1. [Answer of a master who speaks for the Vaibhāṣikas, vaibhā-
şikadesiya.] The organs of smell and taste are useful in Rūpadhātu, for,
without them, beauty and elocution would be missing.
The nose, support of the subtle matter that constitutes the organ of
smell, suffices for beauty (i.44); the tongue, the place of the organ of
taste, suffices for elocution.
[The Vaibhāsikadeśiya.] The members,-nose and tongue, which
support the organ, cannot be deprived of this organ. There is no nose
or tongue where the subtle matter that constitutes the organ of smell
or the organ of taste is missing, in the same way that the sexual
member is always endowed with a special organ of touch which is
called the sexual organ (i.44a, ii.2c-d).
One can well conceive that the sexual member is lacking when the
sexual organ is lacking, for, stripped of this organ, it serves no
function; but the nose and the tongue are useful independent of the
organs of smell and taste. Thus the nose and tongue exist in
Rūpadhātu, although the organs which correspond to them are
lacking. Thus there are only twelve dhātus in Rūpadhātu.
2. [Answer of the Vaibhāṣikas:] But an organ can arise without
having any use, for example the organs of beings destined to perish in
the womb.
Agreed! The arising of an organ can be without usefulness: but it is
never without a cause. What is the cause of the arising of an organ, if
not a certain act commanded by a desire relative to this organ? Now
whoever is without attachment to the object, odor, is also without
attachment to the organ, the organ of smell. Thus there is no reason
for the organs
of smell and taste to appear among beings who are
reborn in Rūpadhatu, since these beings are detached from odors and
tastes. Otherwise, why is the sexual organ lacking in Rūpadhātu?
Reply of the Vaibhāṣikas. The sexual organ is a cause of ugliness
(ii.12).
Is it not beautiful among beings who possess the marks of the
Mahāpuruṣas? Moreover, it is not by reason of its utility that the sexual
organ arises, but rather by reason of its cause. Given its cause, it will
arise, even if it is ugly.The Dhatus 95
3. [Argument from authority.] According to the Vaibhāṣikas, to
maintain that the organs of smell and taste are lacking in Rūpadhatū is
to contradict the Sūtra. The Sūtra 133 teaches that beings of Rūpadhātu
possess, complete, all the organs: they are never one-eyed, or only
one-eared (iii.98a).
This text teaches that beings of Rūpadhātu possess, complete, the
organs that exist in Rūpadhātu. If the Vaibhāṣikas do not understand it
thus, they must then attribute the sexual organ to those beings.
[4. Reply and conclusion of the Vaibhāṣikas.]
Although odor and taste are lacking there, the organs of smell and
taste exist in Rūpadhātu.
In fact, a person who is detached from odors keeps his attachement
with respect to the organ of smell which is part of his person. Thirst
(=desire) enters into action with regard to these six organs of
consciousness, not by reason of the object of these six organs, but by
reason of the person himself. Thus the arising of the organs of smell
and taste has a cause, even if one were detached from odors and tastes.
But the same does not hold for the sexual organ. Attachment relative
to this organ has for its principle attachment to the tactile conscious-
ness of sexual union. Now beings who will be reborn in Rūpadhātu are
detached from this consciousness; thus they have not accomplished
actions commanded by a desire relative to the sexual organ; thus this
organ is lacking in Rūpadhātu. 134
31a-b. In Ārūpyādhatu, there is a mental organ, an object of the
mental consciousness, and the mental consciousness.
Beings detached from matter arise in Ārüpyādhatu, thus the ten
dhātus which are material, namely the five organs and their objects,
and the five consciousnesses which have for their point of support and
for their objects a material dhātu (viii.3c), are lacking in Ārūpyādhatu.
How many dhatus are impure? How many are pure?
31c-d. The three dhatus which have just been named can be96
Chapter One
pure or impure.
They are pure when they form part of the Truth of the Path or of
unconditioned things; in the opposite case they are impure (i.4).
31d. The others are impure.
The other dhatus, fifteen in number, are solely impure. 135
How many dhātus are associated with vitarka and with vicāra, free
from vitarka and associated with vicāra, or free from both vitarka and
vicāra? 136
32a-b. Five consciousnesses always include vitarka and vičara.
They are always associated with vitarka and with vicara, for they
are gross, being turned towards externals. The word hi, “always,'
indicates restriction; they are exclusively dharmas which include
vitarka and vicāra.
32c. The last three dhatus are of three types.
These dhātus are the mental organ, the object of mental con-
sciousness, and the mental consciousness.
1. In Kāmadhātu and in the First Dhyāna (viii.7, 11), (1) the
manodhātu, (2) manovijñānadhātu, and (3) that part of the dharma-
dhāytu which is associated with the mind (ii.23), with the exception of
vitarka and vicara themselves, are associated with vitarka and vicara.
2. In the intermediary dhyāna (dhyānāntara, viii.22d), these same
are free from vitarka, but associated with vicara.
3. In the higher stages up to and including the last stage, these
same are free from both vitarka and vicāra (viii.23c-d).
4. The part of the dharmadhātu which is disassociated from the
mind (ii.35) and the vicara of the intermediary dhyana are free from
both vitarka and vicāra.
5. As for vitarka, it is always accompanied by vicara; it is always
free from vitarka, since two simultaneous vitarkas are impossible. ButThe Dhātus 97
the vicāra of Kāmadhātu and the First Dhyāna are not placed within
any of the three categories: in fact, it is always associated with vitarka,
and it is never accompanied by vicāra, two simultaneous vicaras being
impossible.
We therefore say that, in the stages which include vitarka and
vicāra (viii.7), there are four categories: 1. The dharmas associated
with the mind, with the exception of vitarka and vicāra, are accom-
panied by vitarka and vicāra. 2. Vitarka is free from vitarka, but
accompanied by vicara. 3. The dharmas disassociated from the mind
are free from vitarka and vicāra. 4. Vicāra is free from vicara, and is
accompanied by vitarka.
32d. The other dhātus are free from the one and the other.
The other dhātus are the ten material dhatus. Not being associated
with the mind, they are free from both vitarka and vicāra.
But, if the five sense consciousnesses are always accompanied by
vitarka and vicāra, how are they defined as free from vikalpa?
33a-b. They are free from vikalpa to the extent that they are
free from nirūpaṇāvikalpa and from anusmaraṇavikalpa. 137
According to the Vaibhāṣikas, ¹38 vikalpa is of three types: vikalpa
in and of itself or by definition, vikalpa consisting of examination, and
vikalpa consisting of remembering. 139 The five sense consciousnesses
include the first type of vikalpa but not the other two. ¹40 This is why
one says that they are free from vikalpa, in the same way that when a
horse has only one foot, one says that it does not have any feet.
"Vikalpa by definition” is vitarka, which we shall study in the chapter
on the mental states (ii.33). As for the other two vikalpas:
33c-d. They are dispersed mental prajñā, mental memory
whatever it may be.
Mental prajñā, that is, the discernment of the dharmas associated
with the mental consciousness, but dispersed, that is to say, not98
Chapter One
concentrated, not in the state of absorption (viii.1), is either vikalpa of
examination or by definition. All mental memory, concentrated or not
concentrated, is vikalpa of remembering. 141
How many dhatus "have an object," that is to say, are the subject of
consciousness?
34a-b. The seven dhatus which are mind have an object. 142
Only the dhātus of visual, auditory, olfactory, taste, touch, and
mental consciousness have an object, because they always grasp their
spheres.
34b. And also one part of the dharmadhātu.
That part which consists of the dharmas associated with the mind
(ii.23). The other dhātus, namely the ten material dhātus and the part
of the dharmadhatu which is not associated with the mind (ii.35), do
not have an object.
How many dhatus are non-appropriated? How many are
appropriated?
34c. Nine are non-appropriated.
What are these nine? The seven that have been mentioned which
have an object, together with one-half of the eighth.
34c. The eight that have been mentioned, and sound.
These nine are never appropriated: the seven dhatus of mind
(i.16c), the dharmadhātu (i.15c), and sound are never appropriated.
34d. The other nine are of two types.
They are sometimes appropriated, sometimes non-appropriated.The Dhatus 99
1. The five organs of sense consciousness (cakṣurdhātu, etc.), of the
present time, are appropriated. They are not appropriated in the
future and in the
past.
Four objects,-visible matter, odor, taste, and tangible things,-are
appropriated when they are present, when they are an integral part of
the organs. Every other visible matter, every other odor, every other
taste, and every other tangible is not appropriated: for example, the
physical matter,-color and shape-, of hair, body hair, nails and
teeth, with the exception of their roots, which are bound to the body
or to the organ of touch; color and shape of excrement, urine, saliva,
mucus, blood, etc.; the color and shape of earth, water, fire, etc.
2. What is the meaning of the expression "appropriated?" That
which the mind and the mental states grasp and appropriate to
themselves in the quality of a support is called "appropriated." Organic
matter, that is to say matter which constitutes the five organs of
consciousness, as well as matter not separable from organic matter, is
"appropriated," is "made one's own," by the mind: this results from
the fact that, in the case of well-being or illness, there is a reciprocal
reaction between the mind and this matter. Matter that the Abhi-
dharma calls "appropriated," is called in common language, sacetanā or
sensitive matter. 143
How many dhatus are primary matter, or the great, primary
elements? How many are secondary matter, matter derived from the
primary elements? 144
35a. The tangible is of two types.
Tangibles are (1) the four primary elements, solidity, fluidity, heat,
and motion (i.12); and (2) sevenfold secondary matter, the soft, the
hard, etc. (i.10d).
35b. The other nine material dhātus are solely secondary
matter.100 Chapter One
The other material dhātus, the five organs and the objects of the
first four organs, are solely secondary matter.
35c. As is the part of the dharmadhātu which is material. 145
The same for avijñapti (i.11), which forms part of the dharma-
dbātu (i.15c-d).
The dhatus of mind (i.16c) are neither primary matter nor
secondary matter; the same for the dharmadhātu, with the exception
of avijñapti.
i. According to the Bhadanta Buddhadeva, the ten ayatanas, that is,
the five organs of consciousness and their objects, are solely primary
matter. 146
An inadmissible opinion. The Sutra teaches, in a limited manner,
that there are four primary elements, and it defines them in a limited
manner as being solidity, fludity, etc., (i.12d). Now solidity, fluidity, etc.,
are tangibles and solely tangibles: solidity is not preceived by the organ
of sight. Furthermore, each organ attains to the secondary matter
which is appropriate to it: color is not preceived by the organ of
touch, 147
Further, that the tangible is primary matter and secondary matter,
and that the nine other materials āyatanas are solely secondary matter,
results from the same words of the Sutra: "Oh Bhikşus, the eye, the
internal source of consciousness (i.39), a subtle matter derived from
the primary elements, material sources, invisible, capable of being
struck," and so on with respect to the four other material organs which
are described in the same terms. With respect to the first four objects:
"The visible matter is an external sources of consciousness, deriving
from the primary elements, material, visible, capable of being struck."
The same with respect to odor and taste. But, with respect to the
tangible: "Tangibles are an external source of consciousness, the four
primary elements and matter deriving from the four primary
elements.
ii. One can maintain that the five organs are primary matter, for
the Sūtra (Samyukta, 11.1) says: “Everything that is in the eye, a ball of
flesh, is solid, resistant . . .'The Dhatus 101
Reply. Here the Sūtra refers to the ball of flesh which is not
separable from the organ of sight, and not to the organ itself.
So be it. But, according to the Garbhāvakrāntisūtra (note 120) "a
person is the six dhātus,” the primary element of earth, the primary
element of water, the primary element of fire, the primary element of
wind, the space element and the vijñāna element. Thus, in the
embryonic state, the body is made up of primary matter, not secondary
matter.
No. For in this first phrase, "a person is the six dhātus," the Sūtra
means to describe the essence of a person, 148 and it does not pretend to
give an exhaustive definition. In fact, the Sūtra then says that a person
is the six points of support of the mental dharma called contact (ii.24),
that is to say, the six organs. 149 Further, to take this definition literally:
"a person is the six dhatus," one would infer the non-existence of the
mental states (caitta, ii.24, 34), for the mental states are not included
within vijñānadhatu, which is the mind.
Would one maintain that the mental states are the mind, and as a
consequence are included within vijñānadhātu?
One cannot, for the Sutra says "Sensation and ideas are dharmas
which are mental states, dharmas associated with the mind, having the
mind for their point of support;" and the Sūtra speaks of a "mind
possessing desire;" thus desire, which is a mental state, is not the mind
(vii.lld).
It is thus proven that our definition (i.35a-c) is correct. 150
How many dhatus are agglomerations? How many are not
agglomerations?
35d. The ten material dhātus are agglomerations. 151
The five organs of sense consciousness, and their objects, are
agglomerations of atoms (ii.22).102 Chapter One
Among the eighteen dhātus, how many cut, and how many are cut;
how many burn, and how many are burned; and how many weigh, and
how many are weighed?
36e. Four external dhātus cut, are cut;
Visible matter, smell, taste and tangible cut, when they bear the
name of axe, etc.; they are cut, when they bear the name of wood, etc.
What is the dharma that is called "to cut?"
To cut is to produce the sectioning of the procress of an
agglomeration the nature of which is to continue itself in an
uninterrupted series. The axe cuts a piece of wood which is a series,
and makes of it two series which exist and which develop separately.
The organs cannot be cut off. For example, when all of the parts of
the organ of touch or the body are cut off, they are not, for all this,
multiple: the members which have been cut, that is to say, seperated
from the trunk, do not possess touch.
The organs themselves do not cut, by reason of their translucidity,
like the sparkle of a jewel.
36b. The same are burned and weighed.
The same holds for being burned and weigh as for cutting off and
being cut off. Four external dhātus alone are burned. They weigh, for
example, when they constitute a scales. Not the organs, by reason of
their translucidity, like the sparkle of a jewel.
Sound does not cut off, is not cut off, is not burned, and does not
weigh, for it does not exist in a series.
36c-d. There is no agreement with respect to that which is
burned and weighed. 152
There is no agreement with respect to what burns and what is
weighed. According to some, the same four external dhatus burn and
are weighed. According to others, only the primary element of fire
burns, when it manifests its own manner of being in the flame; only
weight, which is one type of secondary matter (i.10d), is weighed:
lightweight things, light, etc., where nevertheless rūpa manifests its
1own manner of being, are not weighed.
The Dhatus 103
Among the eighteen dhatus, how many are fruition, accumulation,
or outflowing? How many are conjoined with material substances?
And how many are momentary?
37a. Five internal dhatus are of fruition and accumulation.
i. Definitions.
1. Vipākaja, "of fruition," or literally, "arisen from fruition" instead
of "arisen from the cause of fruition" (vipäkahetuja, ii.54), by ommis-
sion of the middle word, the same way that one says "ox-cart" for
"ox-drawn cart."
Or else, in the expression vipākaja, "arisen from vipāka," the word
vipāka designates not the fruition, but the ripened action, the action
arriving at the time period when it gives forth its fruit. 153 That which
arises from ripened action, namely the fruit of retribution, is called
"arisen from vipäka." The fruit is furthermore also called vipāka,
because it is cooked (=done). 154
Or else the expression vipākaja, “arisen from fruition,” signifies
"arisen from the causes of fruition," but one should not say that the
word "cause" is omitted. In fact, a cause is often designated by the
name of its effect, the same way that an effect is often designated by
the name of its cause: "The present six organs are past action"
(Ekottara, p. 9a7; Samyutta, ii.65, iv.132; below ii.28).
2. Aupacayika, "of accumulation," that is to say "that which is
accumulated nearby" through certain foods (iii.39), certain actions
(bathing, etc.), certain sleep, or certain absorptions (iv.6c). According
to one opinion, 155 chastity is also a cause of accumulation; but in reality,
chastity causes there to be no diminution; it is not a cause of
accumulation.
Matter "of accumulation" protects the matter "of retribution" as a
wall does, by surrounding it.
3. Naisyandika, "of outflowing," that is to say, nişyandaphala104 Chapter One
(ii.57), "that which is produced by a cause similar to its effect."
ii. Five organs or internal dhātus, with the exclusion of the mental
organ, are of fruition and accumulation. They are not outflowing, for
they are outflowing only when they are fruition and accumulation. 156
iii. Sound is accumulation, for the voice is in a weak state when the
body is emaciated. 157 It is also outflowing. It is not a cause of fruition,
for the voice proceeds from a desire for action (chanda, ii.24), ¹58
37b. Sound is not of retribution.
Objection. The Prajñaptiśāstra says, "This mark of the Maha-
puruşa (iii.98) which is called 'the voice of Brahma' results from the
perfect practice of abstaining from harmful language (iv.76c)." 159 Thus
sound is fruition.
Etiology of sound. First opinion. One should distinguish three
moments: (1) action; (2) primary elements arising from this action
which are of retribution; and (3) sound, which arises from the primary
elements.
Second opinion. One should distinguish five moments: (1) action;
(2) primary elements of retribution; (3) primary elements of accumu-
lation; (4) primary elements of outflowing; and (5) sound. Thus sound
is not retribution, because it does not immediately proceed from action.
Objection. To reason thus, bodily sensation (ii.7), not being
produced immediately through action but being immediately produced
through the primary elements arisen from action (iii.32), will not be
retribution.
Reply. But sensation is not provoked by a desire to experience such
a sensation, whereas sound is provoked by a desire to speak. If it were
provoked by desire, it would not be retribution.
37c-d. The eight dhatus free from resistance are of outflowing
and also of fruition.
iv. The eight dhātus not capable of resistance (i.29b), namely the
seven dhatus of mind and the dharmadhātu, are outflowing and
retribution; they are outflowing when they are produced by similar
causes (sabhāgahetu, ii.52) or universal causes (sarvatragahetu, ii.54),retribution when they are produced by retributive causes (vipäkahetu,
ii.54c). They are not accumulation, because the non-material dhātus
have nothing in common with agglomeration.
38a. The others are of three types.
The Dhātus 105
v. The other dhätus, that is, the four not mentioned above,-visible
matter, smell, taste, and tangibles,-are of three types: retribution,
when they are not separable from organic matter (i.34); accumulation
and outflowing.
38a. A single dhātu "is real."
The unconditioned, being permanent, is a "real thing." The
unconditioned forms part of the dharmadhātu (i.15); the dharmadhātu
is thus the single dhatu which "contains a real thing."
38b. The last three dhātus are momentary.
The last three dhātus are the mental organ, the object of mental
consciousness, and the mental consciousness.
In the dharmas of the moment called duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti,
which is the first moment in the Path of Seeing the Truths (vi.25) and
as a consequence the first moment which is pure, these three dhatus
are "not produced by a cause similar to its effect" (sabhāgahetu, ii.52),
for, in the series which constitutes the person under consideration, a
pure dharma has not yet appeared which would be a "cause similar to
its effect" of duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti. This is why these three
dhātus are called momentary, because, for a moment, they do not
proceed from this type of cause.
In the group under consideration, the mind to which the ksanti is
associated is manodhātu and manovijñānadhātu, the dharmas which
coexist with this mind are dharmadhātu: pure discipline (iv.13c);106
Chapter One
sensations, ideas, volition and other mental states; plus the prāptis
(ii.36) and the saṁskṛtalakṣaṇas (ii.46).
There is a problem to be examined. Does he who obtains
possession of the organ of sight where he had previously been lacking
it, also obtain possession of the visual consciousness? And does he who
obtains possession of the visual consciousness where he was previously
lacking it, also obtain possession of the organ of sight?
38c-d. He can obtain the organ of sight and the visual
consciousness either separately or together. 160
1. A person lacking the organ of sight takes possession of it
without at the same time taking possession of the visual consciousness:
(a) a being of Kāmadhātu whose organs progressively appear (ii.14),
for, before the organ of sight appears within him, he is already in
possession of his past and future visual consciousness (in the inter-
mediary state, iii.14; on "possession,” ii.36b); and (b) a being who dies
in Ārūpyadhātu and who is reborn in the heavens of the three higher
Dhyānas, where the visual consciousness is lacking although the organ
of sight exists there (viii.13a-c).
2. A person devoid of the visual consciousness takes possession of
it without at the same time taking possession of the organ of sight: (a)
a being born in a heaven of the three higher Dhyānas can manifest a
visual consciousness of the sphere of the First Dhyāna (viii.13): he
does not take possession of the organ of sight which he possesses
already; and (b) a being who falls from one of the three higher
Dhyānas and who is reborn in a lower sphere.
3. A person devoid of the two takes possession of the two: a being
who falls from Ārūpyadhātu and who is reborn either in Kāmadhātu
or in the First Dhyāna (world of Brahmā).
We have up to now understood the term that the stanza employs,
"to obtain" (lābha) in the sense of pratilambha, taking possession; but
one can also understand it in the sense of prapti, possession (ii.36b).The question is thus posed: Is one who is endowed with the visual
organ also endowed with visual consciousness? Four cases are possible:
The Dhatus
(a) a being born in a heaven of the three higher Dhyānas
necessarily possesses the visual organ, but possesses only the visual
consciousness if he manifests a visual consciousness of the sphere of
the First Dhyāna;
How many are external?
(b) a being in Kāmadhātu who has not taken possession of the
visual organ in the course of his embryonic life or who becomes blind:
he remains in possession of the visual consciousness acquired in the
course of his intermediary existence (iii.14) or at conception;
(c) a being in Kāmadhātu who has taken possession of the organ
of sight and who has not lost it, a being born in the heaven of the First
Dhyāna, a being born in a heaven of the three higher Dhyana who
manifests a visual consciousness of the sphere of the First Dhyānas:
these three categories of beings are endowed with both the organ and
the consciousness;
(d) all other beings,-beings of Ārūpyadhātu,-are devoid of both
organ of sight and visual consciousness.
the
the
The taking possession of and possession, simultaneous or not, of
organ
of sight and visible matter, of the visual consciousness and
visible matter, of the organ of hearing and sound, etc., shall be defined,
as fitting, in each case.
39a. Twelve are personal
What are these twelve?
39b. With the exception of visible matter, etc. 161
Twelve dhātus are personal, the six organs and the six conscious-
nesses; six dhātus are external, the six objects of consciousness, visible
matter, etc.108
Chapter One
But how can one speak of personal dhatus, or of external dhātus,
since there is no ātman?
The mind is the object of the idea of self, the mind is what persons
falsely grasp for their self. This mind receives, metaphorically, the
name of atman. Compare, for example, these two line of Scripture:
"The sage obtains heaven, by means of a well subdued ätman," and "It
is good to subdue the mind; the subdued mind brings happiness." 162
Now the organs and the consciousnesses are close to the mind to
which one gives the name of atman: they are in fact the point of
support of them; then one qualifies them as "internal," or "personal,"
whereas the visible and the other objects of the consciousness are held
to be "external.”
But can one say that the six consciousnesses are the point of
support of the mind?
They are the point of support of the mind only when, having
perished, they acquire the quality of mental organ (i.17). Thus they are
not personal.
This objection is worthless. When the consciousnesses, having
perished, becomes the point of support of the mind, it is indeed ese
consciousnesses themselves which become the point of support; thus,
before becoming a point of support, they are not foreign to the quality
of point of support. They are thus personal by reason of their future
quality of point of support. If it were otherwise, the mental organ
would be solely past; it would be neither present nor future. Now it is
well understood that the eighteen dhatus belong to the three time
periods. Moreover, if the present or future consciousness does not have
the characteristic of manodhātu, it is absurd to attribute this character-
istic to it once it is past. For a dharma does not change its characterstics
in the course of time (v.25; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 109a18, p. 200b2).
Among the eighteen dhātus, how many are sabhāga, "active" or "in
mutual assistance?" How many are tatsabhaga, "analogous to
sabhāga?"The Dhatus 109
39b-c. The dhātu called dharmas is sabhāga. 163
An object of consciousness is qualified as sabhāga when the
consciousness which constitutes its proper sphere arises or is destined
to arise with respect to it.
Now there is no dharma with respect to which an unlimited
mental consciousness has not arisen or is destined to arise. All the
Saints in fact necessarily produce the thought "All dharma are
impersonal" (vii.13a). It is true that this thought bears neither on
itself, nor on the dharmas which are coexistent with it (sahabhū,
ii.50b); but this thought and the dharmas which are coexistent with it
are the object of a second moment of a thought of universal
impersonality; all the dharmas are thus included within the object of
these two moments of thought (vii.18c-d). Therefore the dharma-
dhātu, the proper object of the mental consciousness, is, in its totality,
sabhāga, active as an object.
39c-d. The other dhātus are also tatsabhäga.
The word "also" shows that they are both sabhāga and tatsabhāga.
When are they tatsabhāga?
39d. When they do not do their proper work.
This implies the definition: they are sabhāga when they do their
proper work.
1. The organ of sight which has seen, does now see or shall see
visible matter, is termed sabhāga. The same with respect to the other
organs, by indicating for each its own object and its own operation
(karitra, ii.58).
2. According to the Vaibhāṣikas of Kaśmir, the organ of sight is
tatsabhāga in four cases: the organ of sight which has perished, which
is now perishing, which will perish without having seen, and the organ
of sight destined to arise (anutpattidharman, v.24). According to the
Westerners, the organ of sight not destined to arise constitutes two
categories depending on whether it is accompanied by visual con-
sciousness or not.
The same with respect to the other organs of sense consciousness.110
Chapter One
The mental organ is tatsabhāga only when it is not destined to
arise; in fact, when it arises, it always has an object. 164
3. Visible matter, which has been seen, which is now seen, or
which will be seen by the organ of sight, is sabhāga.
It is tatsabhāga when it has perished, is now perishing or shall
perish without having seen, or when it is not destined to arise.
The same with respect to the other objects of sense consciousness
by indicating for each organ the function which corresponds to it.
4. The organ of sight which is sabhāga or tatsabhāga is such for
everyone, for the person to whom this organ belongs, and for other
persons. The same for the other organs. But a certain visible thing is
sabhāga for the person who sees it. In fact, the visible matter that a
person sees can be seen by many, for example, the moon, a stage
performance, or a contest, whereas two persons do not see by means of
the same organ. Consequently, since one organ of sight is not general,
it is though relationship with one person that it will be qualified as
sabhāga or tatsabhāga; the organ of sight is sabhāga when he sees a
visible thing, even though he has not seen, does not now see, or will
not see another visible thing. On the contrary, the visible thing is
general: one would qualify it as sabhāga and tatsabhāga by putting
oneself in the point of view of numerous persons: it is sabhāga in
relation to those who see it, tatsabhāga in relation to those who do not
see it.
The same holds for sounds, smells, tastes, and the tangible things
as for visible matter. 165
Granted, one would say, with respect to sound which, like visible
matter, is perceived at a distance and can be perceived by many persons
(i.43c-d). But smells, tastes and tangibles are not perceived at a
distance, and are perceived only when they enter into a close
relationship with the organ: thus the smell that one person perceives
is not perceived by another. Thus these objects are not general, and we
should compare them to the organs with respect to the qualification of
sabhāga, or tatsabhāga: when they are sabhāga to one person, they are
sabhāga to everyone.
We would answer: We regard these objects as general, because they
!The Dhatus 111
of a
can be so. It can be the case that smell-the same atomic group
smell-which produces a consciousness of smell in one person, is also
perceived by another. Now this does not hold for the organs.
Consequently smells, tastes and tangibles should be compared to
visible matter and sounds.
5. The six consciousnesses are sabhāga or tatsabhāga depending on
whether they are destined to arise, or are not destined to arise, like the
mental organ.
6. What is the meaning of the expressions sabhaga and tatsabhāga?
Bhāga signifies the mutual services that the organs, their objects
and their consciousnesses, render one another in their quality of point
of support of the consciousness, of objects of consciousness, of
consciousness supporting itself on the organ. Or else bhāga signifies
possession of the activity or function; the function of the organ is to
see, etc.; the function of the object is to be the subject of the
consciousness (vişaya or ālambana), of being seen, etc.; the function of
consciousness is to be the subject of consciousness, to be "the
discerner."
The dharmas which possess (sa-) bhāga are termed sabhāga, that is
to say, the organs, objects and consciousnesses which are endowed with
their proper function, or else the organs, objects and consciousness
which render one another mutual service. Or else the dharmas which
have "contact" for their effect, that is, the encounter of the eye, visible
matter, the visual consciousness, etc., (iii.22), are sabhāga. 167
That which is not sabhāga, but is nevertheless analogous to
sabhāga, is called tatsabhāga, that is to say "analogous (sabhāga) to that
(tat)," that is, "analogous to sabhāga." 167
How many dhātus can be abandoned (hā, v.28, vi.1) by Seeing the
Truths, in other words, by the Path of Seeing or through Seeing
(darśana, vi.25b)? How many can be abandoned by Meditation or
repeated consideration of the Truths, in other words, by the Path of
Meditation or by Meditation? How many dhatus are not to be112
Chapter One
abandoned, or cannot be abandoned?
40a. Ten and five are abandoned through Meditation.
i. The ten material dhātus, organs and objects, and the five sense
consciousnesses, are abandoned through Meditation.
40b. The last three are of three
types.
From the point of view of abandoning them, the last three
dhātus, the mental organ, the mental object, and the mental con-
sciousness,-include three types of dharmas:
(a) Eighty-eight anuśayas (v.4), with their coexistent dharmas-
whether these coexistents be of the samprayukta class (ii.24) or of the
viprayukta class (ii.46, i.e., lakṣaṇas and anulakṣaṇas)-are abandoned
by Seeing, with the prāptis (ii.36) of the said anuśayas and the said
coexistents, with their following (anuprāptis and lakṣaṇas) of the said
prāptis.
(b) The other impure dharmas are abandoned by Meditation: 1.
ten anusayas (v.5) with the coexistents, prāptis, etc.; 2. the good-
impure (kuśalasāsrava) and undefiled-neutral (anivṛtāvyākṛta, ii.66)
samskāras; 3. the impure avijñapti with its following (iv.13).
(c) The pure dharmas, that is, unconditioned things and the
dharmas which form part of the Path, are not to be abandoned.
ii. Objection. [The Vatsiputriyas believe that,] not only the eighty-
eight anusayas, but also some other dharmas are abandoned by Seeing.
(1)The quality of Pṛthagjana ¹69 is a dharma which is undefiled-neutral,
and
yet you place it among the dharmas abandoned by Meditation; (2)
bad bodily or vocal action, retributed by a bad realm of rebirth, is
"visible matter," and yet you also place it within the second category.
Now the quality of Prthagjana and the action which causes a bad realm
of rebirth are in contradiction with the Path of Seeing the Truths.
Thus, according to us, both are abandoned through Seeing.
In order to refute the thesis [of the Vätsiputriyas,] the author says
in summary:
40c. Neither the “undefiled,” nor matter, are abandoned by
Seeing the Truths. 170The Dhātus
1. Nothing that is defiled, that is bad, nor defiled-neutral
(nivṛtāvyākṛta, ii.66), and nothing that is material, can be abandoned
by the Seeing of the Truths.
Now the quality of Prthagjana is not defiled: it can belong to a
person who has cut off the good roots (iv.79), but it can also belong to
a person who is "detached."
Bodily action and vocal action are rūpa.
The quality of Pṛthagjana and bodily or vocal action are not
contradictory to the Truths, for the former 1. is not defiled by the
defilements, and 2. is not a consciousness, a dharma which has an
object. Thus neither are abandoned by the Seeing of the Truths.
Further, if the quality of Pṛthagjana were abandoned by Seeing, it
would follow that it would exist in the first state of the Path of
Seeing which is incorrect. 171
40d. Nor that which has arisen from the non-sixth.
2. "Sixth" signifies the mental organ. "Arisen from the non-sixth"
is what has arisen from an organ different from the sixth organ, that is
to say, what has arisen from the five organs, the organ of sight, etc.
This then referes to the visual consciousness, etc. These are also not
abandoned by Seeing.
Among the eighteen dhatus, how many are "view," how many are
not "view?"
41a. The organ of sight and part of the dharmadhatu are view.
How many [parts are there to the dharmadhātu]?
41b. Eight parts.
What are these eight parts of the dharmadhātu?
(1-5) The five false views, of which the first is belief in a self and
mine; they will be defined in the Chapter on the Defilements (v.7). (6)114 Chapter One
Worldly correct views, that is to say, prajñā (ii.24) associated with the
mental consciousness, good but impure. (7-8) And the view of the
Śaikṣas and the Aśaikṣas, that is to say, pure view which is proper to
the Arhat (vi.50).
These eight dharmas, which form part of the dharmadhātu, are
"views."
Comparison. In the manner in which visible matter is seen at night
and in the daytime, on a cloudy day and on a clear day, in this same way
the dharmas are seen (1) by defiled worldly views,-five false
opinions; (2) by non-defiled worldly view or worldly correct views; (3)
by Śaikṣī views; and (4) by non-Aśaikṣī views.
Why are correct worldly views understood solely as prajñā
associated with the mental consciousness?
41c-d. The prajñā which arises with the five sense conscious-
nesses, is not "view" because it is not judgment after
deliberation. 172
"View" is judgment that preceeds from the consideration of an
object (upadhyāna, viii.1). Now the prajñā which arises with the five
sense consciousnesses does not present this characteristic. Thus it is
not "view." For the same reason, it happens that prajñā, even though
mental, defiled or non-defiled, is not "view" when it is purely intuitive
(vii.1).
But, one would say, the organ of sight does not possess “judgment
which proceeds from a consideration of the object." How do you then
say that it is "view?"
"View" is understood here as the seeing of visible matter.
42a. It is the organ of sight which sees visible matter.The Dhātus 115
i. A Vijñānavādin is a master who attributes sight, not to the organ
of sight, but to visual consciousness. He says: If an organ sees, then the
organ of a person occupied with hearing or touch consciousness, would
see (i.6c-d).
42b. When it is sabhāga.
We do not say that all organs of sight see. The organ of sight sees
when it is sabhāga (i.39), that is to say, when it is conjoined with visual
consciousness.
42c. It is not the consciousness of which this organ is the point
of support.
But then, that which sees is indeed the consciousness which is
supported by the organ of sight.
42d. For obscured visible matter is not seen. Such is the opinion
of the Vaibhāṣikas. 173
No, for visible matter, obscured by a wall or any other screen, is not
seen. Now the consciousness is non-material, not capable of being
repulsed (apratigha, i.29b). Thus, if the visual consciousness were to
see, it would see even the visible matter obscured by a screen.
[The Vijñānavādin replies.] The visual consciousness does not
arise with respect to obscured visible matter; not arising with respect
to them, it does not see them.
But why does it not arise with respect to these visible things? For
us, the Vaibhāṣikas, who attribute seeing to the organ and who admit
that the organ, being sapratigha or capable of being arrested, does not
exercise its activity with respect to obscured visible matter, we could
easily explain how the visual consciousness does not arise with respect
to obscured visible matter: the consciousness, in fact, exercises its
activity on the same object that its point of support does. But if you
believe that the consciousness sees, how would you explain the fact
that it does not arise with respect to obscured visible matter?
2. The author takes into consideration the opinion of the Vijñāna-
vädin and responds to the last reply of the Vaibhäşika.116
Chapter One
Do you maintain that an organ of sight sees its object by entering
into a close relationship with its object, in the manner in which the
organ of touch feels a tangible object (i.43c-d)? In this hypothesis I
would understand that the organ of sight, being capable of being
arrested, does not see obscured visible matter. But you maintain that
the organ of sight sees at a distance: you do not then have the right to
say that, being capable of being arrested, it does not see obscured
visible matter. Moreover, one sees obscured visible matter through a
glass, a cloud, a crystal and water: how would you explain this fact? I
would say then that the visual consciousness sees, it arises with respect
to obscured visible matter when the screen does not form an obstacle
to light; it does not arise in the contrary case. 174
3. The Vaibhāṣikas make an appeal to Scripture. The Sutra says,
"Having seen visible matter through the organ of sight." 175 Thus the
organ sees, not the visual consciousness.
We would reply that the Sūtra intends to say, "Having seen visible
matter by means of the organ of sight as point of support." In fact, the
same Sūtra says, “Having discerned the dharmas through the mental
organ": now this organ, being past (i.17), does not discern; it is
through the mental consciousness that one discerns; therefore, if the
text says "through the mental organ," it means "by supporting itself on
the mental organ, the point of support of mental consciousness." The
same for sight and the organ of sight.
One can also admit that the Sūtra attributes to the point of
support, to the organ, the action which belongs to that which grasps
this point of support, that is to say, to the consciousness. It is said in
the world "the benches cry out," whereas the benches are actually the
persons seated on the benches.
This way of speaking is common to Scripture. We read that
"agreeable and disagreeable visible matter is discerned by the organ of
sight." Now you do not maintain that the organ of sight discerns. You
attribute discernment to the consciousness of which organ of sight is
the point of support.
The Sūtra (Samyukta, TD 2, p. 64a10) also says "The organ of
sight, Oh Brahmin, is the gate of the sight of visible matter." This textThe Dhatus 117
proves that the visual consciousness sees by this gate which is the
organ of sight. You would not maintain that "gate" signifies "sight,"
for it would be absurd to say "The organ of sight is the sight of the
sight of visible matter."
4. [Objection of the Vaibhāṣikas.] If the visual consciousness sees,
what it is that discerns (i.48a)?
What is the difference between the two functions of seeing and
discerning which would account for a single dharma not seeing and
discerning at one and the same time? Is it not admitted that a certain
type of prajñā (darśanātmika, vii.1) sees and comprehends? 176 In this
same way a certain consciousness, the visual consciousness, sees and
discerns. There is here only a single function designated by two names.
5. [Certain followers of the thesis "The visual consciousness sees,"
namely the Vatsiputriyas, object:] If the organ of sight sees, what is
then the separately existing action of seeing that you attribute to this
organ, the agent of this action?
The objection cannot be made. In the same way that you would
have it that the consciousness discerns, without admitting any differ-
ence between the agent and the action, in that same way we hold that
an organ sees.
6. According to another opinion, [that of the Dharmaguptakas,] it
is the visual consciousness which sees; but, as the organ of sight is the
point of support of this consciousness, one says that it sees, the same
way one says that the bell rings, because it is the point of support of
the sound.
But, according to this principle, one should also say that the organ
of sight discerns, for it is the point of support of the visual
consciousness.
No. For in the world one agrees to give the name of "seeing" to the
visual consciousness; in fact, when this consciousness is produced, one
says "The color is seen;" one does not say that the color is discerned.
And the Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 489c19) confirms: “One terms 'seen' that
which is attained by the organ of sight, that which falls within its line
of vision and is perceived by the visual consciousness." One says then
in the world that the organ of sight sees, because it is the point of118 Chapter One
support of the visual consciousness which sees; one does not say that it
discerns, because the function attributed to the visual consciousness is
seeing and not discernment. On the other hand, when one says that
consciousness discerns, one does not mean that it discerns to the extent
that it would be the point of support of a certain discernment, as one
understands that the organ of sight sees because it is the point of
support of the visual consciousness. One means that the consciousness
discerns by itself, that it is in and of itself discernment, in the same way
that one says
that the sun creates the day. 177
7. Opinion of the Sautrāntikas. What an empty discussion! The
Sūtra teaches: "By reason of the organ of sight and of visible matter
there arises the visual consciousness": there is not there either an
organ that sees, or visible matter that is seen; there is not there any
action of seeing, nor any agent that sees; this is only a play of cause and
effect. In the light of practice, one speaks, metaphorically, of this
process: "The eye sees, and the consciousness discerns." But one should
not cling to these metaphors. The Blessed One has said that one
should not take them in the manner of popular speech, that one should
not seriously grasp an expression in use in the world, 178
8. According to the system of the Vaibhāṣikas of Kaśmir, the organ
of sight sees, the organ of hearing hears, the organ of smell smells, the
organ of taste tastes, the organ of touch touches, and the mental organ
discerns.
Is visible matter seen by one eye or by both eyes?
43a-b. Visible matter is seen by the two eyes also, as the clarity
of sight demonstrates. 179
[There is no fixed rule: one sees by one eye; one also sees by two
eyes.]
The Abhidharmikas say: "Seen also by the two eyes; the two eyes
being open, sight is clearer." Furthermore, 180 when one eye is covered
and the other half closed, one perceives two moons; but not when oneThe Dhatus
completely closes or half closes that which was open, or when one
opens or completely closes that which has been half closed.
One should not conclude that the visual consciousness is twofold
from the fact that its point of support is twofold, for the consciousness
is not material like rūpa; not having a mass it is not situated in a place.
We have said that the organ of sight sees, that the organs of
hearing, smell, taste, and touch each perceive their objects; and that the
mental organ discerns. Do these organs attain their object, [do they
enter into a close physical relationship with their object]?
43c. The organ of sight, the organ of hearing, and the mental
organ know their object without attaining it. 181
i.1. The organ of sight sees visible matter at a distance: it does not
see the eye-salve placed on the eye; the organ of hearing hears distant
sounds.
The mental organ, being non-material, does not enter into a close
physical relationship with its object.
2. If the organs of sight and hearing must necessarily enter into a
close relationship with their object, then ascetics in dhyāna would not
attain divine sight or divine hearing, in the same way that they do not
attain a divine sense of smell (vii.42).
[Objection.] If the organ of sight sees an object with which it is not
in a close relationship, why does it not see visible matter which is too
distant or obscured? 182
[Reply.] Why does a magnet not attract all iron? Moreover, the
same difficulty remains even if you suppose that the organ enters into a
close relationship with the object: why does the organ of sight not see
the eye salve, the brush, and all the objects with which it is in close
relationship? Or else, let us say that the same rule applies to the organ
of sight and to the organs of smell and taste: the organ of smell senses
only the smell with which it is in close relationship, but it does not
sense the odor which constitutes the organ itself; in the same way, the120 Chapter One
organ of sight sees only certain distant visible matter, but it does not
see all distant visible matter.
According to certain masters, from the fact that one hears noise
from the interior of the ear, one can conclude that the organ of hearing
hears the sound with which it is in close relationship, as it also hears
distant sound. 183
3. The other three organs, smell, taste, touch, perceive an object
with which they are in close relationship. For smell, this results from
the fact that in-breathing is necessary to the perception of the smell, 184
43d. For the other three organs, the opposite.
ii. What should one understand by the expression "to attain" (to
enter into a close relationship)? What does one mean when one says
that the nose "attains" its object, knows its object “after having
attained it?"
To attain is "to arise in nirantaratva," in a state of non-
separation. 185 The object, which renews itself from moment to
moment (iv.2c-d), is found to be arisen in nirantaratva with the organ
and vice versa.
[What does nirantaratva mean? According to the Bhadanta,
immediate juxtaposition, absence of interval; according to the Vaibhā-
şikas, immediate vicinity, absence of an interposed body]. 186
iii. The question is therefore posed whether the atoms do or do not
touch one another.
1. The Vaibhāṣikas of Kaśmir (Vibhāṣā TD 27, p. 683a24) say
that atoms do not touch one another; (1) if atoms touch one another in
their totality, things, that is to say, the different atoms, would "mix
with one another," that is, they would only occupy one place; and (2) if
atoms touched each other in one spot, they would thus have parts: and
atoms do not have any parts.
But, if there is no contact among the atoms, how is sound
produced?
For the very reason that there is no contact, sound is possible: if
atoms were to touch one another, a hand in collision with a hand
would dissolve into it, a rock in collision with another rock wouldThe Dhatus 121
dissolve into it, as gum dissolves into gum. And sound would not be
produced.
But if atoms do not touch one another, why does an agglomeration
of atoms not fall to pieces when it is struck?
Because the wind element holds it together. A certain wind
element has dispersion for its function, for example the wind of the
period of the destruction of the world; a certain wind element has
concentration for its function, for example the wind at the period of
creation (iii.91, 100). 189
2. [The Vaibhāṣikas continue the presentation of their doctrine].
One says that three organs attain their object, because their object
is in a state of non-seperation from them. What does non-seperation
consist of?
It consists of the fact that there is nothing which is in the interval
between the two. This is also what is meant by "to attain."
Furthermore, as agglomerations have parts, there is no difficulty
in agglomerations touching one another. And, from this point of view
the definitions of the Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 684all; see also p. 380a19) are
justified: "Does a thing-in-contact arise having for its cause a thing-in-
contact, or does it arise having for its cause a thing-outside-of-contact?"
Same question with respect to a thing-outside-of-contact.
"One cannot reply in an absolute manner. Sometimes a thing-
outside-of-contact arises from a thing-in-contact, as when a thing-in-
contact falls to pieces. Sometimes a thing-in-contact arises from a
thing-outside-of-contact, as when a thing-outside-of-contact comes
together. Sometimes a thing-in-contact arises from a thing-outside-of-
contact, as when agglomerations come together. And sometimes a
thing-outside-of-contact arises from a thing-outside-of-contact, for
example the particles of dust suspended in the void of a window."
The Bhadanta Vasumitra says: “If atoms touched one another, they
would therefore endure two moments." 189
iv. Opinions of Vasubandhu. 1. The Bhadanta says: "There is not,
in reality, any contact. One says, metaphorically, that atoms touch one
another when they are juxtaposed without interval." (Quoted in
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 684a2; see note 189, end).122 Chapter One
This opinion is the correct one. 190 In fact, if atoms were to allow an
interval between themselves, since this interval would be empty, what
would hinder the progress of atoms into this interval? For it is
admitted that atoms are impenetrable. 191
2. Agglomerations are not anything other than atoms. They are
the same atoms which, in a state of aggregation, are a "thing-in-
contact,” in the same way that they are rūpa (i.13). It is thus absurd to
deny that atoms touch one another, and yet to admit that agglomera-
tions touch one another.
3. If you admit spatial division to the atom, then an atom certainly
has parts, whether it enters into contact or not. If you deny it, why
would the atom, even if it enters into contact, have parts? 192
Should we think that the organs solely grasp an object of their
dimension, if one believes that one sees suddenly extended objects, a
mountain for example, it is through illusion, it is because one rapidly
sees parts of a mountain: it is evidently thus when one sees the circle of
fire delineated by an ember;-or else do the organs indifferently grasp
an object of their dimension and of a different dimension?
44a-b. The three organs of which the organ of smell is the first,
grasp an object of their dimension, 193
A given number of atoms of an organ, attaining the same number
of atoms of an object, produce consciousness. This also holds for smell,
taste, and touch.
But there is no rule for seeing and hearing. Sometimes the object is
smaller than the organ, as when one sees the end of a hair; sometimes
equal to the organ, as when one sees a grape; and sometimes larger
than the organ, when, the eye being hardly open, one sees a mountain.
The same for sound; one hears the buzzing of a mosquito, the noise of
thunder, etc.
The question does not arise for the mental organ which is
non-material.(Here are some problems relating to the organs.)
i. How are atoms of the different organs arranged?
The Dhatus 123
The atoms of the organ of sight are arranged on the pupil like the
flower of the cumin, that is to say, on the surface; they are covered
again by a membrane, of translucent color, which prevents them from
dispersing. According to another opinion, they are arranged in depth,
like a pill; being translucent, like crystal, they do not obscure one
another. 194
The atoms of the organ of hearing are arranged in the interior of
the bhūrja, that type of birch leaf which is found within the ear.
The atoms of the organ of smell are arranged within the interior of
the nostril.
These first three organs from a garland. 195
The atoms of the organ of taste are arranged on the upper surface
of the tongue in the form of a half-moon. In the middle of the tongue a
space the dimension of the end of a hair is not occupied by the atoms
of the organ. Such is the opinion expressed in Scripture. 1⁹6
The atoms of the organ of touch have the shape of the body.
The atoms of the female organ are like a drum. The atoms of the
male organ are like a thumb.
ii. The atoms of the organ of sight can be sabhāga (i.39) in their
totality; tatsabhāga in their totality; some sabhāga, others tatsabhāga.
The same for the organs of hearing, smell and taste. But, it does not
occur that the atoms of the organ of touch are all sabhāga, even when
the body is enveloped in the flames of Pratapana hell (iii.59), an
infinite number of atoms are tatsabhāga; for, says the School, the body
would fall to pieces if all the atoms of touch were to work at the same
time.
iii. It does not occur that consciousness is produced by one atom of124 Chapter One
organ, or by one atom of object. In fact the five categories of
consciousness have agglomerations for their support and their
object.
It results from this that atoms are not perceived; they are thus
"imperceptible". (Compare i.20a-b, iv.4).
The object of the first five consciousnesses is simultaneous with
them; the object of the sixth consciousness is either earlier than it,
simultaneous with it, or later than it; in other words, it is past, present,
or future (i.23). Does the same hold for the point of support of the
consciousness?
No, it does not.
Why is this?
44c. Relative to consciousness, the point of support of the sixth
consciousness is past.
The sole point of support of the mental consciousness is the
mental organ, this is, the consciousness which has just perished (i.17).
44d. The point of support of the first five is also simultaneous.
The point of support of the five consciousnesses is also simultane-
ous with them: that is, it is both earlier than, and simultaneous to the
consciousness. In fact, the point of support of these consciousnesses is
twofold: 1. the sense organ, organ of sight, etc., which is simultaneous
with consciousness; and 2. the mental organ, which is past at the
moment when the consciousness arises.
The five consciousnesses thus have two points of support.
One poses the question: Is that which is the point of support of the
visual consciousness at the same time the "immediately antecedent and
parallel cause” (samanantarapratyaya, ii.62) of this consciousness?
Four cases: 1. the organ of sight, which is solely a point of support; 2.
the totality of mental states, sensation, etc. (ii.24) which have just
perished: they are solely the immediately antecedent cause; 3. theconsciousness which has just perished, or mental organ, which is at
one and the same time a point of support and an immediately
antecedent cause; and 4. the other dharmas are neither one nor the
other.
The Dhatus 125
The same for the consciousness of hearing, smell, taste and touch.
With respect to mental consciousness, one replies by speaking of
the first term of the question: that which is the point of support of
mental consciousness is always the parallel and immediately ante-
cedent cause of this consciousness, but items that have perished are not
its point of support.
Visual consciousness depends on the organ of sight and on visible
matter. Why is the organ considered as the point of support of
consciousness, to the exclusion of the object?
45a-b. The point of support of a consciousness is its organ, for
consciousness changes according to the modality of the
organ. 197
When the organ of sight is the object of attention (employment of
eye salve, etc.); when it is injured by dust, etc.; when it is alert; when it
is sluggish and weak, consciousness reproduces modality: it is accom-
panied by pleasure or by pain, it is alert or weak. The object, on the
contrary, has no influence on the modality of consciousness. Con-
sequently, it is the organ, and not the object, which is the point of
support of consciousness (ii.2a-b).
Consciousness knows the object. Why is it designated by the
name of its organ "eye consciousness" ... "manas consciousness".
"dharma consciousness?"
45c-d. For this reason, and also because it is "its own," it is the
organ which gives its name to the consciousness.126
Chapter One
The consciousness takes the name of an organ because the organ is
its point of support.
Because the organ is "its own:" the organ of a certain person is the
point of support of the visual consciousness of this person alone.
Visible matter, on the contrary, is general, for a certain visible thing is
perceived by both the visual consciousness and the mental conscious-
ness, by one person and by another person. The same observation
holds for the organs of hearing, smell, taste, and touch, and for their
objects, sounds, smells, tastes, and tangibles.
We conclude that the consciousness is named according to its organ
because the organ is its point of support, and because the organ is its
own thing. But the same does not hold for its object. One says in the
world "sound of the drum," and not "sound of the stick;" "sprout of the
wheat," and not "sprout of the field."
A being is born in a certain stage of the world, in Kāmadhātu, in
the First Dhyāna, etc.; he is of this stage, and his body is also of this
stage, and he sees, by the organ of sight, visible matter. Do the body,
the
organ of sight, visible matter and consciousness belong to the same
stage or to different stages?
All can belong to different stages.
i. When a being born in Kamadhātu sees, by means of an organ of
sight of his stage, visible matter of his stage, then body, organ, visible
matter and consciousness are in the same stage.
When this being sees visible matter of his stage, by means of an
organ of sight of the First Dhyana, then the body and visible matter
are of Kāmadhātu, but his organ and consciousness are of the First
Dhyāna; if he sees visible matter of the First Dhyana by means of the
same organ, then only the body is in Kāmadhātu; the other three are of
the First Dhyana.
When this being sees visible matter of Kāmadhātu by means of an
organ of sight of the Second Dhyana, then the body and visible matter
are in Kāmadhātu, the organ is in the Second Dhyāna, and conscious-The Dhatus 127
ness is in the First Dhyana; if he sees, by the same organ, visible
matter of the Second Dhyāna, then the body is in Kāmadhātu, the
organ and visible matter are in the Second Dhyana, and consciousness
is in the First Dhyāna. (viii. 13a-c).
One would explain in the same way these cases where a being born
in Kāmadhātu sees, by the organ of sight of the Third or Fourth
Dhyana, visible matter of these same stages or of a lower stage.
ii. When a being in the First Dhyana sees visible matter of his
stage by means of an organ of sight of his stage, then body, organ,
visible matter and consciousness are of the same stage; if he sees
visible matter of a lower stage by the same organ, then the body, organ,
and consciousness are of his stage, the First Dhyāna.
When this being sees visible matter of his stage by means of an
organ of sight of the Second Dhyana, then three are of his stage (First
Dhyāna), but the organ is in the Second Dhyāna; if he sees, by the
same organ, visible matter of Kāmadhātu, then the body and con-
sciousness are of his stage (First Dhyana), visible matter is in a lower
stage, and the organ is in the Second Dhyana; if he sees visible matter
of the Second Dhyāna by the same organ, then the body and
consciousness are of his stage (First Dhyāna), but the organ and the
visible matter are in the Second Dhyāna.
One would explain in the same way these cases where a being in
the First Dhyāna sees, by means of an organ of sight of the Third or
the Fourth Dhyāna, visible matter of these stages or of a lower stage.
iii. According to these same principles, we can explain those cases
where a being in the Second, Third or Fourth Dhyāna, sees, by means
of an organ of sight of his stage or of a different stage, visible matter of
his stage or of a different stage.
The rule is the following:
46a. The organ of sight is not inferior to the body.
The body, the organ of sight, and visible matter can belong to five
stages: Kāmadhātu, and the Four Dhyānas.
The consciousness of sight is of two stages only: Kāmadhātu and
the First Dhyāna (viii.13a-c).128 Chapter One
Thus stated, the organs of sight which a certain being uses can be
of the stage to which the body of this being belongs, that is, of the
stage where this being has arisen; it can be of a higher stage; but it can
never be lower.
Visible matter and consciousness, through relationship to the
organ, is either of the same stage or lower, but never of a higher stage.
46b. Visible matter is not higher than the organ.
Visible matter of a higher stage cannot be seen by an organ of sight
of a lower stage.
46c. Nor consciousness.
A visual consciousness of a higher stage cannot arise from an
organ of a lower stage.
46d. Visible matter, in relation to consciousness, and visible
matter as well as consciousness, through relation to the body, is
of all types.
Visible matter, through relationship with the visual consciousness,
is either equal, or higher, or lower.
Visible matter and the visual consciousness, through relationship
to the body, are as visible matter is through relationship to the
consciousness, this is to say, equal, higher, or lower.
47a. The same holds for the organ of hearing.
The organ of hearing is not lower than the body, sound is not
higher than the organ of hearing, nor is auditory consciousness; sound,
through relationship to this latter, and sound and consciousness
through relationship to the body, can be of all types.
47a-b. Three organs belong to their own stage.
With respect to the organs of smell, taste, and touch, the body,
organ, object and consciousness belong exclusively to the stage where
the being is born.
After having formulated this general rule, the author mentions one
exception.
147c-d. The consciousness of touch is of its own stage or of a
lower stage.
The Dhātus 129
The body, the organ of touch and tangibles are always of the stage
where the being is born. But the consciousness of touch (1) is of this
stage, in the case of a being born in Kāmadhātu or in the First Dhyana;
or (2) is of a lower stage (First Dhyana) in the case of a being born in
the Second Dhyāna or above.
47d. There is no restriction with respect to the mental organ.
Sometimes the mental organ is of the same stage as the body, the
dharmadhātu and the mental consciousness; sometimes it is lower or
higher. If a body belongs to the first five stages-Kāmadhātu and the
Four Dhyānas-, then the mental organ, the dharmadhātu, and the
mental consciousness can be, in absorption or at conception, of any
stage, all the stages not being moreover the same in each case. This
will be explained in the Eighth Chapter which treats of the absorp-
tions (viii.19c-d). We shall not speak here of this for the sake of
brevity, the profit being small and the pains great.
There are eighteen dhātus and six consciousness. Which dhatu is
discerned by which consciousness?
48a. Five external dhātus are discerned by two types of
consciousness.
Visible matter, sounds, odors, tastes and tangibles are known
respectively, by the consciousness of sight, hearing, smell, taste, and
touch. They are all discerned by the mental consciousness. Each of
these external dhātus is thus discerned by two consciousness.
The thirteen other dhatus, not being of the sphere of the sense
consciousness, are discerned by a single mental consciousness.
Chapter One
How many of the dhatus are eternal?
No dhātu is totally eternal. But
48b. Unconditioned things are eternal. 198
Unconditioned things (i.5b) form part of the dharmadhātu (i.15c).
Thus one part of the dharmadhātu is eternal.
How many of the dhātus are indriyas, that is to say, predominate
(ii.1)?
48c-d. The twelve internal dhatus and one part of the dharma-
dhātu are indriyas. 199
A Sūtra 200 enumerates twenty-two indriyas: 1. organ of sight, 2.
organ of hearing, 3. organ of smell, 4. organ of taste, 5. organ of touch,
6. mental organ, 7. male organ, 8. female organ, 9. vital organ, 10.
faculty of sensation of pleasure, or sensation of pleasure, 11. faculty of
sensation of displeasure, or sensation of displeasure, 12. faculty of
sensation of satisfaction, or sensation of satisfaction (saumanasyen-
driya), 13. faculty of sensation of dissatisfaction, or sensation of
dissatisfaction, 14. faculty of sensation of indifference, or sensation of
indifference, 15. faculty of faith, 18. faculty of energy, 17. faculty of
memory, 18. faculty of absorption, 19. faculty of discernment of
dharmas, or faculty of prajñā, 20. anājñātamājñāsyāmīndriya, 21.
ājñendriya, and 22. ājñātāvindriya.
The Abhidharmikas (Prakaraṇapāda, fol. 31b) do not count the
group that forms the six organs of consciousness (the āyatanas), i.e.,
the organs of sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, and the mental organ.
They do not place the mental organ after the organ of touch, but after
the vital organ, for the reason that the mental organ, the same as the
organs of sensation (10-14), also have an alambana (i.29b-d) and not
solely a visaya as do the organs of sense consciousness (1-5). 201
Among the twenty-two indriyas, eleven-namely the vital organ
(9), the five faculties of sensation (10-14), the five moral faculties1
The Dhatus 131
(15-19)—and one part of the last three, form part of the
dharmadhātu. 202
The twelve internal dhatus are (1) the five organs of sense
consciousness which form five dhatus and five indriyas (1-5); (2) the
mental organ (i.16c), that is to say, the sixth indriya, which make up
seven dhātus; and (3) one part of the last three indriyas.
The five remaining dhatus and one part of the dharmadhātu are
not indriyas.132 Chapter One
iii.39); (3) with regard to the production of their three conscious-
nesses; and (4) with regard to their special activities, i.e., perceiving
smells, tasting tastes, and touching tangibles.
lb. Four predominate with regard to two things;
ii. Four indriyas, namely the two sexual organs, the vital organ, and
the mental organ are each a predominating influence with regard to
two things (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 731b12; see also b23, b5).
1. The sexual organs are the predominating influence (1) with
regard to the distribution of living beings: it is by reason of these two
that living beings form the categories of male and female; and (2) with
regard to the differentiation of living beings: by reason of these two
organs, there are, among the sexes, differences of physical form, voice,
and manner of being.³
Some other masters 4 do not admit this explanation. In fact there
are sexual differences among the gods of Rūpadhãātu who, however, do
not possess sexual organs (i.30), and their distribution into sexes
results from these differences. Thus, if the sexual organs are the
predominating influences from two points of view, they are the
predominating influences with regard to defilement and purification:
in fact, the three types of eunuchs and bisexual beings are alien (1)
to the dharmas of defilement, lack of discipline (iv.13b), mortal
transgression (iv.103), the cutting off of the roots of good (iv.80); and
(2) to the dharmas of purification, discipline (iv.13b), acquisition of the
fruits (vi.51), and detachment (vairāgya, vi.45c) (see ii.19c-d).
2. The vital organ is the predominating influence (1) with regard
to the "joining" of the nikäyasabhāga (ii.41a), i.e., that which concerns
the arising of an existing thing; and (2) with regard to "maintaining"
this nikayasabhāga, i.e., that which concerns the prolongation of an
existing thing from its arising to its extinction.
3. The mental organ is predominate (1) with regard to rebirth, as
the Sūtra explains, “Then there is produced among the Gandharvas,
beings in the intermediate existence, one or the other of two minds, a
mind of desire or a mind of hatred. . ." (iii.15); (2) with regard to
domination: the world and the dharmas submit to the mind. As theThe Indriyas
stanza says: "The world is lead by the mind, conducted by the mind:
(all dharmas obey this one dharma, the mind.)”
iii. The five indriyas of sensation (i.e., the five sensations of
pleasure, displeasure, satisfaction, dissatisfaction, and indifference; ii.7,)
and the eight indriyas of faith, (force, memory, absorption and
discernment (ii.24) and the three pure faculties, ii.10)
lc. Five and eight with regard to defilement and to purification.
are, respectively, predominant with regard to defilement and to
purification.
The sensations are predominant with regard to defilement, for the
defilements, lust, etc., attach themselves to the sensations, and take
shelter therein. Faith and the seven other faculties are predominant
with regard to purification, for it is by them that one obtains purity.6
According to other masters (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 73b6), the
sensations are also predominant with regard to purification, so that the
Sūtra says: "sukhitasya cittaṁ samādhīyate,' duḥkhopaniṣacchraddhā8
ṣaṇ naiṣkramyāśritaḥ saumanasyādhayaḥ⁹ (“There are, by reason of
visible things, etc., six sensations of satisfaction, six sensations of
dissatisfaction, six sensations of indifference, favorable to naiskramya.")
Such is the explanation of the Vaibhāṣikas.
[The Sauträntikas ¹0 criticize this explanation:] (1) the sense
organs, the eyes, etc., are not predominant with regard to the
protection of the person. Here predominance belongs to the con-
sciousnesses, visual consciousness, hearing consciousness, etc.; and it is
after having distinguished that one has avoided anything harmful that
one takes solid food. (2) That which you understand as the "proper
activity of the organ,” namely the seeing of visible things, etc., belongs
to the consciousness (i.42) and not to the organ. The explanations
relative to the predominance of the other indriyas are equally incorrect.
How then should one understand the predominance of the
indriyas?
2a-b. By reason of their predominance (1) with regard to the
perception of their special object, (2) with regard to all objects,
six organs.156 Chapter Two
That is, by reason of their predominance through their affinity to
the six consciousnesses. The five organs, the first of which is the organ
of sight, are predominant through their affinity to the five sense
consciousnesses, visual consciousness, etc., each one of which distin-
guishes its own object, visible things, etc. The mental organ is
predominant with regard to the mental consciousness which dis-
tinguishes all objects. It is in this way that the six sense organs are
predominant.
But, we might say, the sense objects, visibles, etc., are also
predominant through their affinity to the consciousness, and as a
consequence, should they not also be considered as indriyas?
They are not predominant merely by this. "Predominance" means
"predominant power." The eye is predominant, for (1) it exercises this
predominance with regard to the arising of the consciousness that
knows visible things, being the common cause of all consciousnesses of
visible things, whereas each visible thing merely aids the arising of but
one consciousness; (2) the visual consciousness is clear or obscure,
active or well, accordingly as the eye is active or weak: now visible
things do not exercise a similar influence. The same holds for the other
sense organs and their objects (i.45a-b).
2c-d. It is by reason of their predominance in masculinity and
femininity that one must distinguish two sexual organs within
the body.
There are two separate sexual organs within the kayendriya, or the
organ of touch. These two organs are not distinct from the käyendriya:
they too cognize tangible things. But there is a part of the käyendriya
that receives the name of male organ or female organ because this part
exercises predominance over masculinity or femininity. ¹¹ Femininity is
the physical form, the voice, the hearing, and the dispositions proper
to women. The same for masculinity. Since the differences of these two
natures are due to these parts of the body, we know that these two
parts are predominant through their two natures. Hence they consti-
tute indriyas.
3. It is by reason of their predominance with regard to theThe Indriyas 157
duration of existence, to defilement, to purification, that one
considers the vital organ, the sensations, and the five the first
of which is faith, as indriyas.
1. The vital organ is predominant with regard to the prolongation
of existence from birth to death, but not, [as the Vaibhāṣikas say,] with
regard to the connection of one existence with another: this connection
depends on the mind.
2. The five sensations are predominant with regard to defilement,
for the Sūtra ¹2 says, "Lust finds its shelter in the sensation of pleasure;
hatred, in the sensation of displeasure; confusion, in the sensation of
indifference." 13 [On this point the Sautrāṇtikas are in agreement with
the Vaibhāṣikas.]
3. The five faculties,-faith, force, memory, absorption, and
discernment-are predominant with regard to purification, for,
through their power, the defilements are disturbed and the Path is
brought about, 14
4. By reason of their predominance with regard to ascending
acquisitions, with regard to Nirvāṇa, etc., the anājñātamājñās-
yāmîndriya, the ajñendriya, and the ājñātāvīndriya, are
likewise. 15
"Likewise," that is, these three are, likewise, considered as pre-
dominating influences or indriyas. These are the three pure indriyas,
which will be defined ii.10a-b.
1. The first is predominant through the acquisition of the second.
The second is predominant through the acquisition of the third.
The third is predominant through the acquisition of Nirvāṇa, or
nirupadhiseșanirvana. For there is no Parinirvāṇa when the mind is
not delivered. 16
2. The word "et cetera" indicates that there is another explanation:
The first is predominant with regard to the extinctions of the
defilements which are abandoned through Seeing the Truths (v.4).
The second, with regard to the extinction of the defilements which
are abandoned through Meditation on the Truths (v.5a).
The third, with regard to blessedness-in-this-life, that is, the158 Chapter Two
experience of the satisfaction (prīti = saumanasya) and the well-being
(sukha = praśrabdhisukha, viii.9b) that comes from deliverance from
the defilements. (See below note 22).
Why are there only twenty-two indriyas? If you regard a "pre-
dominating influence” as an indriya, ignorance and the other parts of
pratityasamutpāda (iii.21) would be indriyas, for these causes (avidyā,
etc.) are predominant with regard to their effects (the samskāras, etc.).
In the same way, the voice, hands, feet, the anus, and the penis are
predominant with regard to words, grasping, walking (viharaṇa-
cankramana), excretion, and pleasure. ¹7
We would answer that there is no reason to add ignorance, etc., to
the list proclaimed by the Blessed One.
In enumerating the indriyas, the Blessed One took into account the
following characteristics:
5. The support of the mind; that which subdivides, prolongs,
and defiles this support; that which prepares the purification
and which does purify it: these are all the indriyas,18
1. The support of the mind consists of the six organs of
consciousness, from the organ of sight to the mental organ. These are
the six internal āyatanas (i.39, iii.22) which are the primary constitu-
ents of a living being. 19
2. This sixfold support is differenciated by reason of the sexual
organs.
3. It lasts for a time by reason of the vital organ.
4. It is defiled by reason of the five sensations.
5. Its purification is prepared by the five moral faculties, faith, etc.
6. It is purified by the three pure faculties.
The dharmas that possess the characteristic of being predominant
with regard to the constitution, the subdivision, etc. of a living being
are considered to be indriyas. This characteristic is missing in other
dharmas, in voice, etc.The Indriyas
(Some other masters give a different definition:)
6. Or rather there are fourteen indriyas, support of transmigra-
tion, origin, duration, enjoyment of this support; the other
indriyas have the same function with regard to Nirvāṇa.
The expression "or rather" introduces the explanation of other
masters.
(1-6) The six organs (saḍāyatana, iii.22), from the organ of sight to
the mental organ, are the support, the raison d'etre of samsāra. 20
(7-8) It is through the sexual organs that the ṣaḍāyatanas arise. 21
(9) It is through the vital organ that the ṣaḍāyatanas last.
(10-14) It is through the five sensations that the sadayatanas enjoy.
On the other hand:
(15-19) The five faculties,-faith, force, memory, absorption,
discernment, are the support of Nirvāņa.
(20) Nirvāṇa is generated, appears for the first time, through the
first pure faculty, anājñātamājñāsyāmīndriya.
(21) Nirvāṇa lasts, is developed, through the second pure faculty,
ājñendriya.
(22) Nirvāṇa is "experienced" by the third pure faculty, ājñātā-
vindriya, for, through this faculty, one experiences the satisfaction and
well-being of deliverance (see above ii.4).
This determines the number of indriyas, as well as the order in
which the Sūtra places them.
The voice, hands, feet, the anus, and the sexual parts are not
indriyas.
1. The voice is not predominant with respect to words, for words
suppose a certain instruction; 22 2-3. Hands and feet are not pre-
dominant with regard to grasping and walking, for grasping and
walking are simply the hands and feet arising a second moment in
another place and with a new figure (iv.2b-d). On the other hand, we160 Chapter Two
see that hands and feet are not indispensable for grasping and walking,
for example with snakes. 23 4. The anus is not predominant with
regard to the expulsion of matter, for heavy things always fall in a
void; further, wind pushes this matter and makes it go out; 5. The
sexual parts are not predominant with regard to pleasure for pleasure
is produced by the sexual organs. 24
If you consider the hands, the feet, etc., as indriyas, you must then
place the throat, the teeth, the eyelids, and the joints, whose function it
is to swallow, to chew, to open and close, to fold up and to extend the
bones, among the indriyas. In this way, everything that is a cause,
which exercises its action (puruṣakāra, ii.58) with regard to its effects,
would be an indriya. But we must reserve the name of indriya to
whatever possesses predominance.
We have defined the organs of consciousness and the sexual organs
(i.9-44); the vital organ will be explained with the cittaviprayuktas
(ii.35) among which it is placed; the five faculties,-faith, force, etc.,—
being mental states, will be explained with the mental states (ii.24):
We shall examine here the organs of sensation and the pure
faculties which are not found anywhere else.
7a-b. Disagreeable bodily sensation is the indriya of pain. 25
("Bodily” is “that which relates to the body,"26 that which is
associated with the five sense consciousnesses, visual consciousness,
etc.)"Disagreeable" is that which does harm. Sensation in relation to
the five organs of sense consciousness, and which does harm, is called
duḥkhendriya.
7b-c. Agreeable is the indriya of pleasure.
'Agreeable” is that which does good, which comforts, is beneficent.
Agreeable bodily sensation is termed sukhendriya.
7c-d. In the Third Dhyāna, agreeable mental sensation is alsoI
The Indriyas 161
an indriya of pleasure.
(Mental sensation is the sensation associated with mental con-
sciousness.) Agreeable mental sensation of the Third Dhyāna is also
called sukhendriya, an indriya of pleasure. This name, moreover, is
reserved for agreeable bodily sensation; but in the Third Dhyāna,
bodily sensation is absent because the five sense consciousnesses are
not there. Then, when one speaks of the sukha or pleasure of the
Third Dhyāna, one means agreeable mental sensation (see vii.9).
8a. Moreover, it is satisfaction.
"Moreover," that is, in the stages below the Third Dhyāna, in
Kāmadhātu and in the first two Dhyānas, agreeable mental sensation
is satisfaction or the indriya of satisfaction.
[Agreeable mental sensation is absent above the Third Dhyana.]
In the Third Dhyana, agreeable mental sensation is calm and
tranquil, because the ascetic, in this Dhyāna, is detached from joy:
hence it is pleasure and not satisfaction. 27
[Below the Third Dhyāna, agreeable mental sensation is gross and
agitated, because, in the stages below the Third Dhyana, the ascetic is
not detached from joy: hence it is "satisfaction."] Joy, [which has a
joyous exaltation for its characteristic,] is not distinct from satisfaction.
8b-c. Disagreeable mental sensation is dissatisfaction.
(Sensation associated with mental consciousness and which harms
is dissatisfaction or the indriya of dissatisfaction.)
8c. Intermediate bodily or mental sensation is equanimity.
Intermediate sensation, which neither comforts nor harms, is the
sensation "neither-pain-nor-pleasure." This is what is termed the
sensation or indriya of equanimity.
Is this sensation bodily or mental?
8d. It is both.
(Either bodily or mental, intermediate sensation is a sensation of
equanimity.) The sensation of equanimity presents then a double162
Chapter Two
characteristic; consequently it constitutes only one indriya, because
there is no vikalpana here.
8e. For it has no vikalpana.
1. There is no vikalpana, or intellectual operation. Either bodily or
mental, the sensation of equanimity is equally free from any intellec-
tual element (vikalpa-abhinirūpaṇāvikalpa, i.33). As a general rule, 28
agreeable or disagreeable mental sensation proceeds from a concept,
from the concept of "dear" or "hateful," etc. Contrarily, bodily
sensation is produced from an external object independent of psycho-
logical states: Arhats do not have sympathies and antipathies, they do
not conceive of the idea of dear or the idea of hateful, and yet they are
subject nevertheless to physical pain and pleasure. Then we should
distinguish indriyas relative to agreeable and disagreeable sensations
accordingly as these sensation are bodily or mental.
But the sensation of equanimity is produced spontaneously, 2⁹
exactly like a physical sensation; it is produced in a person who does
not form any concept: hence we recognize that there is but one indriya
for the two sensations of bodily and mental indifference.
2. There is no vikalpana or difference. Accordingly as the agreeable
or disagreeable sensations are bodily or mental, they do good or harm
according to a mode of operation that is special to them, and they are
not felt in the same way. The sensation of equanimity creates neither
good or harm; it is not differenciated; mental or physical, it is felt in
the same way.
9a-b. Nine indriyas, in the Paths of Seeing, of Meditation and
of the Asaikṣa, constitute three indriyas.
The mental organ, the sensation of pleasure, the sensation of
satisfaction, the sensation of equanimity, and faith, force, memory,
absorption and discernment constitute the anajñātamājñāsyāmīndriya
for the saint who is on the Path of Seeing; ajñendriya for the saint who
is on the Path of Meditation on the Truths; and ājñātāvīndriya for the
saint who is on the path of the Asaikṣa (i.e., the Arhat), 30
On the Path of Seeing, 31 the saint is engaged in knowing that
V
Claassen memanda, Rektov in temaThe Indriyas
which he does not know (anajñātam ājñātuṁ pravṛtta), namely the
Four Truths: he thinks "I will know." His indriya is then called the
anājñātamājñāsyāmîndriya. 32
On the Path of Meditation on the Truths, 33 the saint does not have
anything new to know, he is a wise one or ajña. But in order to cut off
the defilements which remain in him, he newly knows and often
repeats the Truths that he already knows. His indriya is called the
ajñendriya, the indriya of the wise one, or the wise indriya.
On the Path of the Asaikṣa, the ascetic becomes conscious that he
knows: he obtains the knowledge (āva-avagama) 34 that the Truths are
known (ājñātam iti). Possessing ajñāta-ava, he is an ājñātāvin, and his
indriya is called the ajñātāvīndriya.
Or rather, the saint who is an ājñātāvin is one who has for his
characteristics or habit knowing that the Truth is known: in fact, when
the saint has obtained kṣayajñāna and anutpādajñāna (vi.70), he knows
in truth, "Pain is known; I have nothing more to know" and the rest. 35
We have explained the specific characteristics of the indriyas. We
must explain their different natures: are they pure (9b-d), from
retribution (10-1lb), good (llc-d)? To what sphere do they belong (12)?
How are they abandoned (13)?
How many are impure? How many are pure?
9b. Three are clean;
i. The last three indriyas are exclusively clean or pure. Stain (mala)
and vice (āsrava) are synonyms. ³6
9c. The material organs, the vital organ and the two painful
sensations are impure;
The material organs are seven in number: the five organs, of164 Chapter Two
seeing, etc., plus the two sexual organs, for all these seven organs are
included in rūpaskandha. Together with the vital organ, the sensation
of pain, and the sensation of dissatisfaction, ten indriyas in all are
exclusively impure.
9d. Nine are of two types.
The mental organ, the sensation of pleasure, the sensation of
satisfaction, the sensation of equanimity, and the five moral faculties
(faith, force, etc.) are nine indriyas that can be either pure or impure.
ii. According to other masters 37 (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 7c3), the five
moral faculties are solely pure, for the Blessed One said: "Whosoever is
completely lacking, to whatever degree, any of these five indriyas, faith,
etc., I declare him to be a person outside, one who belongs to the class
of Prthagjanas." 38 Hence anyone who possesses them, to whatever
degree, is an Äryan; hence they are pure.
This text is not proof, for the Blessed One is speaking here of a
person in whom the five pure moral faculties are absent. In fact, in the
passage that precedes the quotation in question, the Blessed One
defines the Āryapudgalas with reference to the five moral faculties. 39
Hence he is referring to only the five moral faculties belonging to the
Aryans, that is, pure. Whosoever is lacking them is evidently a
Pṛthagjana.
Or rather, if this passage speaks of moral faculties in general, we
would remark that there are two types of Pṛthagjana (Vibhāṣā, TD 27,
p. 8b3): those outside, and those inside; the first have cut off the roots
of good (iv.79), whereas the second have not cut them off. It is with
reference to the first that the Blessed One said: "I declare him to be a
person outside, one who belongs to the class of Pṛthagjanas." 40
On the other hand, according to the Sūtra, even before setting into
motion the Wheel of the Dharma (vi.54), there were in the world
persons of sharp, medium, and weak faculties. 41 Hence the moral
faculties of faith, etc., are not necessarily and exclusively pure.
Finally, the Blessed One said: "If I do not know truly the origin, the
disappearance, the advantages, the disadvantages, the escape of the five
faculties of faith, force, etc., I shall not be liberated, gone out,The Indriyas 165
disassociated, delivered from the world of gods, Māras, and Brahmās,
of a world wherein there are Brahmins and monks; I shall not reside
with a mind free from error . . ."42 Now a similar description does not
apply to pure dharmas, which are free from advantages, from
disadvantages, and from escape.
Hence the moral faculties of faith, force, etc., can be either pure or
impure.
Among the indriyas, how many are retribution (vipāka, ii.57c-d),
and how many are not retribution? 43
10a. The vital organ is always retribution. 44
(Only the vital organ (ii.45a-b) is always retribution.)
i. [Objection.] The vital energies (ayuḥsaṁskāras, see below) that a
Bhikṣu Arhat stabilizes or increases, are evidently the vital organ. Of
what action is the vital organ thus stabilized or prolonged the
retribution?
The Mülaśāstra (the Jñanaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 981a12) says:
"How does a Bhikṣu stabilize the vital energies? An Arhat in
possession of supernormal power (ṛddhimān-prāptābhijñāḥ, vii.42), in
possession of the mastery of mind, i.e., one who is asamayavimukta
(vi.56, 64), gives, either to the Sangha or to a person, things useful to
life, clothing, pots, etc.: after having given these things, he applies this
thought to his life; 45 he then enters into the Fourth or prāntakoṭika
Dhyāna (vii.41); coming out of the absorption, he produces the
thought and pronounces the words: 'May this action which should
produce a retribution-in-joy be transformed and produce a retribution-
in-life!' Then the action (the gift and the absorption) which should
produce a retribution-in-joy produces a retribution-in-life."
According to other masters, the prolonged life of an Arhat is the
result of the retribution of a previous action. According to them, there
is a remnant of the result of retribution-in-life which should have
ripened in a previous life, but which was interrupted by death before166 Chapter Two
its time (ii.45). And it is the force of the absorption of the Fourth
Dhyana that attracts this remnant and makes this remnant ripen now.
[The Mülaśāstra continues] "How does a Bhiksu cast off the vital
energies? An Arhat in possession of supernormal powers . . . enters
into the Fourth Dhyāna ; coming out of this absorption, he
produces the thought and pronounces these words: 'May the action
that should produce a retribution-in-life be transformed and produce a
retribution-in-joy!' Then the action that should produce a retribution-
in-life produces a retribution-in-joy."
The Bhadanta Ghoșaka said: By the force of the prantakoţika
Dhyana that this Arhat produced, the primary elements of Rūpadhātu
are attracted and introduced into his body. These primary elements are
favorable to, or contrary to, the vital energies. It is in this manner that
the Arhat prologues or casts off his life.
Along with the Sautrāntikas, we say that the Arhats, through their
mastery in absorption, cause the projection of the constitutive primary
elements of the organs for a certain period of duration, a projection
due to previous actions, to cease; inversely, they produce a new
projection, born of absorption. Thus the vital organ, in the case of the
prolonged life of an Arhat, is not retribution. But in other cases, it is
retribution.
ii. One question gives rise to another.
1. Why does the Arhat prologue his vital energies? For two
reasons: with a view to the good of others, and with a view to the
longer duration of the Dharma. 46 He sees that his life is going to end;
he sees that others are incapable of assuring these two ends.
2. Why does the Arhat cast off his vital energies?
For two reasons: he sees that his dwelling in this world has only a
small utility for the good of others, and so sees himself tormented by
sickness, etc. 47 As the stanza says:
"If the religious life has been well practiced, and the Way well
cultivated, at the end of his life, he is happy, as at the
disappearance of sickness."
3. Who, and in what place, extends or casts off his life?The Indriyas
In the three Dvipas (iii.53), male or female, a asamayavimukta
Arhat who possesses prāntakoţika Dhyāna (vi.56, 64): in fact, he
possesses the mastery of absorption and he is free from the
defilements. 48
4. According to the Sūtra, the Blessed One, after having extended
the jivita samskāras, casts off the saṁskāras of ayus 49
One asks 1.) what difference is there between the saṁskāras of
jīvita and of ayus; and 2.) what is the meaning of the plural "the
samskāras?" 50
On the first point: 51
a. According to certain masters, there is no difference. In fact, the
Mūlaśāstra (the Jñanaprasthāna, TD 26,p. 993b2; see the Prakaraṇa-
pāda TD 26, p. 694a23; see also the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 732b27) says:
"What is the vital organ? It is the ayus in the Three Dhātus.”
b. According to others 52 the expression ayuḥ-samskāras designates
life which is the result of actions in a previous life; the expression
jīvita-saṁskāras designates life which is the result of actions in this life
(gifts to the Sangha, etc.).
c. According to other masters, 53 the ayuḥ-saṁskāras are that by
which existence lasts; the jivita-saṁskāras are that by which life is
prolonged for a little while.
On the second point:
a. The Sūtra uses the plural because the Saint extends or casts off
many saṁskāras. There is no advantage, in fact, in extending a
moment, or in casting off a moment: it is only by means of a series of
moments that the Saint can procure the good of others; on the other
hand, a moment cannot be a cause of suffering.
b. According to another opinion, the plural condemns the teaching
according to which the jivita or the ayus is an entity susceptible of
duration. 54
c. According to another opinion, 55 the plural condemns the
teaching of the Sarvästivādins that see an entity or dharma in the jivita
and ayus. The terms jivita and ayus designate a number of samskäras
existing simultaneously and belonging either to four or five skandhas
according to their sphere of existence. If it were otherwise, the Sūtra168 Chapter Two
would not use the expression "the jivita-skandhas;" it would say "The
Blessed One extends some jivitas, and casts off some ayus."
5. Why does the Blessed One cast off [death] and extend [life]?
With the aim of showing that he possesses mastery over death, he
casts off death; with the aim of showing that he possesses mastery
over life, he extends it. He extends it for a period of three months, no
more, no less; after three months, there is nothing more to do for his
followers, after his task is well achieved, for, short of three months, he
would leave his task unachieved. 56
Or rather, 57 with the aim of realizing this vow: "Any Bhikṣu who
has well cultivated the four supernormal powers (rddhipāda, vi.69b),
can live, if he so desires, a kalpa or more.” 58
The Vaibhāṣikas 59 say: "The Blessed One casts off or extends with
the aim of showing that he triumphs over the Māra who is the
skandhas, and over the Māra who is death. In the first watch of the
night, under the Bodhi Tree, he has already triumphed over the Māra
who is a demon, and, in the third watch, over the Māra who is the
defilements (Ekottarikā, TD 2, p. 760b17 and following)."60
10a-b. Twelve are of two types.
Which twelve?
10b-c. With the exception of the last eight and dissatisfaction.
With the exception of the vital organ, which is always retribution,
and of the nine that will be mentioned below (10b-c) which are never
retribution, the remaining twelve are of two types, sometimes retribu-
tion, and sometimes non-retribution. This refers to the seven material
organs, to the mental organ and to the four sensations, the sensation of
dissatisfaction being excluded.
1. The seven material organs (organ of seeing, . . . male organ) are
not retribution to the extent that they arise from accumulation
(aupacayika, i.37). In other cases, they are retribution.
2. The mental organ and the four organs of sensation are not
retribution 1.) when they are good or soiled, for whatever is retribution
is morally neutral (avyākṛta,ii.57); 2.) when, still being neutral, theyThe Indriyas 169
are, according to their type,61 either airyāpathika, śailpasthānika, or
nairmāṇika (ii.72). In other cases, they are retribution.
3. The last eight, faith, etc., the anājñātamājñasyāmîndriya, etc., are
good and consequently are not retribution.
4. But, we would say, how can one affirm that dissatisfaction is
never retribution? In fact, the Sütra says, "There is an action liable to
result in satisfaction, there is an action liable to result in dissatisfaction,
and there is an action liable to result in a sensation of equanimity."62
[According to the Vaibhāṣikas,] the expression daurmanasya-
vedaniya should be understood not as "an action that should be
experienced, resulting in a sensation of dissatisfaction," but rather as
"an action with which a sensation of dissatisfaction is associated." In
fact, the Sūtra says that contact is sukha-vedaniya: now pleasure
(sukha) is not the retribution of contact. 63 From all evidence, sukha-
vendanīya contact is contact with which a sensation of pleasure is
associated. Hence daurmanasya-vedaniya action is action with which a
sensation of dissatisfaction is associated.
[We would answer:] You should explain the expressions sauma-
nasya-vedanīya and upekṣa-vedanīya as you explain the expression
daurmanasya-vendaniya, since the three expressions figure in the same
context in the Sūtra. It follows that a saurmanasya-vedaniya action is
an action "with which the sensation of satisfaction is associated," not
an action "liable to retribution in satisfaction;" and it follows that as a
consequence, the sensation of satisfaction is not retribution.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] We see no problem in explaining the expres-
sion saurmanasya-vedaniya either as "liable to retribution in satis-
faction" or as "that with which satisfaction is associated." But the
second explanation of vedaniya is only valid for the expression
daurmanasya-vedaniya. It refers to an action with which dissatisfaction
is associated.
[We answer:] One could admit your interpretation of the Sùtra if
there were no other issue, that is, if it had been rationally established
that dissatisfaction is not retribution.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] Dissatisfaction is produced by the imagination,
when one thinks of something that he fears; he is assuaged in the same170 Chapter Two
way: when he thinks of something that he desires. Now such is not the
case with retribution.
[But, we would say,] this is the case for satisfaction which will
consequently not be retribution.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] If, as you maintain, dissatisfaction is retribution,
when a person has committed a serious transgression and then
experiences, with regard to it, dissatisfaction and remorse (kaukṛtya,
ii.29d), one could say that the transgression has already brought forth a
ripened result-which is inadmissible (ii.56a).
But you admit that satisfaction is retribution, and we would reason
as you have just done: when a person has accomplished a meritorious
action and thereby experiences satisfaction, then this action immedi-
ately brings forth a result of retribution.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] Persons detached from desire do not possess
the indriya of dissatisfaction; 64 now, they possess the indriyas which
are retribution, the organ of seeing, etc.; hence the indriya of
dissatisfaction is not retribution.
[But, we would say,] how could such detached persons possess a
satisfaction which would be retribution by it nature? Without doubt,
they possess a satisfaction that arises from absorption, but this
satisfaction is good, and it is then not retribution. They do not possess
any other. 65
The fact is that persons so detached possess the indriya of
satisfaction, which can be the nature of this indriya, whether it be
retribution or not, whereas dissatisfaction is never produced among
them. Hence, the Vaibhāṣikas conclude, the indriya of dissatisfaction is
not retribution.
5. Eight indriyas,-the five organs of sense consciousness, the vital
organ, and the sexual organs,-are, in a good rebirth, the retribution of
good action; in a bad rebirth, they are the retribution of bad action.
The mental organ, in a good rebirth or in a bad rebirth, is
retribution for good action or for bad action.
The sensations of pleasure, of satisfaction, and of equanimity are
retribution for good actions.
The sensation of dislike is the retribution for a bad action. 66The material organs, in a good rebirth, are, we say, retribution for
good actions. To an androgyne, in a good rebirth, both organs are the
retribution for good action, but the quality of being an androgyne is
obtained through bad action. 67
The Indriyas 171
Among the twenty-two indriyas, how many "have retribution?"
How many are "without retribution?"
10a. Only one (i.e., dissatisfaction) has retribution; 68
1. Dissatisfaction always has retribution, for, on the one hand, it is
never neutral, being the result of a concept (vikalpaviseșa: the idea of a
thing liked, or of a thing hated, etc., ii.8c); but, on the other hand, it is
never pure, never being produced in a state of absorption.
10b. Ten (namely, the mental organ, the four sensations-with
the exception of dissatisfaction, and faith and its following)
are twofold (i.e., admit of retribution, as well as being without
retribution).
2. The first eight indriyas (organ of sight, etc.; vital organ, sexual
organs) never have retribution, because they are neutral; the last three
(anājñatamājñasyāmīndriya, etc.) never have retribution, because they
are pure (anāsrava, iv.80).
lla-b. The mental organ (the four sensations, with the excep-
tion of dissatisfaction), and faith and its following;
3. As for the ten remaining indriyas:
The mental organ, the sensations of pleasure, satisfaction, and
indifference, have retribution when they are bad or good-impure; they
are without retribution when they are neutral or pure.
Among the twenty-two indriyas, how many are good, how many172 Chapter Two
are bad, and how many are neutral?
11c. Eight are good; 69
Eight, faith, etc., the anājñātamājñasyāmīndriya, etc., are only good.
good.
11d. Dissatisfaction is of two types;
Dissatisfaction is good or bad (ii.28).
11e. The mental organ, and the sensations, with the excep-
tion of dissatisfaction, are of three types.
The mental organ and the four sensations are good, bad, or neutral.
11f. The others, of one type.
The organ of sight, etc., the vital organ, and the sexual organs are
neutral.
Among the twenty-two indriyas, how many belong to each of the
three spheres of existence?
12. The pure indriyas are absent from Kāmadhātu;
1. All of the indriyas are in the sphere of Kamadhātu, with the
exception of the last three, the immaculate or pure indriyas: these are
not connected with the spheres of existence, rather, they transcend the
spheres of existence. Thus nineteen indriyas, excluding the last three,
are in the sphere of Kāmadhātu.
12b-c. The sexual organs and the two disagreeable sensations
are absent from Rūpadhātu.
2. Excluding furthermore the two sexual organs and the two
disagreeable sensations, the sensation of suffering and dissatisfaction,
there are fifteen indriyas remaining in Rūpadhātu that are common to
the first two spheres of existence (viii.12a-b).The Indriyas
(a) The sexual organs are absent from Rūpadhātu 1.) because the
beings who are born in this sphere have abandoned the desire for
sexual union, and 2.) because these organs are ugly (i.30b-d).
Nevertheless the Sūtra says: "That a female being is Brahma-
such does not happen, that is impossible. That a male being is
Brahmā—such happens, that is possible." 70 It appears that this Sūtra
would pose difficulties.
No. Beings of Rūpadhātu are males without possessing the male
organ. They possess the other aspects of masculinity that one sees
among the males of Kāmadhātu, namely bodily form, sound of the
voice, etc. (ii.2c-d).
(b). The sensation of suffering (duḥkha, physical suffering) is
absent from Rūpadhātu (1) because of the "fluidity" or transparency of
the body, from whence there is absence of pain produced by hurt; and
(2) because of the absence of bad actions liable to retribution, from
whence the absence of suffering "arisen from retribution."
(c). The sensation of dissatisfaction is absent (1) because beings in
Rūpadhātu are penetrated by calm; and (2) because all causes of
irritation are absent. 71
12d. And all the material organs and the two agreeable
sensations are absent from Ārūpyadhātu.
3. Excluding furthermore the material organs (eyes, etc, vii.3c), and
the sensations of pleasure and satisfaction, there remains in Ārūpya-
dhātu the mental organ, the vital organ, the sensation of equanimity,
and faith and its following (i.31).
Among the twenty-two indriyas, how many are abandoned through
Seeing the Truths? How many through Meditation? How many are
not abandoned?
13a. The mental organ and three sensations belong to three
categories; 72174 Chapter Two
1. The mental organ, the sensations of pleasure, satisfaction and
equanimity, are of three types.
13b. Dissatisfaction is abandoned (through Seeing and
Meditation);
2. Dissatisfaction is abandoned through Seeing and through
Meditation, for, never being pure, it is always an object of abandoning.
13c. Nine are abandoned through Meditation alone;
3. Nine indriyas, namely the five sense organs and the two sexual
organs, the vital organ, and the sensation of dissatisfaction, are only of
the class "abandoned through Mediation,” for (1) the first eight are not
soiled; (2) the ninth does not arise from the mind (aṣaṣṭhaja, 1.40);
and (3) all are always impure.
13d. Five are either abandoned through Meditation or are not
abandoned;
4. The five indriyas, the first of which is faith, (1) are not soiled,
and hence are not abandoned through Seeing; (2) being able to be
pure, they are able to be "not the object of abandoning."
13e. Three are not abandoned.
5. The last three (anājñtamājñāsyāmīndriya etc.) are not aban-
doned, (1) because they are pure, and (2) dharmas without defects are
not to be rejected.
How many indriyas, having retribution for their nature, do beings
in the different spheres of existence possess from their origins?
14a. In the Kāmas, beings possess from their origins two
indriyas that are from retribution, 73
The organ of touch and the vital organ.
14b. With the exception of apparitional beings.The Indriyas
1. In Kāmadhātu, beings that are born from a womb, from eggs,
and from perspiration (iii.8) possess from their origin, i.e., from their
conception, two indriyas which are from retribution, namely the organ
of touch and the vital organ. It is only gradually that the other indriyas
appear among them.
Why is not the mental organ and the sensation of equanimity
counted herein?
Because, at conception, both of these are always soiled; hence they
are not from retribution, they are not retribution (iii.38).
How many do apparitional beings possess?
14c. Some possess six;
2. (Apparitional beings, iii.9, possess six, seven or eight indriyas.)
Beings without sex, namely beings at the beginning of the cosmic age
(iii.98), possess six: the five organs of sense consciousness, plus the
vital organ.
14d. Or seven.
Beings with sex possess seven indriyas, like the gods.
14e. Or eight
Bisexual beings possess eight indriyas. But can apparitional beings
be bisexual? Yes, in bad rebirths.
14d. Above, one.
14f. In Rūpadhātu, six;
Kāmadhātu is called "the Kāmas," because of the primary role that
belongs, in this sphere, to the kamagunas or objects of desire
(i.22b-d). Rūpadhātu is called "the Rūpas," because of the primary role
of the rūpas. 74 The Sūtra employs this manner of speaking: "These
calm deliverances, beyond the rūpas . . ." "75
3. In Rūpadhātu, beings, from their origins, possess six indriyas
which are from retribution, like apparitional beings without sex in
Kāmadhātu.176
Chapter Two
4. "Above" means in Ārūpyadhātu. This sphere of existence is not
situated above Rūpadhātu (iii.3); but it is said to be above it because it
is superior to Rūpadhātu from the point of view of absorption: the
absorptions of Ārūpyadhātu are cultivated after those of Rūpadhātu;
and because it outweights it from the point of view of its mode of
existence, from the point of view of the duration of its existence.
In this sphere of existence, beings initially possess one indriya
which is of retribution, the vital organ.
We have explained how many indriyas, of the nature of retribution,
are obtained at conception. Now how many indriyas perish at death?
15a. In Ārūpyadhātu, dying destroys the vital organ, the mental
organ, and the sensation of indifference; in Rūpadhātu, it
destroys eight indriyas;
In Rūpadhātu one must add the five organs of sense consciousness,
the organ of sight, etc. In fact, apparitional beings are born and die
with all their organs.
15b.In Kāmadhātu, ten, nine, eight;
In Kāmadhātu, death takes place either at one stroke or gradually.
In the first case, eight, nine or ten indriyas die, accordingly as the being
is without sex, with sex, or bisexual.
16a. Or four when death is gradual.
In the second case four indriyas die lastly and together; the organ
of touch, the vital organ, the mental organ and the organ of
indifference. These four indriyas die at the same time.
The preceding concerns the case where the mind of the dying
person is soiled or not-soiled-neutral.
16b. In the case of a good death, add all five indriyas.76
If ones mind is good, one should, in the three spheres of existence,The Indriyas 177
add the five moral faculties, faith, etc.77
A being in Arupadhatu, at death, abandons at the last moment the
three indriyas named in the Karika.
In the Teaching of the Indriyas78 all of the characteristics of the
indriyas are examined, both their natures and their operations. We ask
then how many indriyas come into play in the acquisition of the results
of the religious life (śrāmaṇyaphala, vi.52).
16c. One obtains the two highest results through nine indriyas;
The highest results are the results of Srotaäpanna and Arhat, for
these two results are the first and last. The intermediary fruits are
found between the the first and the last.
1. The result of Srotaāpanna (vi.35c) is obtained through nine
indriyas: the mental organ, equanimity," and the five moral faculties,
faith, etc.; anājñātamājñāsyāmīndriya and ajñendriya (ii.10a-b). 80
Anājñātamājñāsyāmîndriya constitutes anantaryamarga (vi.30c),
and ajña constitutes vimuktimärga: 81 it is through these two indriyas
that one obtains the result of Srotaapanna, for the first encourages the
possession of disjunction from the defilements (visamyoga, ii.55d 1,
vi.52); the second supports and makes firm this possession. 82
2. The result of Arhat (vi.45) is obtained through nine indriyas: the
mental organ, either satisfaction, pleasure or indifference, the five
moral faculties, ajñendriya and ajñātavīndriya.
Here ajñendriya constitutes anantaryamārga, and ājñātavīndriya
constitutes vimuktimārga.83
16d. The two intermediary results through seven, eight or nine.
3. The result of Sakṛdāgāmin (vi.36) is obtained either by an
anupūrvaka (vi.33a)-an ascetic who, before pursuing the acquisition
of the result of Sakṛdāgāmin, has obtained the result of Srotaapanna;
or by a bhūyovitarāga (vi.29c-d)—an ascetic who, before entering into
the pure path, i.e., into the comprehension of the Truths, has freed178 Chapter Two
himself through the impure, worldly path, from the first six categories
of defilements of Kamadhātu: consequently, when he has achieved the
Path of Seeing the Truths, he becomes a Sakṛdāgāmin without having
been a Srotaāpanna first. 84
The anupūrvaka-a Srotaāpanna-obtains the result of Sakṛdā-
gāmin either through a worldly path, which does not admit of
Meditation on the Truths, or through the Pure Path. In the first case,
he possesses seven indriyas: the mental organ, indifference, and the
five moral faculties; in the second case, eight indriyas: the same plus
ājñendriya.
The bhuyovītaraga-who is a Pṛthagjana-obtains the result of
Sakṛdāgāmin by means of nine indriyas. He realizes the compre-
hension of the Truths; he then realizes anajñātamājñāsyāmīndriya and
ājñendriya, as in the acquisition of the result of Srotaāpanna.
4. The result of Anägāmin is obtained either by an ānupūrvaka-
the ascetic who has already obtained the previous results, or by a
vītarāga—the ascetic who, without having entered into the Pure Path,
has freed himself from the nine categories of defilements of Kāma-
dhātu, or from the defilements of the higher stages, up to and
including Akimcanyayatana.
The anupūrvaka obtains the result of Anāgāmin through seven or
eight indriyas, according to whether he uses the worldly path or the
Pure Path, as the above ānupūrvaka obtains the result of Sakṛdāgāmin.
The vitaraga obtains the result of Anāgāmin through the com-
prehension of the truths, through nine indriyas, as the above bhūyovi-
tarāga obtains the result of Sakṛdāgāmin.
These general definitions call for more precision.
1. The vītarāga obtains the result of Anāgāmin by “understanding
the Truths." In order to understand the Truths, he places himself either
in an absorption of the Third Dhyana, an absorption of either the First
or the Second Dhyana, an absorption of anagamya or dhyānāntara, or
of the Fourth Dhyana: according to the case, his indriya of sensation is
the indriya of pleasure, satisfaction, or equanimity.
Contrarily, the bhūyovītarāga always obtains the result of
Sakṛdāgāmin with the indriya of indifference.The Indriyas 179
2. The ānupūrvaka who seeks for the result of Anāgāmin within
the absorption of anāgamya, can, when his moral faculties are strong,
depart at the last moment (the ninth vimuktimārga) of the anāgamya
and enter into the First or Second Dhyana.
When he expels the defilements through the worldly path, it is
then through eight, and not seven indriyas, that he obtains the result:
in fact, the anāgamya to which the next to last moment (ninth
ānantaryamārga) belongs, admits of the sensation of equanimity, and
the First or Second Dhyana, within which the last moment takes place,
admits of the sensation of satisfaction. Disjunction from the defile-
ments results then from equanimity and from satisfaction; in this same
way we have seen that disjunction, in the case of the Srotaāpanna,
results from ajñāsyāmīndriya and ajñendriya.
When he expels the defilements through the pure path, that is,
through Meditation on the Truths, one must add the ajñendriya as a
ninth indriya. Anantaryamärga and vimuktimärga are both two
ajñendriyas.85
We read in the Mülaśāstra (Jñanaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 994cl):
“Through how many indriyas is the quality of Arhat obtained? By
eleven."
In fact, the quality of Arhat is obtained, as we have said, through
nine indriyas. The Śāstra answers, "By eleven,” for it does not speak
with reference to the acquisition of the quality of Arhat, but with
respect to the person who acquires this quality.
17a-b. It is said that the quality of Arhat is obtained through
eleven indriyas, because a determined person can so obtain
them.
A saint can fall many times from the quality of Arhat (vi.58) and
reobtain it by means of diverse absorptions, sometimes with the
indriyas of pleasure (Third Dhyāna), sometimes with that of satisfac-
tion (First and Second Dhyana), or sometimes with that of equanimity180
Chapter Two
(anāgamya, etc.). But the three indriyas never coexist.
But, one would say, why does the Sūtra not speak from this same
point of view when it speaks of the quality of Anagamin?
The case is different. It does not hold that the saint, fallen from the
result of Anāgāmin, gains it again by means of the indriya of
pleasure. 86 On the other hand, the vitaraga, the person detached from
all the defilements of Kāmadhātu, and who has obtained the result of
Anāgāmin cannot fall from this result, because his detachment is
obtained through two paths: it is produced through the worldly path
and confirmed through the Pure Path.
How many indriyas does the person possess who possesses such
indriyas?
17c-d. He who possesses the mental organ or the vital organ or
the organ of equanimity necessarily possesses three indriyas.
He who possesses one of these three organs necessarily possesses
the other two: when one of them is absent, the other two are also
absent.
the organs
of
The possession of the other indriyas is not so determined. He who
possesses these three organs may or may not possess the others.
1. A being born in Arūpyadhatu does not possess
seeing, hearing, smelling, or taste. A being in Kāmadhātu does not
possess these organs when he has not yet acquired them (beginning of
embryonic life) or when he has lost them (through blindness, etc., or
through gradual death).
2. A being born in Arūpyadhātu does not posses the organ of
touch.
3. A being born in Arūpyadhātu or Rūpadhātu does not possess the
female organ. A being born in Kāmadhātu cannot possess it when he
had not acquired it or when he has lost it. The same for the male
organ.
4. A Pṛthagjana87 born in the Fourth Dhyāna, in the SecondThe Indriyas 181
Dhyana, 88 or in the Arūpyas, does not possess the organ of pleasure.
5. A Prthagjana born in the Fourth Dhyana, in the Third Dhyana,
or in the Ārūpyas, does not possess the organ of satisfaction.
6.A being born in Rūpadhātu or in Ārūpyadhātu does not possess
the organ of displeasure.
does not possess the organ of dissatisfaction.
7. A detached person
8. A person who has cut off the roots of good (iv.79) does not
possess the five moral faculties, faith, etc.
9. Neither a Pṛthagjana nor a Saint in possession of a result
possesses anājñātamājñāsyāmīndriya.
10. The Pṛthagjana, the Saint who is in the Path of the Seeing the
Truths (vi.31a-b) and the Arhat do not possess ajñendriya.
11. The Pṛthagjana and the Saikṣas do not possess ajñātavīndriya.
This enumeration permits us to establish those indriyas possessed
by those categories of non-specified beings.
18a. He who possesses the organ of pleasure or the organ of
touch certainly possesses four organs.
He who possesses the organ of pleasure also possesses the vital
organ, the mental organ, and the organ of equanimity. He who
possesses the organ of touch does possesses these same three indriyas.
18b. He who possesses one of the organs of sense conscious-
ness necessarily possesses five organs.
He who possesses the organ of sight also possesses the vital organ,
the mental organ, the organ of indifference and the organ of touch.
The same for him who possesses the organ of hearing, etc.
18c. The same for him who possesses the organ of satisfaction.
He who possesses the organ of satisfaction also possesses the vital
organ, the mental organ, the organ of equanimity and the organ of
pleasure.
But, one would ask,89 what sort of organ of pleasure can a being
possess who is born in the heaven of the Second Dhyana and who does
not therein cultivate the absorption of the Third Dhyāna?182
Chapter Two
He possesses the organ of defiled pleasure of the Third Dhyana.
18. He who possesses the organ of displeasure certainly
possesses seven organs.
This being evidently belongs to Kāmadhātu since he possesses the
organ of displeasure. He necessarily possesses the vital organ, the
mental organ, the organ of touch and four organs of sensation: the
organ
of dissatisfaction is not in him when he is detached.
18d-19a. Whoever possesses the female organ, etc., necessarily
possesses eight organs. ⁹⁰
One should understand: Whoever possesses the female organ, or
the male organ, or the organ of dissatisfaction, or one of the moral
faculties,-faith, force, memory, absorption, and discernment.
He who possesses a sexual organ necessarily possesses, in addition
to this organ, seven organs, which have been specified in 18c-d, for this
being evidently belongs to Kämadhātu.
He who possesses the organ of dissatisfaction necessarily pos-
sesses, in addition to this organ, these same seven organs.
He who possesses one of the moral faculties can be born in any of
the three spheres of existence; he necessarily possesses the five moral
faculties, which are seen together, plus the vital organ, the mental
organ, and the organ of indifference.
19b. He who possesses ajñendriya or ājñatavīndriya necessarily
possesses eleven organs.
These are the vital organ, the mental
mental organ, the organs of pleasure,
satisfaction, and equanimity; 9¹ the five moral faculties; and the
eleventh, which is either ajñendriya or ājñātavīndriya.
19c. He who possesses ajñāsyāmîndriya necessarily possesses
thirteen organs.
In fact, it is only in Kamadhātu that one cultivates the Path of
Seeing the Truths (vi.55). Thus the possessor of this indriya is a being
in Kamadhātu. He necessarily possesses the vital organ, the mental***
The Indriyas
organ, the organ of touch, the four organs of sensation, the five moral
faculties and ājñāsyāmīndriya. He does not necessarily possess the
organ of dissatisfaction, nor the organs of sight, etc.; in fact, he can be
"detached," in which case dissatisfaction is not in him; he can be blind,
etc. 92
What is the smallest number of organs it is possible for a being to
possess? (Vibhāṣā TD 27, p. 767b5-11).
20a-b. A being who is lacking any good at all possesses a
minimum of eight organs, the organ of touch, sensations, the
vital organ, and the mental organ.
A being who is lacking good is one who has cut off the roots of
good. He necessarily belongs to Kāmadhātu (iv.79); he cannot be
"detached." Thus he necessarily possesses the organs enumerated.
"Sensation" in the Kārika is vid. That is, "one who feels"
(vedayate) by understanding kartari kvip; or "sensation" (vedanā)
(bbāvasādbana: aunadikab kvip).
20c. It is the same with an ignorant person who is born in
Ārūpyadhātu;
The Prthagjana is termed ignorant (because he has not seen the
Truths).
20d. He possesses eight organs, namely, equanimity, life, the
mental organ, and the good organs.
The good organs are the moral faculties, faith, etc. Since it is a
question of an ignorant person, and since the total is eight, the pure
organs (ājñāsyāmi, etc.) are not alluded to here by the author.
What are the largest number of organs it is possible for a being to184
Chapter Two
possess?
21a-b. At the maximum, nineteen: [a bisexual being,] with the
exception of the immaculate organs.
A bisexual being necessarily belongs to Kāmadhātu. He is not
"detached;" he can possess the moral faculties; and he can possess all
the organs of sense consciousness. But he is a Pṛthagjana: thus he
necessarily lacks the pure organs (ājñāsyāmi, etc.).
The pure organs are termed "immaculate" in the Kārikā. The
ājñāsyāmi, the ājñā and the ājñātāvin are pure because they are not in
relation with the vices either in the quality of an object, or through
association (v.17).
21c. The Äryan, not detached, can possess all the organs,
The Āryan who is not detached, and hence a Śaikṣa and not an
Arhat, possesses at most nineteen organs.
21d. With the exception of a sexual organ and two pure organs.
One must exclude either the male organ, or the female organ; one
must exclude the ajñātāvīndriya in all cases; furthermore, one must
exclude the ājñendriya when the Śaikṣa is in the path of Seeing the
Truths, or the ājñāsyāmīndriya when the Śaikṣa is in the Path of
Absorption in the Truths. 93
[ii. Atoms or paramāņus.]
The conditioned dharmas (i.7a) are, as we have seen, of different
natures physical matter, sensation, ideas, etc. One asks if, in the same
way, they arise independently one from another; or rather if, in certain
cases, they necessarily arise together.
Certain conditioned dharmas are divided into five categories: rūpa
or physical matter; citta or the mind; caittas, mental states or dharmas
associated with the mind (ii.23-34); cittaviprayuktas, i.e., saṁskāras notThe Indriyas
associated with the mind (ii.35-48); and the asaṁskṛtas or uncondi-
tioned dharmas. These last are unarisen (i.5, ii.58): we do not have to
occupy ourselves with them here.
We shall first study the simultaneous arising of the material
dharmas.
22. In Kāmadhātu, an atom into which there is no entry of
sound, and into which there is no entry of any organ, is made
up of eight substances; 94
By paramāņu, we do not understand here a paramāņu in its proper
sense, a dravyaparamāņu, an atom or monad which is a thing, a
substance (dravya, i.13), but a saṁghātaparamāṇu, a molecule, i.e., the
most subtle among the aggregates of matter, for there is nothing,
among the aggregates of matter, which is more subtle.95
1. In Kāmadhātu, the molecule into which sound does not enter,
and into which no organ enters, is made up of eight substances, but of
no less than eight: namely the four primary elements (mahābhūtas,
i.12c), and the four derived elements,—visibles (rūpa, i.10a), odors,
tastes, and tangibles (ii.50c-d; 65a-b).
22b. When the organ of touch enters into it, it is made up of
nine substances;
2. The molecule into which sound does not enter, but into which
the organ of touch" enters, admits of a ninth substance, the dravya
which is the organ of touch.
22c. When any other organ enters into it, it is made up of ten
substances. 97
3. The molecule into which sound does not enter, but into which all
other organs other than the organ of touch (the organ of sight,
cakṣurindriya, etc.) enter, consists of a tenth substance, the dravya that
is this other organ (organ of sight, etc.): for the organs of seeing,
hearing, etc. do not exist independently of the organ of touch nor do
they constitute distinct āyatanas.
4. When sound enters into the aforementioned aggregates, the186 Chapter Two
total rises to nine, ten, or eleven substances: in fact, sound which is
produced by the primary elements that form part of the organism
(upatta, i.10b) does not exist independently of the organs.⁹8
5. If the four primary elements, earth element, etc., are never
disassociated, but coexist in every aggregate or molecule, how is it that,
in any given aggregate, one perceives either solidity, or viscosity, or
heat, or movement, and not these four substances or characteristics at
one given time?
One perceives in any given aggregate those substances (dravya,
earth element, etc.) that are most active in it, and not the others. In the
same way, when one touches a pile of pieces of plants and needles, 99
one perceives the needles; when one eats some salted soup, one
perceives the taste of salt.
How does one know that a given aggregate consists of the primary
elements when their presence in it is not perceived?
All of the primary elements manifest their presence through their
own actions, namely support (dhṛti), cohesion (saṁgraha), maturing
(pakti), and expansion (vyūhana) (i.12c). 100
According to another opinion, that of the Bhadanta Śrīlābha, the
aggregates are made up of the four primary elements, since, given the
action of certain causes, solid things become liquid, etc. ¹0¹ The fire
element exists in water, since this latter is more or less cold, a fact
which is explained by the presence of the element of fire in a more or
less great quantity.
But, we would say, whether cold is more or less active does not
imply that there has been a mixture of a certain substance (dravya), the
cold, with its opposite, heat. So too sound and sensation, even though
homogeneous, vary in intensity.
According to another opinion, [that of the Sautrāntikas,] the
primary elements which are not perceived in a given aggregate exist in
the state of potentiality, and not in action, and not in and of
themselves. Thus the Blessed One was able to say (Samyuktāgama, TD
2, p., 129a3), "There are many dhatus or mineral substances in this
piece of wood." 102 The Blessed One meant that this piece of wood
contained the seeds, the potentialities of many dhātus; for gold, silver,The Indriyas
etc.,
do not exist in the wood at the present time.
[The Sautrāntikas again object;] How does one prove the presence
of color in wind? 103
[The Vaibhāṣikas answer:] This is an object of faith (śraddhaniya),
and not of reasoning (anumeya). Or rather physical matter exists in
the wind, since one perceives smell by reason of the contact of the
wind with an object possessing an odor; now odor is never disassoci-
ated from physical matter. 104
6. We know that odor and taste are missing in Rūpadhātu (i.30);
one must then reduce the number of molecules in Rūpadhātu. We will
have six, seven, or eight substances, and when sound intervenes, seven,
eight, or nine. We shall not explain this in detail.
7. (Objection. The Vaibhāṣikas say that molecules in Kāmadhātu
consist of, at a minimum, eight dravyas, eight things or substances.)
Are we to understand dravyas as individual substances, as things that
have their own characteristics, 105 or as āyatanas that one can term
dravyas, substances, since they each possess distinctive general
characteristics? 106
In the first hypothesis the numbers proposed are too few. A
molecule, you say, consists of four "derived elements,” rūpa first: it will
consist of, we would say, not only of the rupa of color (varna, blue or
red dravya, etc.) but also of the rupa of figure (samsthāna, i.10, iv.3c),
since many atoms are agglomerated in these. It consists of the "derived
matter" called "tangible:" it will be, we should say, heavy or light, hard
or soft; it could be cold or hunger, or thirst; it then consists of
the dravyas that are either heaviness or lightness, softness or hardness,
cold, hunger and thirst (i.10d). Hence the numbers proposed above are
too few. But if, on the contrary, the Vaibhāṣikas mean to speak of
dravyas as āyatanas, then the numbers are still too few, for the primary
elements form part of the ayatana “tangible” (i.35a); one should then
say that a molecule consists of four substances, visible, odor, taste, and
touch.
[The Vaibhāṣikas answer.] Our definition of a molecule is the best
one. The word dravya is to be understood, in this case, as substances
properly so-called, and as ayatanas. Among the eight dravyas of a188 Chapter Two
molecule, there are 1.) four substances properly so-called, the four
primary elements, the supports and sources of derived matter; and 2.)
four ayatanas, four types of derived matter, supported by the primary
elements: visibles, odors, tastes and tangibles (abstractions created
from the primary elements, and included within tangibles).
This answer is not good, for each of these four derived elements is
supported by all four of the primary elements. The molecule will then
consist of twenty dravyas. 107
No, [answer the Vaibhāṣikas,] for we are speaking of the nature of
the primary elements, solidity, etc. The nature of all four of the
primary elements remains the same, in that they support the derived
element of odor or the derived elements of visibles, tastes, and
tangibles.
But why do you express yourself in an ambiguous manner and use
the word dravya in two different meanings? Words are subject to
caprice, but one must examine their meaning.
[iii. The mental states or caittas.]
23a. The mind and its mental states are necessarily generated
together. 108
The mind and its mental states cannot be independently generated.
23d. All things are necessarily generated with their
characteristics.
All conditioned dharmas, physical matter, the mind (ii.34), its
mental states, and the saṁskāras disassociated from the mind (ii.35),
are necessarily generated with their samskṛtalakṣaṇas-arising, dura-
tion, old age, and impermanence (ii.46a).
23c. Sometimes with possession.
Among the conditioned dharmas, those that are integral to living
beings (sattvakhya, i.10) are necessarily generated with the prapti
relative to each one of them (ii.37b). There is no prāpti for the others.
That is why the Kārikā says "sometimes."***
The Indriyas
What are the mental states? 109
23c-d. The mental states are of five types, mahābhūmikas, etc.
The mental states are the mahābhūmikas, those that accompany all
minds; the kuśalamahābhūmikas, those that accompany all good.
minds; the kleśamahābhūmikas, those that accompany all defiled
minds; the akuśalamahābhūmikas, those that accompany all bad
minds; and the parīttakleśabhūmikas, those that have small defile-
ments for their sphere.
Bhūmi or sphere signifies “place of origin." The place of origin of a
dharma is the bhūmi of this dharma.
The "great sphere” or mahābhūmi is so called because it is the
sphere, the place of origin, of great dharmas (that is, of dharmas of
great extension, that are found everywhere). The dharmas that are
inherent in the mahābhūmi are called mahābhūmika, that is, the
dharmas that are always found in all minds. 100
What are the mahābhūmikas, the mental states found in all
minds?
24. Sensation, volition, motion, desire for action, contact,
discernment, memory, the act of attention, approval, and
absorption or concentration coexist in every mind. ¹¹¹
According to the School,112 all the ten dharmas exist in every
moment of the mind.
1. Vedanā is the threefold sensation, pleasant, painful, and neither-
painful-nor-pleasant. (i.14).
2. Cetanā is that which conditions, informs, and shapes the mind
(cittābhisaṁskāra, i.15; iv.1).
3. Samjñā is samjñāna, that which grasps the marks (male, female,
etc.) of an object (vişayanimittodgrahaṇa, i.14, ii.34b-d).190
Chapter Two
4. Chanda is the desire for action. 113
5. Sparsa is the state of contact arisen out of the encounter of the
organ, the object and the consciousness; in other words, the dharma by
virtue of which the organ, the object, and the consciousness are as if
they were touching one another (iii.30).
6. Prajñā, which the Kārikā designates under the name of mati, is
discernment of the dharmas (i.2) 114
7. Smrti is non-failing with regard to the object; a dharma by virtue
of which the mind does not forget the object, by virtue of which it
cherishes it in order to so express it (abhilașatīva). 115
8. Manaskāra is the modification (ābhoga) ¹¹6 of the mind; in other
words, "to bend" or "to apply" the mind towards an object. (Manaskāra
is explained as manasaḥ kāṛaḥ or manaḥ karoty avarjayati, ii.72).
9. Adhimukti is approval. 117
10. Samadhi is the unity of the object with the mind (cittaikāgratā):
(agra = ālambana, i.33); this is the dharma by virtue of which the
mind, in an uninterrupted series, remains on an object (viii.1) 118
How do we know that these ten mental states, distinct in nature,
coexist in one and the same mind?
Subtle, unquestionably, are the specific characteristics of the mind
and its mental states. One discerns them only with difficulty even
when one is content to consider each of the mental states as
developing in a homogeneous series; how much more so when one
envisions them in the (psychological) moment (kṣaṇa) in which they
all exist. If the differences of the taste of vegetables, tastes that we
know through a material organ, are difficult to distinguish, how much
more so is this true with non-material dharmas that are perceived
through the mental consciousness.
The "sphere" of the good dharmas of great extension is termed
kuśalamāhabhūmi. The mental states that arise from this sphere are
termed kusalamahābhūmikas: the dharmas that are found in all good
minds.The Indriyas 191
25. Faith, diligence, aptitude, indifference, respect, fear, two
roots, non-violence, and energy are found only in a good mind,
and are found in all good minds.119
These ten dharmas are always found in all good minds.
1. Śraddha or faith is clarification of the mind. 120 According to
another opinion, 121 it is adherence to the doctrine of the results of
actions (vi.78b), to the Three Precious Ones (vi.73c), and to the Truths.
2. Apramada or diligence is bhāvanā, that is, the taking possession
of, and the cultivation of good dharmas. 122
[Objection.] The taking possession of and the cultivation of good
dharmas is none other than the good dharmas being grasped and
cultivated. How can you make a partial mental dharma of diligence?
Diligence is application to good dharmas. One says, by metaphor,
that it is bhāvanā (cultivation). By this fact, it is the cause of bhāvanā.
According to another school, ¹23 diligence is the guarding of the
mind.
3. Praśrabdhi is the dharma through which the mind is clever,
light, and apt. 124
But, [the Sautrantikas observe, 125] does not the Sutra speak of the
praśrabdhi of the body? 126
The Sūtra speaks of the praśrabdhi of the body as it speaks of
bodily sensation. (All sensation is, in its nature, mental; sometimes the
Sūtra terms the sensation that has for its support the five organs
constituted of atoms a "bodily" sensation associated with the five sense
consciousnesses [ii.7a]. In the same way that praśrabdhi of the mind
depends on the five organs, praśrabdhi of the five sense conscious-
nesses is termed "praśrabdhi of the body.")
[The Sautrāntikas answer:] How can the praśrabdhi of the body,
thus understood, be counted among the parts of Bodhi (sambodhyanga,
vi.68)? In fact, the five sense consciousnesses are of the sphere of
Kāmadhātu, for they are not "absorbed," that is, they are not produced
in the state of absorption, whereas the parts of Bodhi are "absorbed"
(vi.71a). Thus, in our opinion, in the Sutra alluded to, praśrabdhi of the
body is aptitude of the body (kayakarmaṇyatā, viii.9).192 Chapter Two
[The Sarvāstivādins:] How can praśrabdhi of the body, thus
understood, be a part of Bodhi? The aptitude of the body is, in fact,
impure.
[The Sautrāntikas:] But it is propitious to praśrabdhi of the mind,
which is a part of Bodhi; for this reason it receives the name "part of
Bodhi." The Sūtra often expresses itself in this manner. For example,
it teaches that joy constitutes the part of Bodhi called joy (pritisam-
bodhyanga, vi.71). ¹27 It teaches that hostility and the causes of hostility
constitute the obstacle of wickedness (vyāpādanivarana, v.59). ¹28 It
teaches that insight, resolution, and effort constitute "the element of
speculative consciousness" (prajñāskandha, vii.76): for neither resolu-
tion, which is by its nature discursive thought (vitarka), nor effort,
which is by nature energy, are speculative consciousness; but they are
favorable to this consciousness and are, consequently, considered as
consciousness. ¹29 Praśrabdhi of the body, being a condition of prasrab-
dhi of the mind, is placed, as are these, with these, among the
Bodhi.
parts of
4. Upekṣā or equanimity, is mental indifference, the dharma by
which the mind remains equal, even, free from modification. ¹30
[The Sautrantikas:] If all minds are associated with attention,
which is of the nature of "inflexion" or modification, how can all good
minds be associated with equanimity, which is by its nature non-
inflexion?
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] We have already remarked on this: the specific
characteristics of the mind and its mental states are very difficult to
know and determine.
[The Sautrāntikas:] This is not the point: it is quite inadmissible
that the same mind be associated with mental states which repudiate
both modification and non-modification, and both pleasure and
displeasure. 131
[The Vaibhāṣikas: ¹32] There is modification towards a certain
object, and non-modification with regard to another object: hence,
there is no contradiction to the coexistence of modification and non-
modification.Aeglas
The Indriyas 193
[The Sautrāntikas:] If this is so, then associated mental states
cannot be on the same object, which is contradictory to your definition
of associated dharmas (ii.34d). For us, the dharmas that are con-
tradictory, here manaskāra and upekṣā and otherwise vitarka and
vicāra (ii.33), do not exist simultaneously, but successively.
5-6. We shall explain respect and fear later (ii.32).
7-8. The two roots of good are absence-of-desire and absence-of-
hatred (adveşa, iv.8). Absence-of-error, the third root of good, is
"discernment," prajñā, by nature: hence it is already named among the
mahābhūmikas. 133
9. Non-violence is non-cruelty, 134
10. Energy is endurance of the mind. 135
Such are the mental states that are associated with all good minds.
The sphere of the mahakleśadharmas is termed mahākleśabhūmi.
The mental states that belong to this sphere, that is, the mental states
that exist in all defiled minds, are kleśamahābhūmikas.
What are the defiled mental states?
26a-c. Error, non-diligence, idleness, disbelief, torpor, and
dissipation are always and exclusively in soiled minds.
1. Error, moha is ignorance (avidyā, iii.29), non-knowledge,
non-clarity, 136
2. Non-diligence, pramāda, the opposite of diligence, is the non-
taking possession of and the non-cultivation of good dharmas.
3. Idleness, kausidya, is the opposite of energy.
4. Disbelief, āśraddhya, is the opposite of faith.
5. Torpor, styāna, is the opposite of aptitude (vii.11d).
The Abhidharma (Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 925b10) says: “What
is torpor? The weight of the body, the weight of the mind, inaptitude
of the body, inaptitude of the mind. Torpor of the body and torpor of
the mind are termed torpor."
Now torpor is a “mental state.” How can one have torpor of the
body?194
Chapter Two
In the same way that there is bodily sensation (as above, p. 191).
6. Dissipation, auddhatya, is non-calmness of the mind (vii.lld) 137
Only these six dharmas are kleśamahābhūmikas.
1. But the Mūla Abhidharma ¹38 says, on the one hand that there
are ten kleśamahābhūmikas, but on the other hand, it omits torpor
from its enumeration. What are these ten?
They are disbelief (aśrāddhya), idleness (kausīdya), default of
memory (mușitasmṛtità), distraction (vikṣepa), ignorance (avidyā),
non-observation (asamprajanya), wrong judgment (ayonifomanas-
kāra), wrong resolution (mithyadhimokṣa), dissipation (auddhatya),
and diligence (pramāda).
How foolish you are (devānāṁpriyaḥ), 139 grasping the letter of the
text and ignoring its intention (prāptijño na tv iṣṭijñaḥ)! 140
What is its intention?
Five of the dharmas mentioned in the Abhidharma as kleśa-
mahābhūmikas, namely default of memory, distraction, non-
observation, wrong judgment, and wrong resolution, have already been
mentioned as mahābhūmikas: there is no reason to name them again
as kleśamahābhūmikas. The same for the root of good non-error: even
though it is a kusalamahābhūmika, it is not catalogued as such, because,
being prajña by nature, it is classed as a mahābhūmika (as above, note
In fact default of memory is nothing other than defiled memory
(smrti). Distration (iv.58) is defiled samādhi. Non-observation is
defiled prajña. Wrong judgment is defiled judgment. And wrong
resolution is defiled resolution.
This is why the Mūla Abhidharma lists ten kleśamabhābhūmikas
in admitting the state of mahābhūmikas to a state of defilement.
Is a mahābhūmika also a kleśamahābhūmika?The Indriyas 195
There are four alternatives: 1. sensation, ideas, volition, contact and
desire (chanda) are only mahābhūmikas; 2. disbelief, idleness, igno-
rance, dissipation, and diligence are only klesamahābhūmikas; 3.
memory, samadhi, prajñā, judgment, and resolution belong to both
categories; and 4. the other dharmas (kleśamahābhūmikas, etc.)
Certain Masters (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 220a22) maintain that
distraction is not wrong samadhi: the alternatives then are differently
established: distraction is added to the second category, and samadhi is
put into the third.
2. As for the statement: "the Müla Abhidharma omits torpor from
its enumeration" of the kleśamahābhūmika, it is admitted that torpor
is associated with all defiled dharmas.
If torpor is omitted from the list, is this my fault or the fault of the
author of the Abhidharma?
The Abhidhārmikas ¹41 explain the omission: torpor should be
named; but it is not named because it is favorable to samadhi. In fact,
they claim, persons with a torpid disposition (styanacarita), or dull
persons, realize meditation sooner than do dissipated persons. 142
But who is dull without being dissipated? Who is dissipated
without being dull? Torpor and dissipation always go together.
Yes, torpor and dissipation go together. But the term carita
indicates excess. The person in whom torpor dominates is called "dull,"
even though he is also dissipated.
We know this as well as you do; but it is by reason of their nature
that the dharmas are classified into different categories. It is then
established that six dharmas are kleśamahābhūmikas, because only
they are produced in all defiled minds.
26c-d. Disrespect and the absence of fear are always and
exclusively found in bad minds.
These two dharmas, which will be defined below (ii.32) are always
found in bad minds. Consequently they are called akuśalamahā-
bhūmikas. 143196
Chapter Two
27. Anger, enmity, dissimilation, jealousy, stubbornness, hypo-
crisy, greed, the spirit of deception, pride-intoxication, the
spirit of violence, etc., are the parittakleśabhūmikas. ¹44
They are called this because they have parittakleśas for their
spheres. Parīttakleśa, "small defilement," means avidyā or ignorance
(iii.28c-d) in an isolated state, not associated with lust, etc. (kevalā
avenikī avidyā, v.14).
They are only associated with ignorance, with the ignorance that is
cast off through the Path of Meditation, ignorance of the sphere of
mental consciousness. This is why they are called parīttakleśa-
bhūmikas. 145
These will be studied in the Fifth Chapter (v.46 and following).
We have studied five categories of mental states. There are other
mental states that are indeterminate, aniyata, which are sometimes
associated with a good mind, and sometimes with a bad or a neutral
mind: regret (kaukṛtya, ii.28), apathy (middha, v.47, vii.11d), vitarka
(ii.33), vicāra, etc.
How many mental states are necessarily produced with each mind
of each class-with a good, bad, or neutral mind?
28a. The mind in Kāmadhātu, when it is good, always consists
of twenty-two mental states, as it is always associated with
vitarka and vicāra.
There are five classes of minds in Kāmadhātu: 1) the good mind
constitutes one class; 2-3) the bad mind constitutes two classes,The Indriyas 197
accordingly as it is "independent," that is, associated only with
ignorance, or associated with the other defilements, lust, etc.; and 4-5)
the neutral mind that is free of retribution constitutes two classes
according as it is soiled, that is, associated with satkāyadṛṣṭi or with
antagrāhadṛṣṭi ¹47 (v.3), or not defiled, that is, "possessing retribution,"
etc. (i.37, ii.71).
The mind in Kāmadhātu is always associated with vitarka and
vicāra (ii.33a-b). This mind, when it is good, consists of twenty-two
mental states: ten mahābhūmikas, ten kuśalamahābhūmikas, plus two
aniyatas, namely vitarka and vicāra.
When the good mind includes regret (kaukṛtya), the total rises to
twenty-three.
What does the word kaukṛtya (regret) mean? ¹48
Kaukṛtya is, properly, the nature of that which is wrongly done,
but here kaukṛtya means a mental state that has for its object kaukṛtya
in its literal sense, namely regret relative to an error. In the same way,
vimokṣamukha which has fūnyatā or absence of atman for its object is
termed śūnyatā (viii.24-25); non-desire which has aśubhā or the
loathsome (vi.llc-d) for its object is called aśubhā. In the same way, in
the world, one says that the village, the town, the country, are all
brought together, designating thus the inhabitants by the name of the
location. Kaukṛtya in its proper sense is the support, the raison d'etre
of
regret; hence
hence regret is termed kaukṛtya. For the result receives the
name of its cause, for example in the text: "The six sparsayatanas are
previous actions." 149
But how can one designate "regret over errors," regret relative to
an action not done, by the name of kaukṛtya?
Because one says "It is poorly done on my part not to have done
this action," thus designating an omission as "done" or "poorly done."
When is regret good?
When it is relative to a good action omitted or to a bad action
accomplished. It is bad when it is relative to a bad action omitted or to
a good action accomplished.
These two types of regret bear on the two categories of action.198
Chapter Two
29a. A bad mind consists of twenty mental states when it is
independent of, or associated with views (drsti);
1. An independent mind is a mind associated with ignorance
(avidyā, v.1), but not associated with other defilements, lust, etc. 150
A bad mind associated with views is a mind associated with
mithyadṛṣṭi, with dṛṣṭiparāmarsa, or with śīlavrataparāmarśa (v.3); a
mind associated with satkayadṛṣṭi and with antagrāhadṛṣṭi is not bad,
but defiled-neutral.
In these two cases, a bad mind consists of ten mahābhūmikas, six
kleśamahābhūmikas, two akusalamahābhūmikas, plus two aniyatas,
namely vitarka and vicāra.
View itself is not counted, for a view is a certain type of prajñā, and
prajna is a mababbumika.151
29b. Twenty-one, when it is associated with one of the four
defilements, with anger, etc., with regret.
2. Associated with lust, hostility, pride, or doubt (rāga, pratigha,
māna, vicikitsā, v.1), a bad mind consists of twenty-one mental states,
the same as above, plus lust or hostility, etc.
Associated with anger, etc., that is, with one of the minor
defilements (upakleśas) enumerated above, ii.27..
30a. A neutral mind consists of eighteen mental states when it
is defiled;
In Kāmadhātu, a neutral mind, that is, a mind free of retribution, is
defiled, that is covered by defilement when it is associated with
satkāyadṛṣṭi or antagrāhadṛṣṭi. This mind consists of ten maha-
bhūmikas, six kleśamahābhūmikas, plus vitarka and vicāra.
30b. In the contrary case, twelve.
Not defiled, a neutral mind consists of twelve mental states: the
ten mahābhūmikas, vitarka, and vicara.
The Foreigners believe that regret can be indefinite, for example,
in a dream. An indefinite-non-defiled mind associated with indefinite
regret would consist of thirteen mental states.The Indriyas 199
30c-d. Apathy is not in contradiction to any category; wherever
it is found, it is added.
Apathy (middha, v.47, vii.lld) can be good, bad, or neutral. The
mind with which it is associated would then consist of twenty-three
mental states instead of twenty-two, twenty-four instead of twenty-
three, etc., accordingly as it is good and free from regret, or good and
accompanied by regret, etc.
31a. The bad mental states, regret and apathy, are absent from
the First Dhyana.
In the First Dhyana there is missing 1) hostility (pratigha, v.1), 2)
the series anger, etc. (ii.27), with the exception of hypocrisy (sathya),
deception (māyā), and pride-intoxication (mada); 3) the two akuśala-
mahābhūmikas, disrespect and the absence of fear (ii.32); plus 4)
regret, since dissatisfaction (ii.8b-c) is absent, and 5) laziness, since
food through the mouth (iii.38d) is absent. The other mental states of
Kāmadhātu exist in the First Dhyana. 152
31b. Further on, vitarka is also missing absent from the
intermediate dhyana.
Furthermore, vitarka is absent from the intermediate dhyāna.
31c. Further on, again, vicāra, etc.
In the Second Dhyana and above, up to and including Ārūpya-
dhātu, vicāra, hypocrisy, and deception are also absent. 153 Pride-
intoxication exists in the three spheres of existence (v.53c-d).
According to the Sūtra, ¹54 hypocrisy and deception exist as far as
the world of Brahmā, but not above the heavens where beings are in
assembly. Mahābrahmā, sitting in his assembly, was questioned by the
Bhikṣu Aśvajit: "Where do the four primary elements completely
disappear?" Incapable of responding, he boasted: "I am Brahmā, great
Brahmā, ¹55 the Lord, the Creator, the Transformer, the Generator, the
Nourisher, the Father of all." Finally, when Aśvajit was leaving the
assembly, Brahmā counselled him to return to the presence of the
Master and ask him. 156200
Chapter Two
We have seen how many mental states are associated with each
type of mind of the three spheres of existence. We have to define the
mental states enumerated above.
What is the difference between disrespect (ahri) and absence of
fear (anapatrapya)?
32a. Disrespect is lack of veneration. 157
Lack of respect, that is, the lack of veneration, 158 the lack of fearful
submission with regard to the qualities (maitrī, karuṇā, etc.) of oneself
and others, and with regard to persons endowed with these qualities, is
ābrīkya; ahrī is a mental dharma opposed to respect.
32b. Anapatrāpya or atrapa is the dharma that causes a person
not to see the unpleasant consequences of his transgressions. 159
"Transgressions" are what are scorned by good persons.
"Unpleasant consequences” are called in the Kārikā bhaya or fear,
because these unpleasant consequences engender fear.
The condition of the person who does not see the consequences of
transgression-the dharma that produces this condition,―is anapa-
trāpya or atrapā.
[Objection:] What do you understand by the expression "does not
see the unpleasant consequences" abhayadarsitva? Whether you in-
terpret this phrase as abhayasya darsitvam, "he sees that there are no
unpleasant consequences," or as bhayasya adarśitvam, "he does not see
that there are unpleasant consequences," none of these explanations is
satisfactory. In the first case, we have defiled prajñā, an inexact
knowledge; in the second case, we simply have ignorance.
The expression abhayadarsitvam signifies neither "view" (defiled
prajñā), nor "non-view" (ignorance). It describes a special dharma that
is placed among the minor defilements (upakleśas, v.46), which has
false views and ignorance for its cause, and which is termed
anapatrāpya (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 180a17).The Indriyas 201
According to other Masters, 160 ährīkya is the absence of shame
vis-a-vis oneself, in the commission of a transgression; anapatrapya is
the absence of shame vis-a-vis others. 161
But cannot one consider oneself and others at the same time?
We do not say that the two forms of the absence of shame are
simultaneous.
There is ābrīkya, an outflowing of lust, when the person does not
experience the shame of transgression when considering oneself; there
is anapatrāpya, an outflowing from mental confusion, when he does
not experience the shame of transgression when considering others.
Hrī and apatrāpya are opposed to these two bad dharma. Their
definition, according to the first theory, is "respect, veneration, fearful
submission," or "fear of the consequence of transgression;" according
to the second theory, "modesty," "respect for humans."
Some think that affection (preman) and respect (gaurava) are the
same thing.
32c. Affection is faith. 162
Affection is of two types, defiled and non-defiled (Vibhāṣā, TD 27,
p. 151a8).
The first is attachment; for example, affection for wife and sons.
The second is faith; for example, affection for a master or for virtuous
persons.
1. All faith is not affection, namely faith with regard to the Truths
of Suffering and the Arising of Suffering.
2. All affection is not faith, namely defiled affection.
3. Faith can be affection, namely faith with regard to the Truths of
the Extinction of Suffering and the Path.
4. The other mental states, the dharmas disassociated from the
mind, etc., are neither faith nor affection.
According to another opinion, ours,-faith is a belief in qualities:
affection is produced from this belief. Affection is then not faith, but
the result of faith.
32c. Respect is brī. 163202
Chapter Two
As we have explained above (32a), respect is veneration, etc.
1. All hrī is not respect, namely hrī with respect to the Truths of
Suffering and the Origin of Suffering. 164
2. Hrī with respect to the Truths of the Extinction of Suffering and
the Path is also respect.
According to another opinion, respect is veneration; shame is born
from respect and this shame is called hri. Hence respect, the cause of
brī, is not brī.
There are four alternatives concerning affection and respect:
1. Affection which is not respect, namely affection with regard to
wife, to children, to companions in the religious life, to pupils.
2. Respect which is not affection, namely respect with regard to
someone else's master, to a person endowed with qualities, etc.
3. Respect which is affection, namely respect with regard to one's
master, one's father, mother, etc.
4. Neither respect nor affection for other persons.
32d. Both exist in Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu.
Affection and respect do not exist in Ārūpyadhātu.
But you have said that affection is faith, and that respect is brī: now
faith and hrī are kuśalamahābhūmikas (ii.25): hence affection and
respect should exist in Ārūpyadhātu.
Affection and respect are of two types: relative to dharmas and
relative to persons. The text refers to the second type; the first type
does exist in all three spheres of existence.
33a-b. Vitarka and vicara are grossness and subtlety of the
mind. 165
The grossness, that is, the gross state of the mind is termed
vitarka, the subtlety, that is, the subtle state of the mind is termed
vicara. How can vitarka and vicara be associated with the mind at one
and the same time? Can the mind, at one and the same time, be both
gross and subtle?
According to one opinion, 166 we may compare vicara to cold water,
the mind to cheese which floats on the surface of this cold water, and
T
1The Indriyas 203
vitarka to the heat of the sun which operates on this cheese. By reason
of the water and sun, the cheese is not too runny nor too hard. In this
same way, vitarka and vicāra are associated with the mind: it is neither
too subtle, by reason of vitarka, nor too gross, by reason of vicāra.
But, we would say, it follows from this explanation that vitarka and
vicāra are not grossness and subtlety of mind, but the cause of its
grossness and its subtlety: the cold water and the warm light of the sun
are not the hard or the runny state of the cheese, but rather the cause
of these states.
Other objections present themselves. Grossness and subtlety of
mind are relative things. They admit of many degrees: a mind of the
First Dhyana is subtle in comparison with a mind in Kāmadhātu, but
gross in comparision with a mind in the Second Dhyana; the qualities
and the defilements can be more or less gross or subtle in one and the
same stage, for they are divided into nine categories. Thus, if vitarka
and vicāra are grossness and subtlety of the mind, we would have to
admit that they both exist up to the highest stage of Ārūpyadhātu. 167
Now they cease at the Second Dhyana, and adding to this the fact that
no specific or generic differences can be established between grossness
and subtlety, one then cannot differentiate vitarka and vicāra.
According to another opinion, [that of the Sautrāntikas,] vitarka
and vicāra are the "factors of voice." 168 The Sūtra says in fact, “It is
after having examined, after having judged (vitarkya, vicārya) that one
speaks, not without having examined, not without having judged." 169
The factors of voice that are called gross are called vitarkas; those that
are subtle are called vicāras. (According to this explanation, we should
understand vitarka and vicāra not as two distinct dharmas, but rather a
collection of mind and mental states which provoke speech, and which
is sometimes gross, sometimes subtle.)
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] What contradiction is there in two dharmas,
the first (vitarka) gross, and the second (vicāra) subtle, being associated
with the same mind?
[The Sautrāntikas:] There would not be any contradiction if these
two dharmas were specifically different; for example, sensations and
ideas-although the first are gross and the second subtle (i.22)—can204 Chapter Two
coexist. But two states of the same species, one in a strong state and
the other in a weak state, one gross and one subtle, cannot coexist.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] But there is a specific difference between
vitarka and vicāra.
[The Sautrāntikas:] What is this difference?
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] This difference is inexpressible; but it is
manifested through the force or the weakness of the mind. 170
[The Sautrāntikas:] The force and the weakness of the mind do
not demonstrate the presence of two specifically different dharmas, for
the same species is sometimes strong, sometimes weak.
According to another opinion,-ours,-vitarka and vicara are not
associated with one and the same mind. They exist in turn. ¹7¹ The
Vaibhāṣikas would object that the First Dhyāna has five parts (viii.7)
among which are vitarka and vicara. We would answer that the First
Dhyana has five parts in the sense that five parts are possible in the
First Dhyāna: but any given moment of the First Dhyāna possesses
only four parts, namely prīti, sukha, and samādhi, plus vitarka or
vicāra.
What difference is there between māna (pride) and mada (pride-
intoxication) (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 223a6)?
33b. Māna, the error of pride, is arrogance. But mada, pride-
intoxication, is the abolition of the mind of one who is
enamoured with his own qualities.
It is arrogance of mind (cetasą unnatiḥ) with respect to others.
Measuring (mā) the superiority of qualities that one has, or that one
believes to have over others, one becomes haughty and depreciates
others.
Be reason of its attachment to its own qualities, the mind becomes
puffed up, exhaults itself, and abolishes itself. 172 According to other
Masters, in the same way that wine produces a certain joyous excitation
that is called intoxication, so too does the attachment that a person hasfor his own qualities. 173
The Indriyas
We have defined the mind (citta, i.16) and its mental states. We
have seen in what categories the mental states are placed, in what
numbers they are generated together, and what their different
characteristics are. The mind and its mental states receive, in the
Scriptures, different names.
34a-b. The names mind (citta), spirit (manas), and conscious-
ness (vijñāna) designate the same thing 174
The mind is termed citta because it accumulates (cinoti); 175 it is
termed manas because it knows (manute) 176 and it is termed vijñāna
because it distinguishes its object (ālambanaṁ vijñānāti).
Some say that the mind is termed citta because it is spotted (citra)
by good and bad elements; ¹77 to the extent that it is the support
(āśrayabhūta) of the mind that follows, it is manas (i.17); and to the
extent that it grasps the support through the organ and its object
(āśritabhūta), it is vijñāna.
Hence these three names express different meanings, but they
designate the same object; in this same way
34b-d. The mind and its mental states "have a support," "have
an object," "have an aspect," and are "associated."
These four different names, "have a support," etc., designate the
same object.
The mind and its mental states "have a support" because they rely
on the organs (organ of sight, etc., mental organ); "have an object"
(sālambana, i.34) or “a subject of consciousness," because they grasp
their "sphere," "have an aspect," because they take form according to
their object; 178 and are "associated,” that is, similar and united, because
they are similar to one another and are not separated from each other.
How are they samprayukta or associated, that is, "similar and
united?"206
Chapter Two
34d. In five ways.
The mind and its mental states are associated by reason of five
equalities or identities, identity of support (aśraya), of object
(ālambana), of aspect (ākāra), of time (kāla), and equality in the
number of dravyas. That is: the mental states (sensation, etc.) and the
mind are associated (1-3) because they have the same support, the
same object, and the same aspect; (4) because they are simultaneous;
and (5) because, in this association, each type is represented by only
one individual substance (dravya): in any given moment there can be
only one mind produced; to this one, unique mind there is found
associated one sensation, one idea, or one mental state of each type (see
ii.53c-d).
We have explained the mind and its mental states, in full, with
their characteristics. 179
[iv. The dharmas not associated with the mind]
What are the saṁskāras not associated with the mind?
35-36a. The dharmas "not associated with the mind" are
prāpti, aprāpti, sabhāgāta, āsaṁjñika, and two absorptions, life,
characteristics, nāmakāya, etc., and that which is of this type. 180
These dharmas are not associated with the mind; they are not of
the nature of rūpa or physical matter; they are included within the
samskāraskandha (i.15): they are called the cittaviprayukta samskāras,
(1) because they are disjoined from the mind, and (2) because, being
non-material, they resemble the mind.
36b. Prāpti is acquisition and possession. 181
Prapti is of two types: (1) acquisition of that which has not been
obtained (prāpta) or of that which had been lost; and (2) possession of
that which, having been obtained, has not been lost.
Aprāpti is the opposite.The Indriyas 207
36c. There is prāpti and aprapti of dharmas that belong to the
person himself, 182
1. When a conditioned dharma "falls into the personal series,"
there is prāpti or aprapti of this dharma, but not if it falls into the
series of another person, for no one possesses the dharmas of another;
nor if it does not fall into any series, for no one posseses the dharmas
"which are not of a living being" (asattvākhya, i.10b). 183
2. As for unconditioned dharmas, there is prāpti of pratisaṁkhyā-
nirodha and apratisaṁkhyānirodha (i.6, ii.55).
36d. And of the two extinctions.
a. All beings possess the
do not arise without a cause.
apratismkhyanirodha of the dharmas that
b. The Abhidharma (Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 1022a) expresses
itself in this way: "Who possesses pure dharmas? All beings possess
pratisamkhyānirodha with the exception of the sakalabandhana-
ādikṣaṇasthas, that is, with the exception of the Aryans bound with all
the bonds and who are found in the first moment of the Path, and with
the exception of the Pṛthagjanas bound by all the bonds. The others,
both Aryans and Prthagjanas, possess pratisamkhyānirodha.” 184
c. No one possesses space (ākāśa). Hence there is no prapti of
space.
[According to the Vaibhāṣikas,] prāpti and aprāpti are in opposi-
tion: everything that is susceptible of prapti is also susceptible of
aprāpti. As shall be explained, the stanza does not speak of this in a
straightforward manner.
[The Sautrāntikas] deny the existence of a dharma called prāpti or
possession.
[1. How do the Sarvāstivādin-Vaibhāṣikas prove the existence of a
substance (dravyadharma) 185 termed prāpti?]
[The Sarvästivādins:] A Sūtra (Madhyamagama, TD 1, p. 735b29
and following?) says, "Through the production, the acquisition, and the
possession of ten dharmas belonging to an Arhat, the Saint becomes a
person 'having abandoned five things.'"" 186
[The Sautrāntikas:] If you conclude from this text that prāpti208 Chapter Two
exists, we would remark that one "possesses" dharmas “that do not
belong to living beings," and also dharmas that do belong to another.
In fact, a Sūtra (=the Cakravartisūtra) says, “Know, Oh Bhikṣus, that
the Cakravartin King possesses seven jewels . . ."187 Now, among the
jewels, there are the jewels of a wheel, a wife, etc.
[The Sarvāstivādins:] In this text, the expression "to possess"
(samanvāgata) signifies "master of." One says that the Cakravartin
King enjoys mastery over jewels, for they go as he wishes. But in the
Sūtra on the Possession of the Ten Dharmas of an Arhat (Dasā-
śaikṣadharmasamanvāgamasūtra), the word "possession" designates a
thing in and of itself. 188
2. [The Sautrāntikas:] If the word "possession" signifies "mastery"
in the Cakravartisutra, how do you ascertain that, in another Sūtra, this
same word designates a supposed prāpti, a thing in and of itself? In
fact 1.) this prāpti is not directly perceived, as is the case for color,
sound, etc., and as is the case for lust, anger, etc.; 2.) one cannot
conclude the existence of prapti by reason of its effects, as is the case
for the sense organs, the organ of sight, etc. (i.9): for a similar effect is
not perceived.
[The Sarvästivādins:] Error! Possession has an effect. It is the
cause of the arising of the dharmas. 189
[The Sautrāntikas:] This answer is unfortunate. 1. You maintain
that one can posses the two extinctions; now these, being uncondi-
tioned, do not arise: only conditioned things are "caused" (i.7d). 2. As
for the conditioned dharmas, there is not now, in any given person,
possession of the dharmas that he has not yet acquired, 1⁹⁰ nor does he
any longer possess the dharmas whose possession he has abandoned
through his changing of his sphere of existence or through "detach-
ment:"191 the possession of the first has never existed, and the
possession of the second has perished. Hence how can these dharmas
arise if the cause of their arising is prāpti?
[The Sarvāstivādins:] The arising of these dharmas has for its
cause a prāpti which arises at the same time as they do.
[The Sautrāntikas:] An unfortunate answer! If the dharmas arise
by virtue of prāpti, 1.) arising and the arising-of-arising (ii.45c) have
iThe Indriyas 209
no use; 2.) the dharmas "that do not belong to living beings" do not
arise; and 3.) how does one explain the difference in the degree of
defilement,-weak, medium, and strong defilement,-among persons
who are 'bound to all bonds'?: all in fact possess the same praptis of all
the defilements of Kāmadhātu. Would you say that this difference
proceeds from causes distinct from prapti?
We would answer that these causes are the only cause of weak,
medium, or strong defilements; why would one want to assign it to
prāpti?
3. [The Sarvāstivādins:] Who maintains that prāpti is the cause of
the arising of dharmas? Such is not the role that we attribute to it. For
us, prāpti is the cause that determines the state or condition of beings.
Let us explain. Let us suppose the non-existence of prapti: what
difference would there be between an Āryan at the moment in which
he produces a mundane thought and a Pṛthagjana? Now the difference
consists solely in that the Aryan, even when he has a worldly thought,
is in possession (prapti) of a certain number of pure dharmas.
[The Sautrāntikas]: For us, there is this difference that the first has
abandoned certain defilements, while the second has not yet aban-
doned them.
[The Sarvastivādins:] Without doubt; but if we suppose the non-
existence of prāpti, how can we say that a defilement is abandoned or
not abandoned? There can only be the abandoning of a defilement
through the disappearance of the prapti of this defilement; the
defilement is not abandoned as long as its prāpti lasts.
4. [The Doctrine of the Sautrāntikas:] To us, the abandoning or the
non-abandoning of a defilement consists of a certain condition of the
person (aśraya, ii.5 and 6, 44d). The personality of the Aryan is
modified, becoming different from what it was through the power of
the Path (Seeing the Truths, Meditation). The defilement, once it has
been destroyed through the force of the Path, cannot be manifested
again. Like seed which is burned by fire and which becomes different
from what it once was, and is no longer capable of germinating, we say
that the Āryan has abandoned the defilement, because his person no
longer maintains the seeds capable of producing a defilement. The210
Chapter Two
worldly path does not definitively destroy the defilement; it only
damages it or disturbs it: one would say that a Pṛthagjana-who is able
to practice only the worldly path-has abandoned the defilement
when his person no longer contains even the seeds of defilement
damaged by this path. Contrarily one says that a person has not
abandoned defilement when the seeds are neither burnt nor damaged.
One says that a person is in possession of the defilement when he has
not "abandoned" them in the manner that we have just explained; we
say that he is in non-possession of the defilements when he has not
abandoned it. "Possession" and "non-possession" are not things in and
of themselves, but designations.
This then concerns possession and non-possession of defilement.
But concerning the possession and non-possession of good dharmas,
we must distinguish 1.) the innate good dharmas, which do not entail
any effort, and 2.) the good dharmas that are obtained through effort
or cultivation (prayogika, ii.71b).
We say that a person possesses the first when his person possesses
intact the quality of being a seed of these good dharmas. When this
quality is damaged, we say that the person does not possess the good
dharmas. In fact, while the seeds of defilement can be destroyed
completely and definitively, as is the case among the Aryans, good
dharmas never have their roots definitively cut off, with the restriction
that one says of a person who has cut off the roots of good through
false views (samucchinnakusalamula, iv.79c) that he has only aban-
doned these roots, because the quality of being a seed of these roots, a
quality that belongs to his person, has been damaged through false
views.
We say that a person possesses the second-the good dharmas
produced through effort, through hearing, reflection, and medita-
tion-when, these dharmas having arisen, his capacity to produce
them [anew] is not damaged.
Hence what we understand by "possession" or the "fact of being
endowed with" (samanvāgama) is not a dharma constituting a
separate thing in and of itself, namely the supposed prapti of the
Sarvāstivādins, but a certain condition of the person: 1. the seeds ofThe Indriyas 211
defilement have not been uprooted through the Path of the Saints; 2.
the seeds of defilement have not been damaged by means of the
worldly path; 3. the seeds of innate good have not been damaged
through false views; and 4. the seeds of good "obtained through effort"
are in good condition at the moment when one wants to produce this
good. When the person is in such a condition, this is what we call
"possession of defilements,” etc.
But what should we understand by "seeds" [ask the Sarvästi-
vādins]?
By seeds we understand nāmarūpa (iii.30), that is, the complex of
the five skandhas, capable of generating a result, either immediately or
mediately, by means of the pariņāma-višeșa of its series.
The series is the samskäras of the past, the present and the future,
in relation to causality, that constitutes an uninterrupted series.
The pariņāma, or the evolution of the series, is the modification of
this series, the fact that this series arises differently from itself at each
moment.
The visesa, or culminating point of this evolution, is the moment
of this series that possesses the capacity of immediately producing a
result. 192
of
[The Vaibhāṣikas object:] The Sūtra says, "He who is in possession
greed is not capable of producing the foundations of mindfulness
(smṛtyupasthānas, vi.14)."
[The Sautrāntikas:] In this text, we must understand by "posses-
sion" of greed the "consenting to greed," or "not rejecting greed." The
Sūtra does not say that a person who has the seeds of greed in him is
incapable of producing the foundations of mindfulness; it says rather
that active greed renders this person presently incapable of producing
these spiritual exercises.
In short, in whichever manner it is that we understand possession,
either as "cause of the arising of the dharmas," or as "origin of the
condition of beings," or as "special state of the person," or as212
Chapter Two
"consenting to," possession appears to us, not as an entity, a thing in
and of itself, but as a “dharma of designation." This same holds for
non-possession, which is purely and simply the negation of possession.
The Vaibhāṣikas say that prāpti and aprapti are things in and of
themselves.
Why?
Because this is our teaching. 193
37a. There is threefold prāpti of the dharmas of the three
periods.
Past dharmas can be the object of a threefold prāpti, past, present,
and future. The same for present and future dharmas. 194
37b. There is good prapti, etc., of good dharmas, etc.
The prapti of good, bad, or neutral dharmas is, respectively, good,
bad, or neutral.
37c. The prāptis of the dharmas belonging to the spheres of
existence are of their spheres. 195
The dharmas belonging to the spheres of existence are impure
dharmas. The prāpti of a dharma in Kāmadhātu is, itself, in Kāma-
dhātu; and thus following.
37d. There is fourfold prapti of the dharmas that do not belong
to the spheres of existence. 196
In general, the prapti of these dharmas-the pure dharmas-is
fourfold: it belongs to the three spheres, and it is pure. But there are
distinctions:
1. The prapti of apratisamkhyānirodha (see ii.36c-d) is of the
sphere to which the person who obtains it belongs.
2. The prāpti of pratisaṁkhyānirodha is of Rūpadhātu, of Ārūpya-The Indriyas 213
dhātu, and pure. 197
3. The prapti of the Path (märgasatya, vi.25d) is Śaikṣa; the prāpti
of the Asaikṣa dharmas is Aśaikṣa. 198
But there is
38a. Threefold prāpti of the dharmas which are neither Śaikṣa
nor Asaikṣa.
These dharmas-the naivaśaikṣanāśaikṣas, vi.45b—are the impure
dharmas and the unconditioned dharmas; they are called this because
they differ from the dharmas of the Saikṣa and from the dharmas of
the Aśaikṣa.
In general, the prapti of these dharmas is threefold. Their
distinctions are:
1. The prapti of the impure dharmas is neither-Śaikṣa-nor Aśaikṣa;
2. In this same way the prāpti of apratisamkhyānirodha and the
prāpti of pratisaṁkhyanirodha are obtained by a non-Aryan; 199
3. The prapti of pratisamkhyanirodha is Saikṣa when this nirodha
is obtained through the path of the Śaikṣas; it is Aśaikṣa when this
nirodha is obtained through the path of the Aśaikṣas.
The prapti of the dharmas to be abandoned either through Seeing,
or through Meditation, is destroyed, respectively, either through
Seeing or through Meditation; it belongs then, from the point of view
of abandoning them, to the category of these dharmas (ii.33).
As for the dharmas which should not be abandoned, their prāpti
presents difficulties:
38b. There is twofold prapti of the dharmas that should not be
abandoned.
These dharmas are the pure dharmas (i.40b, ii.13d).
The prapti of apratisaṁkhyānirodha is abandoned through the
Path of Meditation.214
Chapter Two
The same for the prapti of pratisamkhyānirodha obtained by the
non-Ãryan.
But the prapti of pratisamkhyanirodha obtained through the Path
is pure and should not be abandoned. The same for the prapti of the
Path, 200
We have established the general principal that the dharmas of the
three periods are susceptible of a threefold prāpti (ii.37a). We must be
more precise.
38c. The prapti of a neutral dharma is simultaneous to it.
The prapti of an undefiled-neutral dharma is simultaneous to this
dharma: one possesses it when it is present, not when it is past or
future. When it is past, the prāpti is past, and when it is future, the
prapti is future: this by reason of the weakness 201 of this dharma.
38d. With the exception of the two supernormal faculties and
apparition.
This rule does not apply to all undefiled-neutral dharmas. The
supernormal faculties of seeing and hearing (cakṣurabhijñā, śrotra-
bhijñā, vii.45) and the mind capable of creating apparitional beings
(nirmāṇacitta, ii.72) are strong, for they are realized through a special
effort; consequently one possesses them in the past, the present, and
the future. Certain Masters 202 maintain that the undefiled-neutral
dharmas "of craftsmanship" and "of attitude" (airyāpathika, ii.72),
when they have been the object of an intense practice are also
possessed in the past and future.
39a. The same for the prāpti of defiled rūpa.
The prapti of defiled-neutral rūpa is only simultaneous to this
rūpa. This rūpa is bodily action and vocal action resulting from a
defiled-neutral mind. This action, even through produced by a strong
mind, is incapable, as is the mind itself, of creating avijñapti (iv.7a);
hence it is weak. Thus one possesses it in the present, but not in the
past or the future.
Dovendien Tha
su estantemenThe Indriyas
Is the tritemporal character of the prapti of the good and the bad
dharmas subject to any restriction, as is the case with the prapti of the
neutral dharmas?
39b. The prāpti of the rūpa of Kāmadhātu is not previous to
this rūpa.
This rūpa, good or bad, for example the prātimokṣa-samvara (iv.19
and following), is not possessed previous to its being produced. The
prāpti is simultaneous and later, but not earlier.
Can non-possession be, like prāpti, good, bad, or neutral?
39c. Aprāpti is undefiled-neutral. 203
Aprāpti is always anivṛtāvyākṛta (ii.66).
39d. Aprāpti of the dharmas of the past or the future is
threefold.
Aprāpti of past or future dharmas can be past, present, or future.
But one necessarily possesses the present dharmas: hence the aprāpti
of present dharmas can be only past or future.
40a. Aprāpti of the dharmas forming part of the spheres of
existence, and of the immaculate dharmas, is threefold.
Aprapti of the dharmas of the sphere of Kāmadhātu belong either
to Kāmadhātu, Rūpadhātu, or Ārūpyadhātu accordingly as the person
endowed with this aprapti belongs to such a sphere of existence. The
same for the aprapti of pure dharmas.
In fact, aprapti is never pure.
Why?
40b-c. According to the School, a Pṛthagjana is a person who
has not acquired the Path. 204
1. As it says in the Mūlaśāstra (Jñanaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 928c5;216 Chapter Two
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 232b9), “What is the state of Pṛthagjana? The
non-possession of the dharmas of the Aryans (āryadharmāṇāṁ
alabhaḥ)." Now the state of Prthagjana is not pure; hence their non-
possession (aprāpti-alabha) is not pure.
Let us examine this definition. When the Sastra says that the state
of Prthagjana is the non-possession of the dharmas of the Aryans,
which dharmas of the Aryans does it mean?
The dharmas beginning with duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti and
including the whole pure path or the Path of the Aryans (vi.25).
[The Sarvāstivādins:] The Śāstra means all these dharmas, since it
does not specify any.
Be careful! To believe you, a person in possession of duḥkhe kṣānti
would be a Pṛthagjana if he did not possess all of the other Äryan
dharmas.
[The Sarvāstivādins:] The Śāstra means the non-possession that is
not accompanied by possession: the person of whom you speak,
although not possessing the other dharmas of the Aryans, is not a
Prthagjana because the non-possession of these other dharmas is
accompanied by the possession of the ksanti. This is quite evident, for,
in the contrary interpretation, the Buddha the Blessed Oně, not
possessing the dharmas of the "family" of the Śrāvakas and Pratyeka-
buddhas (vi.23), would be a Pṛthagjana.
Very well. But then the Sastra would say "The state of Prthagjana
is the absolute non-possession (alābha eva) of the Aryan dharmas" and
not ". . . the non-possession (alabha).
[The Sarvāstivādins:] The Śästra expresses itself very well, for the
ekapadas (Nirukta, 2.2) permit a restrictive sense and the particle eva
is not necessary: for example abbhakṣa signifies "that which lives
solely on water," and väyubhakṣa, "that which lives solely on wind."
2. According to another opinion, 205 the state of Prthagjana is the
non-possession of the first stage of the Path of Seeing, duḥkhe
dharmajñānakṣānti and its concomitant dharmas (vi.25).
[Objection.] In this hypothesis, at the sixteenth moment
(mārge’nvayajñāna), the saint will be a Pṛthagjana and not an Ãryan,
for at this moment, the initial kṣānti is lost. 206The Indriyas
No, for the non-possession of the ksanti which constitutes the
state of Prthagjana has been absolutely destroyed in the first stage.
[Objection.] The ksanti in question is threefold: of the family of
the Śravakas, of the family of the Pratyekabuddhas, and of the family
of the Buddhas (vi.23). Of which of these three types are you speaking
in your definition of the state of Prthagjana?
We mean to speak of three types of ksanti.
Be careful! The Buddha, not possessing the three types of ksanti,
would then be a Prthagjana!
We intend to speak of the non-possession of the kṣānti which is
not accompanied by possession . . . and thus following, as above, to
the example "that which lives solely on water," "that which lives solely
on wind."
Hence the effort attempted in order to avoid the objection: "Be
careful! To believe you, a person in possession of duhkhe dharma-
jñānakṣānti would be a Pṛthagjana . . .” is in vain. The best explana-
tion is that of the Sautrântikas. To them, the state of Pṛthagjana is a
series in which the dharmas of the Ãryans have not arisen.
How does non-possession perish?
40c-d. It is abandoned through acquisition (prapti), and through
passing to another stage.
For example, the non-possession of the Path, which constitutes the
state of Prthagjana, is abandoned (1) when one acquires the Path, 207
and (2) when one passes to another stage. 208 The same holds for the
non-possession of the other dharmas. 209
[Objection:] Non-possession is abandoned (1) when one produces
the non-possession of non-possession, that is to say, when, changing
one's stage of existence, one ceases to possess the state of Pṛthagjana;
and (2) when the possession of non-possession is cut off, that is to say,
when, acquiring the Path, one cuts off the state of Pṛthagjana.
Does this mean that there is possession of possession and non-218 Chapter Two
possession, and that there is non-possession of possession and non-
possession?
Yes. There is possession and non-possession of possession and
non-possession, which is called "secondary possession" (anuprāpti), or
"secondary non-possession." One then distinguishes between mula-
prāti and anuprāpti or prāptiprāpti.
Doesn't this doctrine lead to infinite progression?
No, for one possessess possession through the fact of possession of
possession and vice versa. There is possession of the one through the
fact of the other. Let us explain. When a certain dharma is produced in
a given person, three dharmas arise together, namely: 1) this dharma
itself, which is called the mūladharma; 2) the prāpti of this mūla-
dharma, and. 3) the prapti of this prapti. The person in question
possesses the mūladharma and the prapti of the prapti by the fact of
the arising of the prāpti; he possesses this prāpti by the fact of the
arising of the prapti. 210 Hence there is no infinite progression. When a
good or a defiled ²¹¹ dharma arises, at this very moment three dharmas
arise together, inclusive of this good or defiled dharma, namely: the
mūladharma, its prāpti, and the prāpti of this prāpti2¹2 which is the
prapti of the praptiprāpti of the first moment, plus three anuprāptis
through the fact that one is in possession of the three aforementioned
prāptis. In this third moment eighteen dharmas arise together, namely
nine präptis: the praptis of the three dharmas produced in the first
moment, prāptis of the six dharmas produced in the second moment,
plus nine anuprāptis through the fact that one in in possession of the
nine aforementioned prāptis.
Thus the prāptis continue increasing in number from moment to
moment. 213 The präptis of present and future defilements (klesa and
upakleśa), and of innate (upapattilābhika, ii.71b) good dharmas with
the dharmas that are associated (samprayukta, ii.53c-d) and co-existent
(sahabhū, ii.50b) with them throughout beginningless and endless
transmigration, arise, from moment to moment, in an infinite number.
If one considers the series of one single being in the course of
transmigration, those präptis which arise at each moment are infinite
in number. Considering all beings together, they (i.e., the prāptis) areThe Indriyas
without measure, and without limit. Happily, they possess a great
quality: they are non-material, and give way one to the other. If they
were material, there could not be found enough room in the universe
for the praptis of one single being, and even less for the praptis of two
beings!
What is "genre" or sameness of class designation? 214
41a. Sabhāgatā is that which causes resemblance between living
beings. 215
1. There exists an entity called sabhāgatā, a dharma by virtue of
which living beings, as well as the dharmas "that fall into the series of
living beings" (sattvasamkhyāta, i.10), have resemblence between
them (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 138a9)._
2. The Śāstra (Jñānaprasthāna, etc.) designates this entity by the
name of nikayasabhāga: the author uses the term sabhāgatā for metric
reasons.
3. Sabhāgatā is of two types, general and particular. The first is
found in all living beings: by virtue of it, there is resemblance of any
living being with all other living beings. This is called sattvasabhāgatā.
The second has numerous subdivisions: each of these subdivisions
is found only in certain beings. Living beings are differenciated
according to their spheres of existence, the different stages of these
spheres, their realm of rebirth (gati, iii.4), their wombs (iii.9), their
caste (jāti, as Brahmins, etc.), their sex, the state of Upāsaka (iv.14),
Bhikṣu, Śaikṣà, or Arhat, etc. 216 This holds as well for sabhāgatās, by
virtue of which each living being of a certain species resembles living
beings of this same species.
4. There is, furthermore, sabhāgatā of dharmas that belong to
living beings, dharmasabhāgatā, which in turn distinguishes the
skandhas, the ayatanas and the dhatus: skandhasabhāgata, etc.,
rūpaskandhasabhāgatā, etc.220 Chapter Two
5. In the absence of a separate entity, namely sabhāgatā, how does
one explain general ideas (buddhi) and expressions (prajñapti), such as
"living beings," etc., applied to some beings that differ one from
another? In this same way, it is solely by reason of dharmasabhāgatā
that the ideas and expressions, “skandha,” “dhātus,” etc., are justified. 217
6. Do we conclude that one transmigrates, that one dies and is born
without abandoning and without taking up a certain sattvasabhāgatā
(state of a human being, etc.)? There are four alternatives: 1. to die in a
place (Kāmadhātu for example) and be reborn in the same place: the
sabhāgatā remains the same, regardless of transmigration; 2. to enter
into one's predetermined realm of rebirth (niyāmāvakrānti, vi.26a):
without there being transmigration, there is yet the abandoning of the
sabhāgatā of the Pṛthagjanas and the acquisition of the sabhāgatā of
the Saints; 3. to die in one realm of rebirth, the human realm of
rebirth, etc., and to be reborn in another realm of rebirth; 4. all other
cases.
[The Sautrāntikas do not admit the existence of a dharma called
sabhāgata and present many objections to it.]
1. If a certain entity called "the genre of Pṛthagjana" exists, for
what purpose do we imagine the state of Pṛthagjana consisting of the
non-possession of the Aryadharmas (ii.40c)? Someone will be a
Prthagjana through the genre of Pṛthagjana in the way that someone
is a human through the genre “human" for the Vaibhāṣikas do not
imagine a state of human different from the genre "human.
2. Ordinary people do not recoginize sabhāgată through the direct
preception of the senses (pratyaksa); they do not infer the existence of
the sabhāgata through an operation of the intelligence (prajña), for
sabhāgatā does not exercise any action by which one could know it:
although people do not know anything of sattvasabhāgatā they
recognize the non-difference of the species of beings. Hence, what
would be the use in supposing that a sabhāgată exists?
3. Why does the School refuse sabhāgatā to things that are not
living beings, such as rice and corn, gold and iron, mango and bread-
fruit trees?
4. The different sabhāgatās that the School recognizes, sabhāgatās
""The Indriyas 221
of living beings, of spheres, of realms of rebirth, etc., are distinct one
from another. Yet one has, for all of them, common ideas and
designations: all are sabhāgatās.
5. [The Sarvāstivādins are the proponents of the doctrine of the
Vaiseşikas.] The Vaiseșikas admit a certain entity (padārtha) called
"sameness” (sāmānya), by virtue of which there is produced, with
regard to things, similar ideas and designations; they believe also in
another entity, called “difference" (viseșa), from whence proceeds
specific ideas and designations with regard to different species.
The Vaibhāṣikas protest that their theory is not to be confused
with that of the Vaiseșikas, who believe that genre or sameness
(sāmānya) a unique substance (padārtha), exists in a multitude of
individuals. Hence even if they approve of the Vaiseşikas admitting
genre (sāmānya), they still condemn their interpretation of it. As for
sabhāgatā, it exists in and of itself (as a dravya), for the Blessed One,
speaking of a murderer who is reborn in hell, continues, saying, "If he
is reborn here, if he obtains the sabhāgatā of humans
[The Sautrāntikas answer:] By expressing itself in this way, the
Sūtra does not teach the existence of a thing in and of itself called
sabhāgatā. What then does the Sūtra designate by the word sabhāgatā?
By the expression sabhāgatā of humans,” etc., the Sūtra means a
similarity in the manner of being: in the same way, sabhāgata of rice,
corn, beans, etc.
This opinion is not admitted by the Vaibhāṣikas. 219
What is non-consciousness (āsamjnika)?
41b-c. Non-consciousness is that which, among the Non-
conscious Ones, arrests the mind and its mental states. 220
Among the beings who take birth among the Non-Conscious
Ones, i.e., the non-conscious gods, there is a dharma that arrests the
mind and its mental states, and which is called "non-consciousness." By
this dharma, the mind and future dharmas are, for a certain time,222 Chapter Two
hindered from being produced and do not have the power to arise.
This dharma is similar to what arrests the water of a river, that is, to a
dike.
This dharma is exclusively
41d. Retribution.
It is exclusively the retribution of non-conscious absorption
(asamjñisamāpatti, ii.42a). 221
Where do these non-conscious gods reside?
41d. They live in Brhatphala.
In the heaven of the Brhatphalas there is a raised place which is
the dwelling of the Non-Conscious Ones, in the same way as the
dhyānāntarikā, the dwelling of the Mahābrahmā gods, is raised within
the heaven of the Brahmapurohitas (iii.2c; 222 Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
784b5).
Are the Non-Conscious Ones called this because they are always
non-conscious, or are they sometimes conscious?
They are conscious at birth and at death (iii.42; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
784c8); 223 they are called non-conscious because their consciousness is
suspended for a very long time. When, after this long time, they
produce a consciousness again, they die. As it says in the Sūtra "When
they produce consciousness again, they die, like a person awakening
after sleep."
Dying in the non-conscious heaven, they are necessarily reborn in
Kāmadhātu and nowhere else. (1) In fact, the force of asamjñisamā-
patti (ii.42a), by which these beings are born among the Non-
Conscious Ones, is exhausted; they have not been in a position to
practice asamjñisamāpatti: hence they die, as arrows fall to the ground
when their impetus is spent. (2) On the other hand, beings who are
reborn among the Non-Conscious Ones necessarily possess an action
"retributive in Kāmadhātu” and “retributive in the second existence"
(iv.50b). In this same way beings who are reborn in Uttarakuru
(iii.90c-d) necessarily possesses an action retributive in a heavenly
realm of rebirth immediately after their existence in Uttarakuru.***
The Indriyas 223
The Mūlaśāstra says, “What are the two samapāttis or absorp-
tions? 224 They are asamjñisamāpatti, the non-conscious absorption,
and nirodhasamapatti, the absorption of extinction." 225
What is the non-conscious absorption?
In the same way that asamjnika is a dharma that arrests the mind
and its mental states,
42a. The same for the non-conscious absorption.
The non-conscious absorption is an absorption in which the ascetic
is non-conscious, or in an absorption free from consciousness.
The word "the same" shows that this absorption, like āsamjnika,
arrests the mind and its mental states.
To which bhūmi does it belong?
42b. In the Fourth Dhyāna.
In order to cultivate this absorption, the ascetic should have
entered the Fourth Dhyāna.
Why does one cultivate it?
42c. Through desire for deliverance.
The ascetic falsely imagines that āsaṁjñika, the non-consciousness
that constitutes the result of the non-conscious absorption, is true
deliverence.
Asamjnika, being retribution, is necessarily morally neutral. As for
the non-conscious absorption, it is
42d. Good.
It produces as its retributive result the five skandhas of a non-
conscious god, who, as we know, is conscious at birth and at death.
To what category does it belong from the point of view of
retribution?
42e. Solely retribution in the next existence.224 Chapter Two
It is not "retributive in this life" or "retributive later;" it is no
longer of "unnecessary retribution” (iv.50).
Without doubt, an ascetic can fall from this absorption after having
produced it; but, [according to the Vaibhāṣikas,] he will produce it
again and be reborn among the Non-Conscious Ones. This is to say
that the ascetic who takes possession of this absorption will certainly
not enter into a "predestined" realm of rebirth (vi.26a). 226
This absorption is cultivated only by Prthagjanas.
42f. Not by Aryans.
The Aryans consider this absorption as a precipice, a calamity, and
do not value entering it.
On the contrary, Pṛthagjanas identify non-consciousness (āsam-
jñika) with true deliverance; they have no idea of "going out" with
respect to it; hence they cultivate the absorption that leads to it. But
Aryans know that the impure cannot be true deliverance. Hence they
do not cultivate this absorption.
When Aryans enter into the Fourth Dhyāna, do they obtain the
prapti of this past and future absorption, the same as one obtains the
prapti of the Fourth Dhyana of the past and the future as soon as one
enters into the Fourth Dhyana? 227
Non-Āryans do not obtain the prapti of the non-conscious
absorption of the past and future.
Why?
Having cultivated it many time previously, this absorption can
only be realized through great effort; as it is not mind,
42g. It is obtained in one time period.
One takes possession of this absorption, not in the past, not in the
future, but in one time period, that is, in the present, as is also the case
for the prātimokṣa discipline (iv.35). In the second moment of this
absorption, and in all the moments that follow the obtaining of this
absorption until the moment when it ends, one possesses it in the past
and in the present. On the other hand, since this absorption is not
mind, it is impossible for one to acquire a future prāpti of this
absorption. 228***
The Indriyas 225
What is nirodhasamāpatti or the "absorption of extinction?" 229
43a. In the same way, the absorption that bears the name of
nirodha or "extinction."
That is to say, the absorption of extinction is like asamjnika, the
non-conscious absorption: it is a dharma that arrests the mind and its
mental states.
What are the differences between the non-conscious absorption
and the absorption of extinction?
43b. It is viewed as tranquility;
1. Āryans cultivate this absorption because they consider it as the
absorption of tranquility. 230 One cultivates the non-conscious absorp-
tion because one regards non-consciousness as being deliverance
(niḥsarana-mokṣa).
43c. Arisen from Bhavāgra;
2. It belongs to the sphere of Bhavägra, that is, one penetrates it
upon leaving naivasaṁjñānāsamjñāyatana absorption (viii.4), whereas
the non-conscious absorption belongs to the sphere of the Fourth
Dhyana.
43d. Good;
3. It is good; it is not neutral or defiled, for its originating cause is
good (iv.9b).
43e. Of two retributions and neutral;
4. It admits of two types of retribution, being either “retributive in
the next existence," or "retributive later" (aparaparyāyavedanīya,
iv.50).23¹ Its retribution is also unnecessary, for the ascetic who has
practiced it can obtain Nirvāṇa in the present existence.
Of what does its retribution consist?
This absorption produces the four skandhas of Bhavāgra, i.e., an
existence in Bhavagra (iii.3).Chapter Two
43f. Āryans
5. It is produced only by Aryans, not by Pythagjanas. These latter
cannot produce it (1) because they fear annihilation, 232 and (2) because
this absorption can only be produced through the power of the Path:
in fact, it is the ascetic who has seen Nirvāṇa who is determined to
obtain it. 233
43g. It is obtained through effort.
6. Although obtained by the Aryans, it is not obtained merely
through the fact of detachment. It is only realized through effort.
One does not possess this absorption in the past or in the future;
this point has been explained in the matter of the non-conscious
absorption.
44a. In that which concerns the Muni, it is obtained through
Bodhi itself.
The Buddha obtains the absorption of extinction at the moment
when he becomes a Buddha, that is, at the moment of kşayajñāna
(vi.67). No quality of the Buddha is obtained through effort; all of his
qualities are acquired through the simple fact of detachment: as soon as
he desires it, the mass of qualities arise at will. 234
How is it that the Blessed One, without having formerly produced
this absorption (i.e., nirodhasamāpatti), would become, at the moment
of Bodhi (kṣayajñana), "twofold delivered," that is, delivered from the
obstacles of the defilements and delivered from the obstacles to
absorption (samāpattyāvaraṇa, vi.64)?
He becomes "twofold delivered" exactly as if he had previously
produced this absorption, for he possesses the power of realizing this
absorption whenever he wishes (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 780b26).
The Masters of the West (Pāścātya) 235 maintain that the Bodhi-
sattva first produced this absorption in the state of Śaikṣa, and then
obtained Bodhi. Why do we not adopt this opinion?
This would be to follow the Netrīpadaśāstra of the Sthavira
Upagupta, which says, "One who, after having produced the absorp-
tion of extinction, produces kṣayajñāna, should be called a Tathāgata."The Indriyas 227
44b. But not previously.
The Vaibhāṣikas of Kaśmir deny that the Bodhisattva produces the
absorption of extinction before producing kṣayajñāna.
44c. For the Muni conquers Bodhi in thirty-four moments. 236
The School admits in fact (Vibhāṣā TD 7, p. 780b10) that the
Bodhisattva obtains Bodhi in thirty-four moments, namely sixteen
moments that constitute the "comprehension of the Truths" (satya-
bhisamaya, vi.27) and eighteen moments that constitute the abandon-
ing of the defilements relative to Bhavāgra (=naivasaṁjñānāsaṁ-
jñāyatana), i.e., nine anantaryamärgas and nine vimuktimārgas (vi.44).
The eighteenth moment is kṣayajñāna. These thirty-four moments
suffice, for, before entering into the "comprehension of the Truths,”
the Bodhisattva, still a Pṛthagjana (iii.41), detaches himself through
the worldly path from all spheres, with the exception of Bhavagra. The
eighteen moments form a path during the course of which the Saint
does not produce a mind of a different nature, that is, a worldly,
impure mind, for example the mind entering the absorption of
extinction. Hence the Bodhisattva, in the stage of Śaikṣa, that is, before
becoming an Arhat, enters the comprehension of the Truths and the
eighteenth moment of the abandoning of Bhavagra, but he does not
produce the absorption of extinction.
The Foreigners (bahirdeśaka) 237 say, "What harm is there in the
Bodhisattva producing this impure mind?"
In this hypothesis, the Bodhisattva oversteps his resolution (vyut-
thānāśayaḥ syāt); 238 now the Bohisattva does not overstep his
resolution.
This is true, he does not overstep his resolution; but this does not
mean that he would not overstep the Pure Path in producing an
impure mind.
How, in this hypothesis, would he not overstep his resolution?
He has taken upon himself the resolution (Madhyamāgama, TD 1,
p. 777a12), "I shall not leave this sitting position 239 before I obtain the
destruction of all the defilements." Now he does not overstep this
resolution, for it is in one "sitting" (asana, vi.24a-b) that he realizes his228 Chapter Two
goal, 240
Although the two absorptions, the non-conscious absorption and
the absorption of extinction, present many differences, they have this
in common:
44d. But these two absorptions take place in persons in
Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu. 241
To deny that the non-conscious absorption is produced in Rūpa-
dhātu is to contradict the Mülaśāstra, 242 which says, "There is an
existence in Rūpadhātu that does not admit of the five skandhas, 243
namely (1) the existence of beings in Rūpadhātu who, conscious by
nature, enter into the non-conscious absorption and into the absorp-
tion of extinction, 244 and (2) the existence of beings in Rūpadhātu who
are in possession of asamjnika, and who are born among the Non-
Conscious Ones."
From this text it results that the two absorptions are cultivated by
beings of Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu.
There is however this difference between the two absorptions:
44e. The absorption of extinction is, for the first time, among
humans.
A person who has never produced the non-conscious absorption
can produce this absorption either in Kāmadhātu or in Rūpadhātu; but
it is necessary to be a human in order to produce the absorption of
extinction for the first time. A human, an Āryan, who has produced
this absorption can fall from it, and losing possession (prāpti) of it, can
be reborn in Rūpadhātu and produce this absorption anew.
But the question is raised whether one can fall from the absorption
of extinction, which is similar (sadṛśa) to Nirvāṇa.
Yes, [answer the Vaibhāṣikas;] to deny falling is to contradict the
Udayi-sutra, 245 which says, "Brothers, a Bhikṣu is endowed with
morality, with absorption, and with discernment. It is possible for him
to enter many times into the absorption of extinction and leave it. If, in
this life, he does not attain ajñā, 246 nor attain it at the moment of his
death; but after the destruction of his body, going beyond the gods ofThe Indriyas 229
gross eating, he is reborn in a heavenly mental body; and thus reborn it
is possible for him to then enter many times into the absorption of
extinction and leave it."
This text shows in fact that one can fall from nirodhasamāpatti.
On the one hand the Buddha would have us understand that the
mental body that Śäriputra speaks of belongs to Rūpadhātu. 247 On the
other hand, the absorption of extinction is of the realm of Bhavagra,
the highest state of Arūpyadhātu. If a Bhikṣu who possesses it does not
fall from it, and if he does not lose it, he will not be able to repeat his
birth in Rūpadhātu. 248
According to another school, 249 the absorption of extinction also
belongs to the Fourth Dhyana and is not subject to falling.
This opinion is not correct. This absorption does not belong to the
Fourth Dhyana, for the Sūtra teaches that one acquires nine absorp-
tions one after the other. 250
How then do you explain the vyukrāntaka absorption (viii.18c) in
which the ascetic passes over different stages of absorption?
The rule of the successive production of the absorptions concerns
the beginner. 251 He who has acquired mastery passes over the
absorptions at will.
There are differences between these two absorptions:
1. from the point of view of their spheres: the first is of the Fourth
Dhyana, the second of Bhavagra (naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana)
2. from the point of view of their antecedents or preparations
(prayoga): the first proceeds from the idea of deliverance falsely
identified with non-consciousness; the second, from the idea of
stillness;
3. from the point of view of the person (samtāna): the first is
produced in a Prthagjana; the second, in an Aryan;
4. from the point of view of the nature of their retribution: the first
produces birth among the Non-Conscious Ones; the second, birth in
Bhavāgra (Kathavatthu, xv.10);230
Chapter Two
5. from the point of view of the characteristic of their retribution.
The retribution of the first is necessary, and takes place in the next
existence; the retribution of the second is necessary in the case of an
Anāgāmin, but not necessary in the case of an Arhat; and when it does
take place, it takes place in the next existence or later;
6. from the point of view of its production for the first time. The
first is indifferently produced within the two spheres of existence; the
second, only among humans.
The characteristic common to these two absorptions is the
arresting of the mind and its mental states.
Why is the first called "absorption free from ideas" (asamjñisamā-
patti) and the second "absorption of extinction of ideas and sensations"
(samjñāveditanirodhasamāpatti)?
Because the preparation from the first merely opposes ideas, 252
whereas preparation for the second opposes both ideas and sensations.
In the same way paracittajñāna (vii.5b), "knowledge of the mind of
another," bears on the mental states of someone else: it receives this
restrictive name because its preparation alludes only to the mind of
another. 253
In the two absorptions, the mind is interrupted for a long time. 254
How, upon coming out of this absorption, can a new mind be born
from a mind destroyed for a long time? 255
The Vaibhāṣikas find no difficulty in this: past dharmas exist
(v.25). Consequently the mind previous to this absorption, the mind-
in-absorption (samāpatticitta) or "the mind of entry into the absorp-
tion" is the similar and immediate cause (samanantarapratyana, ii.62)
of the mind after the absorption or the "mind-of-leaving" (vyut-
thānacitta, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 777b18).
[The Sautrantikas reason as follows:] When a person is born inThe Indriyas 231
Ārūpyadhātu, rūpa or matter is cut off for a long period of time
(iii.81b): if this person is then reborn in Kāmadhātu or in Rūpadhātu,
his new rūpa does not proceed from the series of rūpa previously
interrupted for a long time, but rather, from the mind. In the same
way, the mind of leaving the absorption does not have for its cause the
mind previous to the absorption: it is born from “a body possessing
organs". This is why the Ancient Masters said, "Two dharmas are the
seed one of the other: these two dharmas are a mind and a body
possessing organs."
Vasumitra says in the treatise entitled Paripṛccha: 256 “This dif-
ficulty, i.e., 'How is the mind reborn after absorption?', interests those
who consider the absorption of extinction as free from mind. But I
maintain that this absorption is accompanied by a subtle mind. The
difficulty does not exist for me." 257
The Bhadanta Ghoşaka regards this opinion as wrong. In fact, if
any consciousness (vijñāna) resides in this absorption, there would be
contact (sparsa) through the coming together of the three, conscious-
ness, organ, and object; by reason of contact, there would be sensation
(vedanā) and ideas (saṁjñā) (iii.30b). As the Blessed One teaches, "By
reason of the mental organ and the dharmas, mental consciousness
arises; by the coming together of these three, there is contact;
sensation, ideas, and volition arise at the same time." 258 Hence, if one
admits that the mind (vijñāna, citta) continues to exist in this
absorption, sensation and ideas will not be arrested in it. Now this
absorption is called the extinction of sensation and ideas (saṁjñāvedi-
tanirodha).
[Vasumitra answers:] The Sūtra says, “By reason of sensation,
there is thirst," and yet, although Arhats experience sensation, thirst
does not arise in them. The same here: every contact is not a cause of
sensation.
This reasoning is not conclusive. The Sūtra, in fact, specifies,
"Thirst arises by reason of sensation born of contact which is
accompanied by ignorance” (iii.27).259 Whereas it says, "Sensation
arises by reason of contact." Hence, say the Vaibhāṣikas, the mind is
interrupted in the absorption of extinction.232
Chapter Two
[Vasumitra asks:] If this absorption is completely free of mind,
how is it an absorption (samāpatti)?
It is called an absorption because it puts the primary elements into
a state of equilibrium 260 contrary to the production of the mind; or
rather because ascetics penetrate (samapadyante) it by the power of
their minds: it is for this reason that the Dhyānas, etc., are called
samāpattis.
Should one consider the two absorptions as existing in and of
themselves (dravyatas)?
Yes, [answer the Sarvāstivādins,] for they thwart the arising of the
mind.
No, [answer the Sautrāntikas,] it is not what you term "absorp-
tion" that hinders the arising of the mind; rather, it is the “mind in
absorption" (samāpatticitta), the mind that preceeds the state of
absorption: this mind, being opposed to the arising of the mind, causes
other minds to not arise for a certain time. The mind of absorption
renders the person ²6¹ or series contrary to, and unfitted to the arising
of the mind. What is called "absorption" is simply the non-existence of
the mind for a certain period of time; not a thing in and of itself
(dravyadharma), but a "thing of designation” (prajñaptidharma).
[The Sarvāstivādins:] How can an absorption be conditioned
(saṁskṛta) if it is not a thing in and of itself?
This "non-existence of the mind” was not realized before the mind
of absorption; it ceases when the ascetic produces anew the mind
(vyutthānacitta: the mind leaving the absorption). One can then, in a
manner of speaking, designate it as being "conditioned," since it begins
and ends. Or rather, what we call "absorption" is the condition of the
person, a condition that results from the mind of absorption.
The same holds for non-consciousness (āsaṁjñika, ii.41b-c).
Āsamjnika is not a thing in and of itself that hinders the arising of the
mind; but we designate by this term the state of non-consciousness of
the Non-Conscious gods, a state that results from a certain mind.What is the vital organ?
The Vaibhāṣikas do not agree with this opinion; they maintain that
āsaṁjñika and the two absorptions are things in and of themselves. 262
The Indriyas
45a. Jīvita is life (āyus). 263
In fact, the Abhidharma 264 says, “What is the jīvitendriya? The
ayus of the three spheres of existence."
What sort of dharma is the ayus?
45b. The support of warmth and consciousness.
For the Blessed One said, "When life, warmth and consciousness
leave the body, the body lies abandoned, like wood, lacking feeling. 265
There exists then a distinct dharma, a support of warmth and of
consciousness, a cause of the duration of the series, named āyus. 266
[The Sautrāntikas deny that the vital organ exists in and of itself.]
[1. The Sautrāntikas:] If the ayus supports warmth and conscious-
ness, what supports it?
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] It is supported by warmth and consciousness.
[The Sautrāntikas:] If these three dharmas,-life, warmth, and
consciousness, -mutually support one another and continue to exist
by means of this mutual support, how do they come to an end? Which
perishes first, the destruction of which entails the destruction of the
others? For if one of them does not perish first, then these three
dharmas will be eternal and will not perish.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] The ayus is supported by means of actions; the
āyus has been projected through actions and continues to exist as long
as the projection of action allows it to do so.
[The Sautrāntikas:] If this is so, why admit that warmth and
consciousness are supported by actions? What do we have to do with234 Chapter Two
the ayus?
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] That which is supported by action is, in its
nature, retribution. If the consciousness were supported by action, all
consciousness from the womb to death, would be retribution: and this
is false. Hence the necessity of the āyus, supported by action, the
support of warmth and consciousness.
[The Sautrāntikas:] You say then that action supports warmth and
that warmth supports consciousness. Then the ayus is useless.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] The ayus is necessary, for warmth is absent in
Ārūpyadhātu. What is the support of consciousness in Ārūpyadhātu if
the ayus does not exist?
[The Sautrântikas:] In Ārūpyadhātu, consciousness is supported by
action.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] Do you have the right to change your mind?
Sometimes you maintain that the consciousness is supported by
warmth, and sometimes you maintain that it is supported by actions. 267
But on the other hand, you have admitted that one should avoid the
conclusion that all consciousnesses, from the womb to death, are
retribution. Consequently the ayus exists, and it is the support of
warmth and consciousness.
[2. The Sautrāntikas:] We do not deny the existence of the ayus.
We only say that the ayus is not a thing in and of itself.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] Then what is the dharma that you call ayus?
[The Sautrāntikas:] It is a certain power that the action of a
previous existence places in a being at the moment of its conception, a
power through which the skandhas renew themsleves for a deter-
mined length of time in this homogeneous series that constitutes an
existence (nikāyasabhāga, ii.41), in the same way a seed places a certain
power in the sprout by which the plant develops to maturity. In this
same way too a shot arrow has a certain power which causes it to travel
for a certain period of time.
[The Vaibhāṣikas believe that] a certain sort of guna or "quality,"
called saṁskāra or vega (impetus) arises in the arrow. By the force of
this guna, the arrow travels without stopping until the moment it
falls, 268The Indriyas
The samskära is unique; on the one hand, the arrow does not
encounter any obstacle: hence no difference is possible in the speed of
the arrow. On the other hand, the arrow will not fall. Would you say
the the "wind" creates an obstacle to the saṁskāra? The "wind" which
creates an obstacle is the same either far or near, and so the arrow
would either fall at first, or it will never fall.
The Vaibhāṣikas maintain that the ayus is a thing in and of
itself. 269
[ii. How Death takes place.]
Does death take place solely through the exhaustion of life?
The Prajnaptiśāstra 270 says, “It happens that one dies through the
exhaustion of life without one dying through the exhaustion of merit.
Four alternatives: 1. death through exhaustion of action that ripened in
life; 2. death through the exhaustion of actions that ripened in objects
of enjoyment; 271 3. death through the exhaustion of these two types of
actions; and 4. death through the fact of not avoiding causes that harm,
for example, excess of food."
We must add death due to the abandoning of the ayuḥsaṁskāra
(ii.10), 272
When life is exhausted, the exhaustion of actions that ripen in the
objects of enjoyment has no efficacy for death; and vice versa.
Consequently the third alternative should be understood as "death
because the two types of actions are exhausted."
[iii. Death before its proper time (akālamaraṇa, iii.85c).]
The Jñanaprasthāana (TD 26, p. 997b28) says, "Should one say of
the ayus that it is 'dependent on the series,' or that it lasts once it has
arisen?' The ayus is of the first category for beings in Kāmadhātu who
are not in one of the two absorptions (asamjñisamāpatti and
nirodhasamāpatti); but it is of the second category for beings in
Kāmadhātu who are in the two absorptions, and for beings in
Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu."
What is the meaning of this passage?
If the ayus is killed when the body is killed, then the ayus is "bound
to the body-series." If the body cannot be damaged, then the ayus lasts
all the time for which it has been produced, and one says that the ayus236 Chapter Two
lasts once it has arisen. 273
The Masters of Kaśmir say that the first type of ayus is "subject to
obstruction," but that the second is not subject to obstruction. .
Thus there is premature death. 274
According to the Sūtra, there are four modes of existence: 275
existence that can be destroyed by oneself and not by another, etc. 276
Four alternatives: 1. existence destroyed by oneself: certain beings in
Kāmadhātu, namely the Krīdāpradūṣika gods and the Manaḥpradūṣika
gods 276 destroy their own existence through their excess of joy or
anger; we must also add the Buddhas who enter into Nirvāṇa; 2.
existences destroyed by others: beings in the womb and in eggs; 3.
existences destroyed by oneself and by others: beings in Kāmadhātu in
general; we must exclude beings in hell, beings in the intermediate
state (iii.12), etc.; 4. existences that are neither destroyed by oneself nor
by others: beings in the intermediate state, all beings in Rūpadhātu and
Ārūpyadhātu, and a part of the beings in Kämadhätu: beings in hell
(iii.82), the inhabitants of Uttarakuru (iii.78c), persons in the absorp-
tion of kindness (vii.29), persons in the non-conscious absorption
(ii.42, Kathāvatthu, xv.9); the Rājarṣi, that is, the Cakravartin who has
left the householders's life; a messenger of the Buddha; 278 persons
whom the Buddha prophesized would live a certain length of time: 279
Dharmila, Uttara, Gangila, 280 the son of the merchant Yaśas, Kumāra,
Jivaka, etc.; the Bodhisattva in his last existence; the mother of the
Bodhisattva pregnant with the Bodhisattva; the Cakravartin; the
mother of the Cakravartin pregnant with the Cakravartin.
[Objection:] The Sūtra tells us of a question by Śäriputra and the
Blessed One's answer to it: "Lord, What are the beings whose
existence cannot be destroyed either by themselves, or by others?'
'Sariputra, beings who are born in Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana .
that is, in the highest sphere of Ārūpyadhātu, Bhāvāgra. How can you
say, in the light of this passage, that the existence of all beings in
Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu is protected from all destruction, either
by themselves or others?
The School (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 772a29) explains, “Beings in
Rūpadhātu and the first three stages of Ārūpyadhātu can destroy theirThe Indriyas
existence 'by themselves," that is, by a course of action within their
own realm, and 'by others,' namely by a course of action belonging to
the preliminary stages of a higher stage (vi.48, viii.22). But in the last
stage of Ārūpyadhätu a course of action belonging to this stage and
also of actions of a superior stage are both absent; hence the existence
of beings who reside therein cannot be modified either by themselves
or by others.
This answer appears weak to us; in fact, one can, in the last stage
of Ārūpyadhātu practice a course of action belonging to the im-
mediately lower stage (akiñcanyāyatana, viii.20). One must then admit
another explanation (Vibhāṣā, ibid.). In his response to Śāriputa, the
Buddha, by naming the beings of Naivasaṁjñānāsamjñāyatana, in-
tends to designate all beings in Rūpadhātu and Arūpyadhātu, for in
naming the last one designates the first. We can demonstrate that such
is the usage. Sometimes Scripture names the first term of a list the
totality of which is alluded to, for example, "The first sukhopapatti
(iii.72), namely (tadyathā) the Brahmakāyika gods." We should then
also understand, “the Brahmakāyikas, the Brahmapurohitas, and the
Mahābrahmās." Sometimes Scripture names the last term, "The
second sukhopapatti, namely the Ābhāsvara gods." We should then
understand, "the Parittabhas, the Apramāṇābhas, and the Ābhāsvaras."
But one can contest this explanation. In the two passages given
above the word tadyathā is used to introduce an example. We must
translate tadyathā not as “namely" but as "for example." It is a rule
concerning examples that when one names one case one designates all
similar cases. And we admit that, in the two above passages on the
sukhopapattis, the Scripture designated all the terms of the list by
naming only the first and the last. However the answer of the Blessed
One to Säriputra does not contain the word tadyathā.
We would say that this explanation does not introduce an example,
for we find it in Sūtras that give a complete enumeration, "Material
beings, diverse of body, diverse of ideas, namely (tadyathā) human
beings and part of the gods ..." (iii.6). Thus the word tadyatha
introduces a definition (upadarśanārtha). Hence the Blessed One, in
his answer to Śāriputra, designates the beginning by naming the end,238 Chapter Two
that is, he is speaking of the totality of the two higher spheres. 281
What are the characteristics of conditioned dharmas?
45c-d. Their characteristics are arising, old age, duration, and
impermanence. 282
These four dharmas, arising, old age, duration, and impermanance,
are the characteristics of conditioned things. A dharma in which these
characteristics are found is conditioned; a dharma in which they are not
found is unconditioned. 283
Arising produces or causes to produce conditioned things; duration
stablizes them or causes them to last; old age makes them deteriorate;
and impermanence destroys them.
Does not the Sūtra teach the existence of some three "conditioned
characteristics" of conditioned things? The Sūtra says, in fact, “There
are, oh Bhikṣus, three characteristics of conditioned things, which are
themselves conditioned. What are these three? The production or
origin of conditioned things is an object of consciousness; its dis-
appearance and also its duration-modification is an object of
consciousness."284
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] The Sūtra should enumerate four character-
istics. The characteristic that it omits is the characteristic of duration or
sthiti. Truth to tell, it does use sthiti in the compound, sthityanyathātva,
"duration-modification;" but sthityanyathatva is an expression that
signifies "old age." As the Sūtra says "production" (utpäda) in place of
"arising" (jāti) and "disappearance" (vyaya) in place of "imperma-
nence" (anityatā), in this same way it also says sthityanyathātva in
place of "old age" (jara).
If the Sūtra specifies only three characteristics, it is because, with a
view to rousing disgust among believers, it points out as the
characteristics of conditioned things those dharmas which cause
conditioned things to pass through the three time periods: the powerda vata, le foto Sky
TO DARA
The Indriyas 239
of its arising causes it to pass from the future into the
present; old age
and impermanence cause it to pass from the present into the past, and,
after old age has weakened it, impermanence finishes it. The School
gives a comparision (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 201b7): Suppose there is a
man in a dark forest, and there are three enemies there who wish to
kill him. The first causes this man to leave the forest; the second
weakens him, and the third destroys his vital principle. Such is the role
of the three characteristics with regard to conditioned things. 285
Duration, on the contrary, sustains conditioned things and causes them
to last; this is why the Sūtra does not count it among the character-
istics. Further, the unconditioned lasts eternally in its own nature: the
characteristic of duration is not without resemblance to the persistence
of the unconditioned. So in order to avoid any confusion, the Sūtra does
not indicate duration as a characteristic of conditioned things.
[The Sautrāntikas think that] the Sūtra does name duration; it
names it by associating it with old age: sthityanyathātva, that is to say,
"sthiti and anyathātva."
What advantage is there, would you say, in making one single
characteristic out of these two characteristics?
Persons are attracted to duration: in order to incite disgust with
respect to duration, the Sūtra names it together with old age, like
prosperity associated with black ears. 286
Conclusion: there are four characteristics.
The arising, duration, etc., of any sort of dharma is also condi-
tioned. They should also arise, last, grow old, and perish; they should
then, in their turn, possess four characteristics: arising-of-arising, etc.,
which will be the secondary characteristics (anulakṣaṇa) of the dharma
under consideration. These secondary characteristics, being condi-
tioned, have in their turn four characteristics, and so we have infinite
progression.
There is no infinite progression.240
Chapter Two
46a. They have in their turn characteristics termed arising-of-
arising, duration-of-duration, etc.;
Four primary characteristics are as described above.
The four secondary characteristics (anulakṣaṇa) are arising-of-
arising, duration-of-duration, old age-of-old age, and impermanence-
of-impermanence.
All conditioned things are conditioned by these primary charac-
teristics; these, in their turn, are conditioned by the four secondary
characteristics.
You say that each of the primary characteristics should have,
exactly as the dharma that it characterizes, four characteristics, and
thus following: you do not understand that these are the activity, the
operation (vṛtti-dharmakāritra-puruṣakāra, iv.58) of the different
characteristics.
46b. The primary characteristic refers to eight dharmas, the
secondary characteristic to one dharma. 287
When a dharma arises-which we will term the principle dharma
or müladharma, a mind or a mental state-nine dharmas, including it,
arise together: the principal dharma, four primary characteristics, and
four secondary characteristics. The first primary characteristic, primary
arising causes the principle dharma, plus three primary characteristics
(duration, old age, and impermanence), plus the four secondary
characteristics to arise: in all eight dharmas. It does not cause itself to
be produced: it arises through the secondary characteristic arising-of-
arising (jāti-jāti). In the same way a hen lays many eggs and each egg
causes the birth of only one other chicken (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 200c19);
in the same way primary arising causes eight dharmas to arise,
whereas arising-of-arising causes only one dharma to arise, namely
primary arising.
It is the same for the other primary and secondary characteristics.
Duration-of-duration causes primary duration to last, which in turn
causes the principal dharma to last, as well as the three primary
characteristics and the four secondary characteristics comprising
duration-of-duration. The same for primary old age and imperma-G
The Indriyas 241
nence which causes eight dharmas to age and to perish, and which age
and perish themselves through the secondary characteristics which
correspond to them, old age-of-old age and impermanence-of-
impermanence.
Hence the characteristics themselves have characteristics called
anulakṣaṇas; they are four in number and not sixteen, and there is no
infinite progression.
The Sauträntikas say:
i. All this is to analyze emptiness! 288 Arising, duration, etc., are not
entities, separate things in and of themselves. We know things either
through direct perception, through inference, or through the testi-
mony of Scripture: these three means of correct knowledge (pramāṇa)
are missing with respect to these characteristics.
But, [reply the Sarvāstivādins,] the Sūtra says “The production of
conditioned things is an object of consciousness ..
Ignorant! You are attached to the words and err with regard to
their meaning. The Blessed One however said that it is the meaning,
and not the letter, that is the recourse. 2⁹⁰ As for the sense of this Sūtra,
it is obvious.
Blinded by ignorance, foolish persons imagine that the series of
conditioned phenomena (saṁskāras) is a "self" or belongs to a "self,"
and, as a consequence, they are attached to this series. The Blessed One
wanted to put an end to this erroneous imagination and to the
attachment which results from it: he wanted to show that the series is
conditioned, that is to say, "produced through sucessive causes"
(pratītyasamutpanna); and he taught the three marks of that which is
produced through successive causes, saying that "Three saṁskṛtalak-
ṣaṇas of the saṁskṛta are the object of consciousness." It is the series
that the Blessed One means to designate as conditioned, for, quite
clearly, he does not attribute the three marks to each moment of the
series, since he says that these marks are the object of consciousness: in
fact, the production of the moment, its aging, and its disappearance,242 Chapter Two
are not the objects of consciousness; whatever is not the object of
consciousness cannot be a mark.
If the Sūtra uses the word saṁskṛta twice, "There are three
saṁskṛtalakṣaṇas of the samskṛta," this is in order that one should
know that these three marks are not marks showing the presence of
the saṁskṛtas, as herons indicate the nearness of water; nor are they
qualitative signs of the saṁskṛta, as the marks of a young girl permit
one to say that she is good or bad; no, when these marks are found on a
thing, they show that this thing is a saṁskṛta. [Hence we would
translate this canonical text as "Conditioned things possess three
visible marks which show that it is conditioned, that is, produced
through successive causes. These marks are its arising, its duration-
modification, and its impermanence."]
ii. According to us, what one should understand by production or
arising is the fact that the series begins; disappearance or imperma-
nence is the end or cessation of the series; duration is the series
continuing from its beginning until its end; evolution or old age is the
modification of the continuous series, the difference between its
successive states. It is from this point of view-that is, by considering
arising, enduring, prolonging itself, and modifying itself-that the
Blessed One says to Sundarananda, who is perpetually attentive to his
states of mind, "Fine, my man! You know that your sensations arise,
last, end, and disappear." 291
We would then say, 2⁹2
"Arising is the beginning of the series, disappearance is its rupture;
duration is the series itself; evolution is the difference between its
successive states."
And again,
"Arising is existence following upon non-existence; duration is the
series; impermanence is the rupture of the series; and evolution is
supposed to be the difference between the successive states of the
series."
"Since the dharmas are momentary, would you say that the
dharmas will perish [immediately] if duration is lacking? But [if the
dharmas are momentary], they perish spontaneously: in vain youThe Indriyas 243
attribute duration to a momentary dharma.” 293
Consequently it is the series that the Sūtra refers to when it speaks
of duration, and the definition of the Abhidharma (Prakaraṇapāda,
TD, p. 694a26) is justified, "What is duration? The saṁskāras arisen
and not destroyed." The nature of the "moment" (kṣaṇadharmatā)
cannot be "arisen and not be destroyed."
Yet the Jñanaprasthāna (TD 26, p. 926b21) says, "Relative to one
mind, what is production? It is arising. What is disappearance? It is
death. What is evolution? It is old age.'
But this passage of the Sastra does not refer to a moment of the
mind, but to the mind of a homogeneous existence (nikāyasabhā-
gacitta). [In a homogeneous existence (ii.41) the minds are multiple,
but this multiplicity can be designated as being one mind.]
iii. However, since one cannot consider characteristics as things in
and of themselves, one can say that each moment taken separately
possesse the four characterisitcs.
In fact, (1) each moment exists after having been non-existent: its
existence, following upon its non-existence, is its arising; (2) after
having existed, it does not exist anymore: this is its disappearance; (3)
the duration of the moment is the concatenation or the
process of
successive moments: in fact, if the subsequent moment resembles the
previous moment, it is then its substitute: the previous moment still
exists or still lasts. Thus the subsequent moment can be considered as
the duration of the previous moment; (4) the dissimilitude of duration
is its transformation.
Would you say that there is no dissimilitude when the successive
moments are similar (sadṛśa)?
There is dissimilitude, as this results from the difference in time of
the slower or faster falling of a vajra that is or is not projected, and
which is projected with or without force: difference due in each case to
a transformation or a difference of the primary elements of the vajra.
When the dharmas succeed themselves in a homogeneous series, the
difference is small; that is why, although they differ, they are
considered as similar.
[The Sarvästivādins object:] Your definition of characteristics does244 Chapter Two
not hold for all conditioned dharmas. In fact, your definition of
duration supposes a subsequent moment: but such a moment does not
exist for the last moment of the mind of an Arhat. Hence the last
moment of a sound, a flame, or an Arhat, has neither duration nor
transformation.
We do not attribute duration to all conditioned dharmas! We say
rather, that all duration is subject to transformation. The Blessed One
teaches three characteristics, because, in certain cases, there are three
characteristics. But, for the last moment of a flame, there is only
producation and disappearance, and no duration or transformation.
In short, conditioned dharmas exist after having existed; after
having existed, they no longer exist; the series of dharmas is their
duration, dissimilarity of the series is their transformation. Such is the
teaching that the Blessed One gives in the Sutra of the Three
Characteristics. This has nothing to do with things in and of
themselves, arising, etc.
[iv. The Vaibhāṣikas object:] According to you, arising is the
dharma itself in so far as it exists after having been non-existent. The
dharma which is the "thing characterizeď” (lakṣya), would then be the
characteristic (lakṣaṇa) also.
What is wrong with that? The marks of a Mahāpuruṣa are not
different or distinct from the Mahāpuruṣa himself. The horns, the
hump, the fetlock, the hoof, and the tail of a cow, which are its marks,
are not different from the cow. The primary elements do not exist
apart from their individual characteristics, solidity, etc. (i.12d). In this
same way, for the Vaibhāşikas who affirm the "momentariness" of the
dharmas, the rising of smoke is none other than the smoke itself 294
Let us look at this a bit closer. Although I grasp the individual
nature of visible things, etc., which are conditioned, yet as long as I do
not know the fact that they did not exist previously, that they will not
exist later, and that their series transforms itself, then I shall not know
their quality of being conditioned. Consequently, the quality of being
conditioned does not have for a mark the quality of being conditioned,
but rather previous non-existence, etc. 295 And there do not exist
characteristics, things in and of themselves, distinct from visible thingsThe Indriyas 245
and other conditioned things.
v. If we admit the reality of characteristics, then since they are
given as simultaneous, we would have to admit that one dharma arises,
lasts, grows old and perishes at one and the same time.
It is in vain that the Sarvästivādins pretend that the characteristics
do not exercise their activity at one and the same time; that arising
engenders before being born itself, being still in a future state, and that
once it is born it does not engender any longer; that duration, old age,
and impermanence exercise their activity when they are present and
not in a future state; and that, consequently, the last three character-
istics are active in a moment when the first is no longer active, so the
four characteristics can be simultaneous without contradiction.
Let us first consider arising which, being future, engenders. One
must examine whether a future dharma, supposing that it does exist,
can be active. If future arising produces the operation of engendering,
how can one say that it is future? In fact, according to the Vaibhāṣikas,
a future dharma is one that does not exercise its activity. You would
have to define future. On the other hand, when a dharma has arisen,
has been engendered, and the operation of arising is past, how can you
say that arising is then of the present? You would have to define
present.
And either the activity of the other characteristics is exercised
simultaneously, or their activity is exercised in succession. In the first
hypothesis, whereas duration makes a dharma last, old age makes it
age and impermanence destroys it: the dharma lasts, ages and perishes
at the same time. As for the second hypothesis, to admit that the
activity of these characteristics is not simultaneous is to admit three
moments, and this is to renounce the doctrine of momentariness. 296
[The Vaibhāṣikas answer:] For us, the kṣaṇa or moment is the
time during which the characteristics have achieved their operation. 297
Then explain why, in this hypothesis, duration, arising at the same
time as old age and impermanence, accomplishes its operation of
"making last that which should last" before old age and impermanence
accomplish their operation of making things age and destroying them.
If you answer that duration, being stronger, accomplishes its operation246 Chapter Two
first, then we would ask how duration is weakened later in such a
manner that, encountering old age and impermanence, it ages and
perishes, not alone, but with the dharma that it should have made last.
You say perhaps that duration, having achieved its task, cannot
perform it again, in the same way that arising, having engendered
something, engenders no more. The comparison is not legitimate. The
operation of arising consists of attracting the dharma that it should
engender from the future and causing it to enter into the present; once
the dharma has entered into the present, arising is incapable of
making it enter therein again. But the operation of duration is to make
the dharma "which should be made to last" last, of hindering the
dharma which makes old age and perishing last. Duration is capable of
making that which lasts last indefinitely. Consequently, duration is
capable of repeating its operation.
By reason of what obstacle or from what adverse forces would the
activity of duration cease once it has begun? Would these forces be old
age and impermanence, old age weakening duration which imperma-
nence then kills? Since, in this hypothesis, old age and impermanence
are stronger than duration, it is proper then that they exercise their
activity first. Further, according to your conception of duration and its
role, it is through the activity of duration that, not only the principal
dharma, but also old age and impermanence, last. Hence, when the
activity of duration ends, the principal dharma, as well as old age and
impermanence, cease their duration. We ask how, and with regard to
what object, old age and impermanence exercise their activity of aging
and causing to perish?
We do not see what it is that old age and impermanence have to
do. It is through duration that one dharma, once it arises, does not
perish for a certain time, does not perish as soon as it arises. If
duration, its task completed, neglects the dharma, it will quite certainly
not last any longer; that is to say, it perishes in and of itself.
We well understand the duration and impermanence of the
dharma, "A dharma, after having arisen, does not perish," "A dharma,
after having lasted, perishes." But how can one attribute old age to a
dharma? Old age is a transformation, a dissimilarity between twoSHAW
The Indriyas 247
states. Now, can one say of a single dharma that it becomes different
from itself?
"If it remains this, it is not that; if it is transformed, it is no longer
this. Hence the transformation of a dharma is impossible."
According to another School,298 it is with the cooperation of
external causes of destruction, fire or a hammer, etc., that the
characteristics of impermanence causes certain dharmas to perish, as
wood or a pot.
This is a theory as absurd as a sick person, who, after having taken
a medicine, begs the gods to render it efficacious! In the logic of this
system, it is the external causes of destruction which destroy, and the
characteristic of impermanence serves no function.
The same School admits that the mind and its mental states, like
sound or a flame, perish immediately, without any foreign causes
intervening, through the chacteristic of impermanence. Impermanence
and duration accomplish their operation at one and the same time: a
dharma lasts and perishes at the same time. This is inadmissable.
We conclude that it is with regard to the series that the Blessed
One teaches the characteristics of conditioned things. Thus understood,
the Sūtra does not invite criticism, "There are three characteristics that
show that the conditioned is conditioned, that it is produced through
successive causes . . ." 299
If arising engenders, in a future state, the dharma that it should
engender, why do not all future dharmas arise at one and the same
time? 300
46c-d. Arising engenders the dharma that it should engender,
but not without the cooperation of causes and conditions. 301
Isolated arising does not have the force of engendering the dharma
that it should engender independent of the cooperation of causes and
conditions.
[1. Objection of the Sautrāntikas:] If this is the case, we rather248 Chapter Two
believe that it is the cause that engenders, and not arising; this
characteristic accompanies the dharma since the beginning of time and
causes the dharma to arise when, finally, the cause of this dharma
encounters another! When the causes are completed, the dharma
arises; when they are not completed, it does not arise: what efficacy can
we attribute to arising? 302
[2. The Sarvástivādins answer:] Do you pretend to know all the
dharmas that exist? The nature of dharmas is subtle! 303 Even though
one sees them, one does not know their nature.
Moreover, in the absence of the characteristic "arising," the idea of
"birth" (jatabuddhi = jata iti) would be absent. 304 And if arising is
nothing other than the dharma itself exisitng after having been non-
existent, the genitive "the arising of warmth" or "the arising of
sensation" would not be justified; for this amounts to saying "the
warmth of warmth" or "the sensation of sensation." This is the same
for duration, old age, and extinction.
[3. Reply of the Sautrāntikas:] This theory leads you very far afield:
in order to justify the idea of empty (śünya), or the idea of the
impersonal, you would admit the existence of an entity called
"emptiness" or the existence of an entity called "non-self." And again,
in order to justify the ideas of one and two, large and small, separate,
associated and disassociated, this and that, existant, etc., you would
admit, in agreement with the Vaiśeşikas, a long series of entities:
number, extension, individuality, conjunction, disjunction, quality of
being that, quality of being this, existence, etc. It obliges you to create a
"pot-ness" in order to justify the idea of a pot.
As for the genitive, you do not admit that the individual nature of
warmth and warmth are different things, and yet you speak of the
individual nature of warmth.
Hence you have not proven that "arising" is a thing in and of itself;
you have not proven that this is not merely a designation of a dharma
in so far as it exists after having been non-existent.
When I want to teach someone that a certain dharma exists which
formerly did not exist, I say to him, “This dharma has arisen," and I
designate this dharma as being born. Many dharmas,—warmth,The Indriyas
sensation, etc., arise, that is to say, "exist after having been non-
existent." Hence there are many arisings, that is, many dharmas
arising. Since arising is multiple, in order to distinguish it from other
arisings, so that my questioner knows that it refers to an arising having
the name "warmth" and not to an arising having the name "sensa-
tion," I will employ the genitive, “the arising of warmth," or "the
arising of sensation," although the arising of warmth is only the
warmth arising. In the same way one says, in the world, "the odor of
sandalwood," although sandalwood is only odor, or "the body of the
bust," although a bust is only its body. 305
[4. The Sarvāstivādins answer:] We hold to the existence of the
characteristic "arising," which belongs to conditioned things and does
not belong to unconditioned things, and we can easily explain this by
virtue of the fact that unconditioned things do not arise. But if
conditioned things arise without "arising," why do unconditioned
things, space, etc., not arise?
We say that conditioned things arise, for they exist after having
been non-existent. But how can unconditioned things arise, since they
are eternal? You explain that certain dharmas,—the unconditioned
dharmas, are devoid of the characteristic "arising," because, you say,
such is the nature of things (dharmatā): we say, rather, that by virtue
of the nature of things, none of the dharmas are susceptible of arising.
Moreover, according to you, all conditioned things equally possess the
characteristic "arising" that you refuse to unconditioned things: yet you
admit that certain causes are capable of producing warmth but
incapable of producing sensation. In the same way, according to you,
since conditioned and unconditioned things are equally devoid of the
characteristic of “arising," all causes that produce conditioned things
are ineffacacious with regard to unconditioned things.
[5. The Vaibhāṣikas say that] the four characteristics, arising, etc.,
are things in and of themselves. 306
Why? 307 Should we abandon the Agamas 308 for the sole reason
that there are persons who object to them? One does not renounce
sowing for fear of deer, and one does not renounce eating dainties
because of flies. 309 One must refute objections and adhere to the250
Chapter Two
Doctrine.
What is nāmakāya, padakāya, and vyañjanakāya?
47a-b. Nāmakāya, etc., are collections of saṁjñās, vākyas, and
akṣaras.310
1. Nāman, “name" or "word" is understood as "that which causes
ideas to arise,"311 for example the words "warmth,” “sound,” “odor,"
etc.
2. Pada or "phrase" is understood as vākya, a discourse, a phrase
allowing the development necessary for a complete sentence, 312 for
example the stanza, "Impermanent are the samskäras ..." and the
rest. 313 Or rather, one should understand pada as that which causes one
to comprehend the different modalities of activity, quality, and time
which concern a certain person: for example, he cooks, he reads, he
goes; it is black, yellow, or red; ³14 he cooks, he will cook, or he
cooked, 315
3. Vyañjana is understood as akṣara or phoneme (varṇa), vowels
and consonents, for example, a, ā, [i, ī,] etc.
But are not the akṣaras the names of the letters?
One does not make or one does not pronounce phonemes with a
view to designating, or of giving an idea of the letters; but one makes
or one writes the letters with a view to giving an idea of the
phonemes, so that, when one does not understand them, one still has
an idea of them through writing. Consequently the phonemes are not
the names of letters.
4. Kaya or "body" means "collection;" samukti, in fact, has the
sense of samavaya according to the Dhatupatha, iv.114.
Hence we have: nāmakaya = color, sound, odor, etc.; padakāya
"The samskaras are impermanent, the dharmas are impersonal;
Nirvana is tranquil . . .” etc.; and vyañjanakāya = ka, kha, ga, gha . . .
***The Indriyas
[1. Objection of the Sauträntikas:] Are not words, phrases, and
phonemes (nāman, pada, vyañjana) "voice" (vāc) by nature, and
consequently "sound" (śabda)? Hence they form part of the
rūpaskandha; they are not samskäras disassociated from the mind as
the Sarvăstivādins believe.
[The Sarvăstivādins:] They are not "voice." Voice is "vocal sound,"
and a vocal sound only; for example, a cry does not cause one to attain
to or comprehend an object. But a word (nāman) which moreover is a
function of vocal sound, illumines, causes one to attain to, or signifies
the object.
[The Sautrāntikas:] What I call "voice" is not merely vocal sound,
but a vocal sound that causes one to attain to an object, that is, a vocal
sound with regard to which persons who are speaking are in
agreement as to what a certain thing signifies. It is thus that the
Ancients have invested the sound go with the power to signify nine
things: "The sages have established the sound go in nine things, that
is, cardinal region, cattle, land, a beam of light, a word, a diamond, an
eye, a haven, and water." 316 The philosopher for whom "it is the word
(nāman) which illumines the object" should admit that the sound go
has been endowed by convention with these different meanings. Then
if a given object is signified to the hearer by a certain word, it is indeed
vocal sound and nothing else, that signifies it. What advantage is there
in supposing the existence of an entity you call "word?"
[2. The Sautrāntikas continue:] A word is either produced by the
voice 317 or revealed 318 by the voice.
a. In the first hypothesis, since voice is vocal sound by nature, any
vocal sound whatsoever, even the cry of an animal, would produce a
word. If you answer that a word is produced solely through a vocal
sound of a certain nature-the articulation of sound, varṇātmaka-we
would
say that this sort of vocal sound which is capable of producing a
word would be quite capable of designating an object also.
In the second hypothesis, this same criticism holds by replacing the
verb "to produce" with the verb "to manifest.”
b. But it is absurd to suppose that the voice produces a word. In
fact, sounds do not exist at the same time-one has, for example,252
Chapter Two
r-u-p-a-whereas the word, which you define as a dharma, an entity,
cannot arise in parts. Then how can the voice, when it produces a
word, produce it? You say that the case is analogous to that of avijñapti
(iv.3d): the last moment of the vijñapti, a corporeal or vocal act, creates
avijñapti by reason of its previous moments. But, we would say, if the
last moment of the sound of the voice creates the word, it would suffice
to understand the last sound in order to attain or comprehend the
object.
It is not an evasion to suppose that voice engenders the phoneme
(vyañjana), that a phoneme engenders a word, and that a word causes
comprehension of objects. In fact, the same objection is present, "The
phonemes do not exist at the same time, etc."
For these same reasons, it is absurd to suppose that the voice
manifests a word. [Sounds do not exist at the same time, and a dharma,
one entity, such as a word, cannot be mainfested in parts . . . and
following].
c. [The hypothesis that "voice" engenders a phoneme-a hy-
pothesis that we have previously tolerated-calls moreover for some
new remarks]. Experts vainly apply their minds but do not discover a
phoneme distinct from the voice. Moreover, the voice neither en-
genders nor manifests the phoneme, for the same reasons that allow
that the voice neither engenders nor manifests a word. [Since the
"voice" is vocal sound by nature, all vocal sound would engender or
manifest phonemes. If you reply that phonemes are only engendered
or manifested by the vocal sound of a certain nature . . . as above ad
2a2.]
[3. But the Sarvăstivādins may suppose that] a word arises with its
object, like the characteristic "arising." The question of knowing
whether it is produced or manifested by the voice, disappears.
In this hypothesis, no present word would designate a past or
future thing. Moreover, a father, a mother, or other persons arbitrarily
fix the word that is the proper name of a son, etc.: how can you admit
that the word, like the characteristic "arising," arises simultaneously
with the object? Finally, unconditioned things would not have any
name, since they do not arise: a consequence that the SarvästivādinsThe Indriyas 253
cannot admit.
[4. But the Sarvästivādins are warranted by a text.] The Blessed
One said, "A stanza (gāthā) depends on words, and a poem depends on
stanzas." 319
[The Sautrāntikas answer that] word (naman) is a sound (sabda)
upon which persons have come to an agreement that it signifies a
certain thing. 320 A stanza (gāthā) is a certain arrangement of words: it
is in this sense that it, according to the Blessed One, depends on words.
To admit an entity in and of itself called pada, is a very superfluous
hypothesis. You might as well maintain that there exists, distinct from
ants and minds, things in and of themselves termed “a row of ants” or
"a succession of minds." 321 Recognize then that only the phonemes
(akṣaras), which are sounds, exist in and of themselves.
The Vaibhāṣikas admit nāmakāya, padakāya, and vyañjanakāya, as
saṁskāras disassociated from the mind, for, they say, none of these
dharmas serve as a gate of understanding. 322
We ask: (1) to which sphere of existence do the phonemes, words,
and phrases belong? (2) Do they belong to living beings (sattvakhya,
i.10b)? (3) Are they of retribution, of accumulation or of out-flowing
(i.37)? and (4) Are they good, bad, or neutral?
47c-d. They exist in Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu; they belong to
living beings; they are out-flowing; and they are neutral, 323
The phonemes, etc., belong to two spheres of existence. According
to one opinion, they also exist in Ārūpyadhātu, but there they are
"unpronounceable." 324
They belong to living beings, being produced through the efforts of
living beings and consisting of articulated sounds (varṇa), etc. In fact,
they belong to the person who speaks, not to the things that they
designate.
They are an out-flowing, being produced through sabhāgahetu254 Chapter Two
(ii.52); they are not of retribution, since they proceed from the desire
of the person who speaks; they are not of accumulation, since they are
not material.
They are non-defiled-neutral (anivṛtāvyākṛta, ii.28). ³:
We shall briefly explain the characteristics, not as yet mentioned, of
the other dharmas disassociated from the mind (ii.35).
47d-48b. The same for "genre," (sabhāgatā) which is also from
retribution, and which belongs to the three spheres of
existence.
"The same for," that is to say, like phonemes, words, and phrases,
sabhāgatā is of the first two spheres of existence; it belongs to living
beings; it is from out-flowing; and it is non-defiled-neutral.
But sabhāgatā is not only from out-flowing: it is also of retribution;
it not only belongs to the first two spheres of existence, it also belongs
to the third.
48b. Possession (prapti) is of two types.
It is of out-flowing and of retribution.
48c. Its characteristics also.
Its characteristics, arising, etc., are of two types, like possession.
48c-d. The absorptions and non-possession (aprāpti) are of
out-flowing.
The two absorptions and non-possession are only out-flowings.
As for their spheres, their relationship with living beings, their
moral qualifications (good, etc.), the explanations have been given
above. The characteristics belong to all conditioned things, hence they
belong to living beings and to non-living beings. For the āsaṁjñika
and the ayus, see ii.41d and 45a.
***The Indriyas
We have seen (9ii.47c-d) that arising, in order to engender the
dharma that it should engender, needs the cooperation of hetus or
causes, and pratyayas or conditions. What are the hetus, and what are
the pratyayas? 327
49. The hetus are sixfold: kāraṇahetu, sahabhū, sabhāga,
samprayutaka, sarvatraga, and vipāka. 328
Kāraṇahetu is reason for existence; sahabhūhetu is coexistent
cause; sabhāgahetu is parallel cause; saṁprayuktakahetu is associated
cause; sarvatragahetu is universal cause, and vipäkahetu is retributive
cause: such are the six types of causes that the Abhidhārmikas (Jñāna-
prasthāna, TD p. 920c5) recognize.329
50a. All dharmas are kāraṇahetu with regard to all, with the
exception of themselves.
A dharma is not a kāraṇahetu of itself.
With this exception, that all of the dharmas are kāraṇahetu with
regard to all other conditioned dharmas, because no dharma constitutes
an obstacle to the arising of the dharmas susceptible of arising.
It results from this definition that the dharmas that are saha-
bhūhetu, etc., are also kāraṇahetu: all other hetus are included within
kāraṇahetu. The hetu that does not receive a special name, which is
simply kāraṇa, "reason for existence," without any other qualification
is kāraṇahetu: it receives as its particular name the name that suits all
the hetus. Compare this with the name of the rupāyatana (i.24).
Kāraṇahetu calls for the following observations:
1. Vices are produced among the ignorant; once the Truths are
known, they are not produced, as the stars are not visible when the sun
shines. Hence the consciousness of the Truths, or the sun, causes an
obstacle to the vices, or to the stars. Then it is false to say that all
conditioned dharmas are kāraṇahetu because they create no obstacle to
arising.256 Chapter Two
We understand that the consciousness of the Truths and the clarity
of the sun create no obstacle to the arising of the dharma which is
"arising" (utpadyamāna), that is to say of the dharma, which, its causes
being completed, 330 continues to exist.
2. What is called cause or reason for existence, may be what is
capable of causing, or of not causing, an obstacle! In fact, when their
lord does not oppress them, villagers say, “We are fortunate through
the actions of our master." 331 But can one call cause that which, being
incapable of causing an obstacle, does not cause an obstacle? Nirvāṇa is
incapable of creating any obstacle to the arising of any conditioned
thing: such too are future dharmas with regard to past dharmas, or
creatures of hell or animals with regard to beings in Ārūpyadhātu:
Nirvāṇa, future dharmas, or creatures in hell are as if they did not exist
with regard to their being an obstacle to the arising of the conditioned
things in question. Can one consider them as causes?
They are causes; for, even when the lord is incapable of harming
them, the villagers express themselves as we have said; but not about a
non-existent lord.
3. The definition that we have given of karaṇahetu is a general
definition and includes that which is kāraṇahetu par excellence and
that which is simply kāraṇahetu. Kāraṇahetu par excellence is the
generating cause: in this sense, eye and color are the karanahetu of the
consciousness of sight; as food is with regard to the body, 332 the seeds,
etc., with regard to the sprout, etc. (see ii.56b).
[4. Objection.] If all the dharmas are the causes of other dharmas
because they do not cause any obstacle, why do not all the dharmas
arise together? 333 Why, when one murder is committed, are not all
creatures, like the murderer himself, guilty of the crime of murder?
This objection is useless. In fact, all the dharmas receive the name
of karaṇahetu because they do not create any obstacle: it is not that
they are all agents.
5. According to other masters, all kāraṇahetus possess a real
efficacy with regard to all dharmas. For example Nirvāṇa and the
consciousness of sight: a mental consciousness, good or bad, arises
having Nirvāṇa as its object (ālambana, ii.62c-d); from this mentalconsciousness there later arises a consciousness of sight; then Nirvāṇa
has efficacy, albeit mediately, with regard to the consciousness of sight.
The same argument applies to future dharmas, to beings in hell,
etc.
The Indriyas 257
50c-d. Sahabhūhetu, coexistent causes, namely the elements
(bhūta), the mind and the companions of the mind, character-
istics and the thing characterized, are the dharmas that are
causes one of the other. 334
11. The dharmas that are causes (puruṣakāraphala, ii.58) one of the
other, are called sahabhūhetu,335
For example, the primary elements (mahābhūta) 336 are, among
themselves, sahabhūhetu. The same for the mind and its companions
(ii.51); the same for the characteristics, arising, etc. (ii.45b), and the
dharmas that they characterize.
In the category of sahabhūhetu are then included all conditioned
dharmas which are in a mutual relationship of causality. 337
2. We have reason not to complete the above definition. A dharma
is a sahabhūhetu of its secondary characteristics (anulakṣaṇa, ii.45)
without being in a mutual relationship of causality with them: for the
secondary characteristics are not the sahabhūhetu of their dharma.
This is a case to be added to the definition. 338
What dharmas are called "the companions of the mind?"
51a-c. The companions of the mind are: the mental states; the
two disciplines (samvara); and the characteristics (lakṣaṇas) of
the mental states, the two disciplines and the mind.
These are all the dharmas associated with the mind (cittasam-
prayukta, ii.24), the discipline of absorption and pure discipline258 Chapter Two
(iv.17d), and the characteristics, arising, etc. (ii.45b) of all these, and
also of the mind.
[Why are they termed "companions of the mind"?]
51d. From the point of view of time, of result, etc., and of
goodness, etc.
The companions are associated with the mind:
1. In regard to time: they have the same arising, the same duration,
and the same destruction as does the mind; they are of the same time
period as the mind.
same
"the same arising
arising .
When we say "the
. . . ," we understand the word
"same" in the sense of concomitance: the companions arise, last, and
perish at the same time as does the mind; but their arising is distinct.
The minds that are not destined to arise do not arise, nor last, nor
perish: the same for their companions. This is why the phrase, "The
companions are of the same time period as the mind” is added. [The
mind which should arise is future until the moment when it arises if it
is to arise: its companions are hence future; it is past after the moment
when it shall perish if it arose: its companions are then past.] 339
2. In regard to the result, etc. Result means puruṣakāraphala
(ii.58a-b) and visamyogaphala (ii.57d); and “et cetera" refers to
vipākaphala (ii.57) and nisyandaphala (ii.57c).
The companions have the same result, the same vipāka, and the
same nisyanda as the mind: "same" indicates identity.
3. In regard to goodness, etc. The companions are good, bad, or
neutral, like the mind which they accompany.
There are then ten reasons why the companions are termed
companions. 340
The mind having the least number of companions 341 is a
sahabhūhetu of fifty-eight dharmas: namely 1) the ten mahābhūmikas
(ii.23) with the four characteristics of each of them; and 2) the four
characteristics and the four secondary characteristics (anulakṣaṇa,The Indriyas
ii.46).
If, from these fifty-eight dharmas, the four secondary character-
istics of the mind-which have no effect upon it-are set aside, then
we have fifty-four dharmas that are sahabhūhetu of the same mind. 342
According to another opinion, only fourteen dharmas are
sahabhūhetu of this mind, namely its four characteristics and the ten
mahābhūmikas. As the secondary characteristics have no effect on the
mind, the characteristics of the mahābhūmikas likewise have no effect
on the mind.
The Vaibhāṣikas reject this opinion that the forty characteristics
of the mahābhūmikas are not sahabhūhetu of the mind,-as contra-
dictory to the doctrine of the Prakaraṇagrantha according to which
"the four characteristics, arising, duration, old age, and imperma-
nence, of the belief in self (satkāyadṛṣṭi) . . . and in the dharmas
associated with this belief (comprising the mahābhūmikas), are at the
same time a result and a cause of the belief in self." 343
Certain Masters, in their reading of the Prakaraṇagrantha, omit
the words, "and of the dharmas associated with this belief." According
to the Vaibhāṣikas of Kásmir, these words figure in the text; or, if they
are missing, the context indicates that one should supply them and
that the passage as it stands is incomplete.
Any dharma that is a sahabhühetu cause is a sahabhū or a
coexistant item. But there are some coexistant items that are not
sahabhūhetu:
1. the secondary characteristics of the principal dharma (mūla-
dharma) are not a sahabhūhetu regarding this dharma (ii.46a-b);
2. these same are not sahabhūhetu among themselves;
3. the secondary characteristics of the companions of the mind are
not a sahabhūhetu regarding the mind;
4. these same are not a sahabhūhetu among themselves;
5. derived matter, blue, etc., susceptible of resistance and which has
also arisen together, are not a sahabhūhetu among themselves;260 Chapter Two
6. a part of derived matter not susceptible to resistance and also
arisen together with them, is not a sahabhūhetu, with the exception of
the two disciplines (see I.136);
7. no derived matter, even though arisen with the elements, is a
sahabhūhetu with the elements;
8. possession (prapti), even when it arises with the dharma to
which it is related, is not a sahabhūhetu to it.
The dharmas of these eight categories are coexistant (sahabhū),
but are not sahabhūhetu, because their results, vipāka or nisyanda, are
not identical (see p. 259). As for possession, it does not always
accompany the dharma: it arises either before the dharma, or after it,
or at the same time as it (ii.37-38).
[The Sautrāntikas criticize the doctrine of coexistant causes.]
All this may be right, that is, "what is a sahabhūhetu cause, a
mutually coexistant cause, is a coexistant item," and the rest. Never-
theless, in the world, the relationship of cause to effect is well proven
in certain cases: the cause is previous to the effect. It is in this way that
a seed is the cause of the sprout, the sprout of the stalk, etc. But one
does not prove a similar relationship between simultaneous things.
You should then demonstrate that dharmas arisen together can be in a
cause and effect relationship.
[The Sarvāstivādins supply two examples.] The lamp arises with
its light; the sprout, growing in the light, arises with its shadow. Now
a lamp is the cause of its light and a sprout is the cause of its shadow.
Thus cause and effect can be simultaneous.
[The Sauträntikas:] These examples are not proven. We must
examine whether a lamp is the cause of its light, or if, as we think, a
lamp with its light are both the effect of a complex of previous causes
and conditions, oil, wick, etc. In the same way, a complex of previous
causes (seed, light) is the cause of the sprout and its shadow, of the
sprout with its shadow.
[The Sarvāstivādins:] The relationship of cause and effect isThe Indriyas 261
proven by the existence and the non-existence of what is called effect,
similar to the existence and the non-existence of what is called cause.
The definition of the Logicians (hetukas) is very good: "When A is or
is not, and when B is or is not, then A is considered as cause, and B is
considered as effect." Granted this, if we examine the dharmas that we
have defined as mutually coexistent and sahabhūhetu, we see that they
all exist when one of them exists, and that none exist when one of
them is absent. 344 They are then in a relationship of mutual cause and
effect.
[The Sautrāntikas:] Admitting that among the simultaneous
dharmas, one dharma can be the cause of another dharma, then the
organ of sight is the cause of visual consciousness. 345 But how many
simultaneous dharmas are the cause and effect of one another?
[The Sarvāstivādins:] Mutual causality is proven by the definition
that we have given of causality. When the mind exists, its mental
states exist, and vice versa.
[The Sautrāntikas:] Very well, but then the Sarvästivādins should
revise their system. In fact, they have denied mutual causality to
derived matter (physical matter, taste, etc.) although physical matter
never exists without taste (ii.22); they have denied mutual causality to
derived matter and to the primary elements, and mutual causality to
secondary characteristics and the mind.
[The Sarvāstivādins:] In the same way that three staffs stand up
supported one on the other, the causal relationship of simultaneous
things, the mind and its mental states, etc., is proven.
[The Sautrāntikas:] This new example should be examined. We
ask whether the three staffs stand up together through the force that
the three staffs possess through arising together, or rather, if the force
of the complex of previous causes which caused them to arise together
does not now also cause them to arise supported one on the other.
Further, there are things here other than the mutual force of support:
there is a rope and a hook, and there is the ground.
But, [reply the Sarvāstivādins,] mutually coexistant items have
causes other than the sahabhūhetu, namely sabhāgahetu, sarvatra-
gahetu, and vipāäkahetu, which have a role analogous to that of the262 Chapter Two
cord, etc. Sahabhūhetu is then proven.
52a. Similar dharmas are sabhāgahetu or similar causes.
Similars (sabhāga) are sabhāgahetu of similars.
1. The five good skandhas are sabhāgahetu of the five good
skandhas. When they are defiled, that is to say, bad, and defiled-neutral, .
they are sabhāgahetu of defiled ones. Neutral, that is, undefiled-neutral,
they are sabhāgahetu of neutral ones.
Nevertheless, different masters are not in agreement on this last
point. According to some, neutral rūpa is sabhāgahetu of the five
neutral skandhas, but the four skandhas,-sensation, etc.—are not
sabhāgahetu of rūpa. 347
According to others, four skandhas are sabhāghetu of the five; but
rūpa is not sabhāgahetu of the four.
And according to others, rūpa is not sabhāgahetu of the four, and
vice versa.
2. From the point of view of one existence, the first embryonic
state is the similar cause of ten states: these are the five embryonic
states, kalala, arbuda, peśin, ghana, and praśākhā; and the five post-
embryonic states, bāla, kumāra, yuvan, madhya and vṛddha. The second
embryonic state is the sabhāgahetu of nine states (arbuda to vārddha),
and thus following. A previous moment of each state is the similar
cause of the later moments of that same state (compare iv.53).
From the point of view of the states of existence followed by the
same species, each of the states of the previous existence is the similar
cause of the ten states.
The same holds for external things, corn, rice, etc., that is, the
quality of sabhāgahetu remains confined in each series: corn is a
similar cause of corn, not of rice.
[3. The Dārṣṭāntikas deny that] physical matter (rūpa) is a similar
cause of matter; but this contradicts the Book (Jñanaprasthāna, TD 26,
p. 985b14), which says, "Past primary elements are the hetu and theadhipati of future primary elements." Adhipati means adhipati-
pratyaya (predominating conditions, ii.62d); and hetu means sabhā-
gahetu, for the hetus are here evidently apart from cause.
The Indriyas 263
Are all similar dharmas similar causes of similar dharmas? No.
Similar causes are the similar dharmas which
52b. Belong to the same category (nikāya) and the same stage
(bhū).
This means that the dharmas belonging to a certain category and
to a certain stage (bhūmi) are a similar cause of dharmas of the same
category and the same stage.
The dharmas are classed into five categories accordingly as they are
susceptible of being abandoned through Seeing each of the Four
Truths, or through Meditation (1.40).
The dharmas belong to nine stages: they are either in Kāmadhātu,
or in one of the Four Dhyānas, or in one of the Four Ārūpyas.
A dharma susceptible of being abandoned through Seeing the
Truth of Suffering is a similar cause of another dharma susceptible of
being abandoned through Seeing the Truth of Suffering, and not of the
dharmas belonging to the other four categories; and thus following.
Sabhāgahetu has not yet been exactly defined. In fact, only those
dharmas are similar causes which have
52b. Arisen previously.
An arisen dharma, that is to say, any previously past or present
dharma is a similar cause of a later similar dharma, arisen or not
arisen. A future dharma cannot be a similar cause. 348
1. On what authority does this definition rest?
It rests on the Mūlaśāstra, for the Jñānaprasthāna (TD 26, p.264 Chapter Two
920c15) says, "What is similar cause (sabhāgahetu)? The root of good,
arisen and previous, is a cause in the quality of a similar cause with
regard to the later root of good and of the dharmas associated with it,
of the same category
and stage. In that way, the roots of good of the
past are a similar cause with regard to past and present roots of good;
past and
present roots of good are similar causes with regard to future
roots of good."
2. [Objection:] A future dharma is a similar cause, for we read in
this same Jūānaprasthāna, “[Question:] Is there a period when the
dharma which is the cause of a certain dharma is not a cause?
[Answer:] There is never a time when this dharma is not a cause."
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] This text does not contradict the first; for the
Jñānaprasthāna does not refer to that which is a cause in the quality of
a similar cause (sabhāgahetu), but rather that which is a cause in the
qualities of sahabhūhetu, samprayuktakahetu, or vipäkahetu.
According to another opinion, that of the "followers of the last
place" (paramāvasthāvādin), the answer of the Jñanaprasthāna, “There
is never a time when this dharma is not a cause" refers to sabhāgahetu,
and they justify themselves as follows: A future dharma, in an arising
state, is certainly sabhagahetu. Hence, taking into account a future
dharma in its last place, the Jñanaprasthāna can say that there is never
a time when the dharma is not a cause, that it is always a cause, since,
at a certain moment in the future, it is a cause.
This explanation does not resolve the difficulty. In fact, if a future
dharma, after not having been a cause becomes a cause by arriving at a
state of arising, then it has not always been a cause: but now the
Jñānaprasthāna says absolutely that there is never a time when it is not
a cause.
Furthermore, this explanation cannot be reconciled with the
answer that the Jñānaprasthāna (p. 1026b19; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 87a2)
gives to another question, "Is there a period in which the dharma that
is an immediately antecedent condition (samanantara, ii.62a-b) of a
certain dharma is not samanantara? Yes, when it has not yet arisen."
Now the case of samanantara is analogous to that of sabhāgahetu:
future samanantara, arriving at a state of arising, is samanantara.The Indriyas
Hence if the interpretation of the answer, "There is never a time when
this dharma is not a cause," in the sense of "In the future, in an arising
state, it is sabhāgahetu" is correct, then the Jñanaprasthāna, dealing
with samanantara, should answer as for sabhägahetu, "This dharma is
never samanantara." Now the Jñänaprasthāna answers, "It is not
samanantara when it has not arisen." Hence the word “cause" in the
first answer should not be understood as sabhāgahetu.
The "followers of the last place" say that the Jñanaprasthāna
answers the first question by saying, "There is never a time when it is
not a cause," and the second by saying, "It is not a cause when it has not
arisen," in order to show that one can answer in these two ways in
order to express the same sense. One can answer the first question as
the second, and the second as the first.
What a singular process of explanation! The author of the Sastra
would then be totally useless! Hence the first explanation proposed is
the best explanation.
3. If a future dharma is not a similar cause (sabhägahetu), why does
the Prakaraṇapāda teach that future satkāyadṛṣṭi has satkāyadṛṣṭi as its
cause, and is in turn the cause of satkāyadṛṣṭi? We read, in fact (in the
text quoted in note 342, para. B1(b)), "with the exception of
future satkayadrșți and the Truth of Suffering which is associated
with it" (anāgatāṁ satkāyadṛṣṭi tatsaṁprayuktaṁ ca duḥkhasatyam
sthapayitva.) 349
This reading, [answer the Vaibhāṣikas,] is corrupted. It should
read, “with the exception of the Truth of Suffering associated with
future satkāyadṛṣṭi (anāgatasatkāyadṛṣṭisamprayuktam). If we were to
suppose that your reading is authentic, we must, because of the sense
that the text expresses, consider it as without authority (na tantram),
and as having been determined by the context of discourse (that is,
through imitation of the preceeding phrase).
4. If a future dharma is not sabhägahetu, how do you explain the
following bhasyam of the Prajnapti? 350 This Treatise says in fact, "All
the dharmas are determined from a fourfold point of view: cause,
result, support (aśraya), and object (ālambana)." 351
[The Vaibhāṣikas answer:] When it says, "This dharma is never266 Chapter Two
the cause of that dharma," the Treatise does not mean to speak of all
types of causes. By cause, we must understand samprayuktakahetu and
sahabhūhetu; by result, adhipatiphala and puruṣakāraphala (ii.58); 352
by support, the six organs (organ of sight, etc.); and by object, the six
spheres (visaya), visible things, etc.
5. If a future dharma is not sabhāgahetu, then sabhāgahetu did not
exist at first, but then does exist.
But this is precisely what the Vaibhāṣikas affirm! The condition
(avasthā) of sabhāgahetu of the sabhāgahetu is new, that is, it exists
after having been non-existent; but the thing itself, the dravya which is
a certain sabhāgahetu, is not new. A future dharma is not sabhāgahetu,
but once it has arisen, it becomes sabhāgahetu. In fact, the result of the
complex of causes, is the condition of a thing and not the thing itself
(dravya), the dharma. (A future dharma exists as a thing, dravyatas;
the complex of causes causes it to pass from the future into the
present, endows it with the condition of the present, and endows it, by
this fact, with the quality of sabhāgahetu; see v.25.)
6. What harm do you see in this future dharma being a similar
cause (sabhāgahetu) in the same way that it is a retributive cause
(vipākahetu, ii54)?
It it were sabhagahetu, it would be mentioned as such in the
Jñānaprasthāna (see above p. 263 line 27); now the Jñṣnaprasthāna,
answering the question, "What is sabhāgahetu?” does not say that
future roots of good are sabhāgahetu of future roots of good.
We do not think that the omission of future dharma from this text
creates an argument against us. This text, in fact mentions only the
sabhāgahetus that are capable of "grasping" and of "giving forth" a
result (phaladanagrahaṇasamartha, ii.59).
No, for the result of sabhägahetu is an "out-flowing result of
out-flowing," a result similar to its cause (nişyandaphala, ii.57c), and
this type of result does not suit a future dharma, because, in the future,
there is no anteriority and posteriority. One cannot, on the other hand,
admit that a past or present dharma already arisen is an out-flowing of
a future dharma, in the same way that a past dharma is not an
out-flowing of a present dharma, for a result is not anterior to its cause.The Indriyas 267
Hence a future dharma is not a similar cause.
7. If this is the case, then a future dharma would no longer be a
vipākahetu, a retributive cause (ii.54c), for 1) a retributive result
(vipäkaphala, ii.56a) cannot be either simultaneous or anterior to its
cause; and 2) because future dharmas have no earlier or later periods of
time.
[The Vaibhāṣikas answer that] the cause is not the same. A similar
cause (sabhāgahetu) and its out-flowing (nisyanda) result are similar
dharmas. Now this is to suppose that they exist in the future, that they
lack anteriority and posteriority, and that they are the mutual cause of
one another, and as a consequences the results of one another: now it is
not admissable that two dharmas are an out-flowing of one another.
On the contrary, a retributive cause and a retributive result are
dissimilar. Even if the anteriority and the posteriority were absent, a
cause remains only a cause, and a result remains only a result. The
quality of sabhāgahetu results from a condition or state (avasthā): a
future dharma is not sabhāgahetu; but when it enters into a present or
a past condition, it becomes sabhāgahetu. Its quality of retributive cause
results from the nature of the dharma itself.
We have said that a dharma is a similar cause (sabhāgahetu) of
only those dharmas that belong to its stage. Does this restriction apply
to all the dharmas?
It applies only to impure dharmas, not to pure dharmas:
52c-d. But the Path is sabhāgahetu to the Path, without
distinguishing the nine stages.
The Path is of nine stages or spheres-the anāgamya, the
dhyānāntara, the Four primary (mula) Dhyānas, and the three inferior,
primary Ārūpyas (vi.20c)-in the sense that an ascetic, abiding in
these nine states of absorption, can cultivate the Path.
The dharmas that constitute the Path are similar causes of the
dharmas that constitute the Path, from stage to stage. In fact, the Path268 Chapter Two
resides in the different stages as a visitor, without forming part of the
spheres of existence to which these stages belong: the desire of
Kāmadhātu, of Rupadhatu, of Arūpyadhātu, are not on the Path. The
Path, whatever be the stage upon which the ascetic relies in order to
cultivate it, stays of the same nature; the Path is hence a similar cause
of the Path.
Nevertheless, the complete Path is not a similar cause of the
complete Path. One does not have to take into account the stage in
which it is cultivated, but rather the characteristics proper to the Path
itself.
52d. The Path is sabhāgahetu to an equal or superior Path.
Not of an inferior Path, because the Path is always acquired
through effort.
Let us define the terms, "inferior," "equal," and "superior Path."
1. When past or present duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti (the first
moment of the Path of Seeing, darśanamārga, vi.25d) is a similar cause
of this same kṛṣānti of the future, the caused Path is equal to the causing
Path.
When this ksanti is a similar cause of duḥkhe dharmajñāna (the
second moment of the Path of Seeing, darśanamãārga, vi.26a) the
caused Path is superior to the causing Path.
And thus following up to anut padajñāna (vi.50) which, not having
a superior, can only be the similar cause of an equal Path, namely a
future anut pādajñāna.
To state it more precisely, the Path of Seeing (darśanamārga) is a
similar cause of the Path of Seeing, the Path of Meditation (bhāvanā-
mārga), and the Path of the Asaikṣas (aśaikṣamārga); the Path of
Meditation is a similar cause of the Path of Meditation and the Path of
the Asaikṣa; and the Path of the Aśaikṣa is a similar cause of an equal
or superior Path of the Aśaikṣa.
3. Any Path can be cultivated by an ascetic of weak faculties or
active faculties: a Path of weak faculties is the similar cause of the same
Path of weak faculties and of active faculties; a Path of active faculties
is the similar cause of the same Path of active faculties. ConsequentlyThe Indriyas 269
the Paths of śraddhānusārin (vi.29), śraddhādhimukta (vi.31) and
samayavimukta (vi.56-7) are, respectively, the similar causes of six,
four, and two Paths; the Paths of dharmānusārin (vi.29), dṛṣṭiprāpti
(vi.31) and asamayavimukta (vi56-7) are, respectively, the similar
causes of three, two, and one Path.
When a Path cultivated in a higher stage is the similar cause of a
Path cultivated in a lower stage, how can it be the cause of an equal or
higher Path?
The Path cultivated in a lower stage can be equal or higher 1) from
the point of view of the faculties (indriyas) which can be weak or active
in any stage, or 2) from the point of view of the accumulation of
causes.
It does not follow that the same person successively grasps
śraddhānusārin and dharmānusārin Paths; yet the first, in the past or
present, is a similar cause of the second, the later one. 355
Does the rule of equal or higher results apply only to the pure
dharmas, that is, to the dharmas that form part of the Path?
53a. The dharmas acquired through cultivation are sabhāgahetu
of the same two classes, the equal and the higher.
Worldly dharmas acquired through effort or exercise are similar
causes of equal or higher dharmas, but not of inferior dharmas.
What are the dharmas acquired through effort?
53b. Those which arise through hearing, through reflection,
etc.
The dharmas "acquired through effort" are the opposite of the
"innate" dharmas. These former dharmas are qualities (guna) proceed-
ing from hearing (śruta), that is, from the Word of the Buddha, from
reflection (cintā), and from meditation (bhāvanā).
Since they are acquired through effort, they are the similar cause of
greater or of equal, but not of lesser, good.270 Chapter Two
The dharmas of hearing in Kāmadhātu are similar causes of the
dharmas of hearing and reflection in Kamadhātu; but not of the
dharmas of meditation, because these dharmas do not exist in
Kāmadhātu, and because a dharma is a similar cause of dharmas of the
same sphere of existence.
The dharmas of hearing in Rüpadhātu are similar causes of the
dharmas of hearing and meditation in Rūpadhātu; but not of the
dharmas of reflection, because these dharmas do not exist in this
sphere of existence: in Rūpadhātu, as soon as one begins to reflect, one
immediately enters into absorption (samadhi).
The dharmas of meditation in Rūpadhātu are similar causes of the
dharmas of meditation in Rūpadhātu, but not of the dharmas of
hearing in Rūpadhātu, because these are less good.
The dharmas of meditation in Arūpyadhātu are the similar causes
of the dharmas of meditation in Ārūpyadhātu. The dharmas of hearing
and of reflection do not exist in this sphere of existence.
Furthermore, one must consider that the dharmas acquired
through effort are of nine classes: weak-weak, medium-weak, etc. The
weak-weak are the similar causes of dharmas of nine classes; the
medium-weak, of dharmas of eight classes, with the exception of the
weak-weak; and thus following.
The nine classes of the "innate" good dharmas are similar cause of
one another. The same holds for the defiled dharmas.
The undefiled-neutral dharmas are of four categories (ii.72), the
following being "better" than the preceding: dharmas arisen from
retribution (vipäkaja, i.37); dharmas relative to lying down, to sitting
attitudes, etc.; dharmas relative to professional work; and the mind
that can create fictive beings (nirmāṇacitta, vii.48). These four
categories are, respectively, the similar cause of four, three, two, and
one category.
Furthermore, as a mind capable of creating fictive beings of the
sphere of Kāmadhātu can be the result of each of the Four Dhyanas
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 89a12), there is reason to establish here the same
distinctions: the minds capable of creating fictive beings constitute four
classes, and are, according to their class, similar causes of four, three,***
The Indriyas
two, or one mind capable of creating fictive beings. In fact, since it is a
result of a higher Dhyana, the mind capable of creating fictive beings is
not the similar cause of a mind capable of creating fictive beings which
is the result of a lower Dhyana: from one similar cause (a mind capable
of creating fictive beings) realized with the greatest effort, there cannot
proceed a dharma less good, realized with less effort.
Once these principles have been established, the following ques-
tions are stated and resolved: 356
1. Is there a pure dharma, already arisen, which is not the cause of a
pure dharma not destined to arise?
Yes. Duḥkhe dharmajñāna already arisen is a cause of duḥkhe
dharmajñānakṣāntis not destined to arise. Furthermore, a better good
is not the cause of lesser good.
2. Is there, in a series, a pure dharma, previously acquired (of which
one has first obtained the prāpti), which is not the cause of a pure
dharma arisen later?
Yes. Future duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti [whose possession (prāpti)
has been obtained in the first moment of the Path] are not the cause of
duḥkhe dharmajñāna already arisen. This is because a result cannot be
anterior to its cause, and because a future dharma is not a similar cause.
3. Is there a pure dharma, arisen previously, which is not the cause
of a pure dharma arisen later?
Yes. The best is not the cause of less good. For example, when one
realizes an inferior result after having fallen from a superior result, the
superior result was not the cause of this inferior result. Furthermore,
possession of duḥkhe dharmajñāna which has previously arisen is not
a cause of the possession of the dharmajñānakṣānti which will arise in
the following moments (duḥkhe'nvayajñānakṣāntikṣaṇe, etc. ), because
these new possessions are less good.272
Chapter Two
53c-d. The mind and its mental states are only samprayuk-
takahetu, causes through association. 357
Mind and mental states are samprayuktakahetu.
Is this to say that minds and mental states, arisen at different
moments and in different series, are among themselves samprayuk-
takahetu?
No.
Would
then say
you
that the mind and mental states of the same
aspect, that is, having the same aspect of blue, etc., and of the same
object (ekālambana), that is, having for their object the same blue, etc.,
are samprayuktakahetu?
No. This definition gives rise to the same criticism: minds and
mental states of different time periods and of different series can have
the same aspect and the same object.
Would you say that the mind and mental states of the same aspect
and the same object, can be, furthermore, of the same time period?
This still does not suffice: for many persons can see a new moon at
one and the same time.
Consequently, the author adds
53d. Which has the same support.
The mind and mental states which have the same support are,
among themselves, samprayuktakahetu.
"Same" signifies single or undivided. 358
For example, a given moment (kṣaṇa) of the organ of sight is the
support 1) of a visual consciousness, and 2) of the sensation (vedanā)
and the other mental states which are associated with this conscious-
ness. And the same for the other organs until manas: a certain
moment of the mental organ (manas) is the support of a mental
consciousness and of the mental states associated with this
consciousness.
Whatever is samprayuktakahetu is also sahabhūhetu. What is the
difference between these two causes? 359
Some dharmas are called sahabhühetu because they are mutually
the results of one another. As companions in a caravan travel thanks toThe Indriyas 273
the support that they give one another, in this same way the mind is
the result of mental states, and the mental states are the result of the
mind.
Some dharmas are called samprayuktakahetu, mutual cause
through association, because they function identically, that is, because
there is among them the five similarities or identities defined above
ii.34. The travel of the companions in a caravan is assured by the
mutual support that they give one another; furthermore, they use the
same food, the same drinks, etc. In this same way, the mind and its
mental states use the same support, have the same aspect, etc.: if one
of these five identities is missing, they no longer function in the same
way and are not associated.
54a-b. Former universals are sarvatragahetu or universal causes
of the defiled dharmas of their own stage.
Universals, which we shall study in the Chapter on the Defile-
ments (v.12), arisen previously, that is, of the past or present, and
belonging to a certain stage (bhumi), are the universal cause of later
defiled dharmas, of the same stage, which are defiled by nature, either
through association or through their origin (iv.9c).
Universals are only the cause of defiled dharmas; they are the cause
of defiled dharmas in their own category and in other categories
(nikāya, ii.52b): it is through their power that there arises, with their
following, defilements belonging to categories different from them. 360
They then constitute a cause different from sabhägahetu.361
Then would the defiled dharmas of an Āryan (rāga or lust, etc.)
have the universals for their cause? Yet the Āryan has abandoned all
universals, for these are abandoned by Seeing the Truths.
The Vaibhāṣikas of Kaśmir admit that all defiled dharmas have the
dharmas abandoned through Seeing the Truths for their cause. For the
Prakaraṇapāda 362 expresses itself in these terms: "What dharmas have
for a cause the dharmas abandoned through Seeing the Truths? Defiled
dharmas 363 and the retribution of the dharmas abandoned through274 Chapter Two
Seeing the Truths.
“What dharmas have for a cause neutral (avyākṛta) [dharmas]?
Neutral conditioned dharmas 364 and bad dharmas.
"Is there a duḥkhasatya which has for its cause a belief in self
(satkāyadṛṣṭi) and which is not in turn the cause of a belief in self?...”
and the rest to: "with the exception of the arising-old age-duration-
impermanence of the belief in a future self 365 and its following, and of
all other defiled duḥkhasatya."
[Objection:] If some bad dharmas have for their causes not only
some bad dharmas but some neutral dharmas as well, how should one
explain this bhāṣyam of the Prajñapti, 366 "Is there a bad dharma which
has only a bad dharma for its cause? Yes; the first defiled volition
(cetanā) that an Āryan produces upon falling from detachment." 367
[Answer:] The neutral dharmas, which are abandoned through
Seeing the Truths, are the cause (i.e., sarvatragahetu) of this bad
volition. If the Prajñapti does not mention it, it is because it intends to
name only the causes that have not been abandoned.
54c-d. Bad dharmas and impure good dharmas are retributive
causes.
1. Bad dharmas-which are all impure-and impure good
dharmas are only retributive causes, because their nature is to ripen.
Neutral dharmas are not retributive causes, because they are weak:
as rotten seeds, even though moistened, do not grow.
Pure dharmas are not retributive causes because they are not
moistened 369 through desire (tṛṣṇā): as intact seeds, not moistened, do
not grow.
Furthermore, pure dharmas are not bound to any sphere of
existence: thus to which sphere could the result of retribution that they
would produce belong?
The dharmas that are neither neutral nor pure possess the two
qualities necessary for retribution, the proper force, and the moisten-The Indriyas
ing of thirst, the same as intact and moistened seeds.
2. [Objection:] What is the meaning of the expression vipäkahetu?
You have a choice between two interpretations of this compound:
vipäkahetu signifies either "cause of vipaka" or "cause which is
vipāka."
In the first case, the suffix a (ghan) marks the state (bhāva): the
vipāka (=vipakti) is the result of the operation indicated by the root
vi-pac.
In the second case, the suffix a marks the operation (karman): the
vipāka is that which become ripe (vipacyate), that is to say, the action
arrives at the moment when it gives forth a result.
To which of these two interpretations do you hold? If you accept
the first, how would you justify the text (Jñanaprasthāna, TD 26, p.
974a26), "The eye arises from vipäka?" If you accept the second, how
would you justify the expression, “vipāka of action?"
[Answer:] We have shown (i.37) that both explanations of the
word vipāka are correct. When one examines results, one must
understand the word vipaka according to the first explanation; the
meaning is result of retribution. The text, "The eye arises from vipāka"
should be understood as "The eye arises from the cause of vipaka."
3. What is the meaning of the compound vi-päka?
The prefix vi indicates difference. Vipāka is a pāka or result
dissimilar from its cause. 370
How is that?
In Kāmadhātu, 1) a retributive cause (vipäkahetu) consisting of
only one skandha can produce a single result: possession (prāpti,
ii.36b) with its characteristics (lakṣaṇas, ii.45c); 2) a retributive cause
consisting of two skandhas can produce a single result: bodily and vocal
action with its characteristics; 3) a retributive cause consisting of four
skandhas can produce a single result: the mind and its mental states,
good and bad, with their lakṣaṇas.
In Rūpadhātu, 1) a retributive cause consisting of a single skandha
can produce a single result: possession with its characteristics, that is,
asamjñisamāpatti (ii.42a) with its characteristics; 2) a retributive cause
consisting of two skandhas can produce a single result: vijñapti (iv.2)276 Chapter Two
of the First Dhyāna with its characteristics; 3) a retributive cause
consisting of four skandhas can produce a single result: a good mind,
not of absorption (for the mind of absorption always consists of rūpa
and discipline, iv.13, and is thus five skandhas), with its characteristics;
4) a retributive cause consisting of five skandhas can produce a single
result: the mind of absorption with its characteristics.
In Ārūpyadhātu, 1) a retributive cause consisting of a single
skandha can produce a single result: possession, nirodhasamāpatti
(ii.43), with their respective characteristics; 2) a retributive cause
consisting of four skandhas can produce a single result: the mind and
its mental states with their characteristics.
4. There is action the retribution of which is included in a single
āyatana, in a single dharmāyatana (i.15): action that has for its
retribution the vital organ (jivitendriya, ii.45a). 371
In fact, action that has the vital organ for its retribution necessarily
has the vital organ and its characteristics (ii.45c) for its retribution;
both form part of the dharmayatana.
Action that has the mental organ (manas) for its retribution
necessarily has two ayatanas for its retribution, namely the mana-
āyatana (i.16b) and the dharmāyatana (which embraces sensations,
etc., and the characteristics which necessarily accompany the mental
organ).
Action that has tangible things (spraṣṭavyāyatana, i.10d) for its
retribution necessarily has two āyatanas for its retribution, namely the
tangible things and the dharmayatana (which includes the character-
istics of tangible things).
Action that has the organ of touch (kāyāyatana, i.9a) for its
retribution necessarily has three ayatanas for its retribution, the organ
of touch, tangibles (namely the four primary elements that support the
organ of touch), and the dharmāyatana (which includes its character-
istics).
In the same way, action which has either physical matter
(rūpāyatana), odors (gandhayatana), or taste (rasayatana) for its
retribution, necessarily has three āyatanas for its retribution: tangible
things and the dharmāyatana as above, plus, according to the cause, theThe Indriyas 277
ayatana of physical matter, odor, or taste.
Action which has either the eye, the ear, the nose, or the tongue for
its retribution, necessarily has four ayatanas for its retribution: 1) one
of the four organs, 2) the organ of touch, 3) tangible things, and 4) the
dharmayatana.
An action can have five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, or eleven
ayatanas for its retribution, 372
Action, in fact, is of two types: of varied result and of non-varied
result. The same holds for seeds: lotus, pomegranate, fig, millet, corn,
etc.
5. The retribution of an action can belong to a single time period or
to three time periods; 373 but the reverse is not true, 374 for a result
cannot be inferior to its cause. The retribution from an action lasting
an instant can last numerous instants; but the reverse is not true, for
the same reason (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 98a7).
Retribution is not simultaneous to the action which produces it, for
a retributive result is not experienced at the moment when the action
is accomplished. Retribution does not immediately follow an action,
for it is the immediately antecedent condition (samanantarapratyaya,
ii.63b) that attracts the moment that immediately follows the action:
in fact, the retributive cause depends on the development of the series
for the realization of its result.
To which time period should a dharma belong in order that it
might be each of these six causes? We have implicitely stated this rule,
but we have not yet taught it in the Kārikā:
55a-b. Sarvatragahetu and sabhāgahetu are of two time periods;
three causes are of three time periods. 375
A past and present dharma can be sarvatraga and sabhāgahetu
(ii.52b). Past, present, and future dharmas can be saṁprayuktaka,
sahabhū, and vipäkahetu. The Kārikā does not speak of karaṇahetu
(ii.50a)): the conditioned dharmas of the three time periods are278 Chapter Two
kāraṇahetu; the unconditioned dharmas are outside of time.
Which causes correspond to which results? By reason of which
results are they recognized as causes?
55c-d. Conditioned things and disconnection are results. 376
The Mulaśāstra says, "What dharmas are results? Conditioned
things and pratisaṁkhyānirodha.” 377
[Objection:] If the unconditioned is a result, it should have a cause,
from which cause one could say that it is the result. Furthermore, since
you maintain that it is a cause (kāraṇahetu, ii.50a), it should have a
result, from which result one could say that it is a cause.
Only conditioned things, [the Sarvästivädins answer,] have cause
and result.
55d. The unconditioned has neither cause nor result. 378
For we cannot attribute to it any of the six causes, nor any of the
five results.
i. 1. Why not admit that the part of the Path which is called
anantaryamārga³79 is the kāraṇahetu of the result of disconnection
(visamyogaphala, ii.57d)?
We have seen that kāraṇahetu is a cause that does not create any
obstacles to arising; but disconnection, being unconditioned, does not
arise. Thus one cannot attribute a kāraṇṇahetu to it.
2. Then how is disconnection a result? Of what is it the result?
It is the result of the Path, for it is obtained due to the force of the
Path (vi.51): in other words, it is through the Path that an ascetic
obtains possession (prapti, ii.36c-d) of disconnection.
3. Hence it is the obtaining or the possession of disconnection
which is the result of the Path, and not disconnection itself: for the
Path is efficacious with regard to the obtaining of disconnection, but
not with regard to disconnection.
Wrong! The efficacy of the Path possesses diversity with regard toThe Indriyas 279
both obtaining and disconnection.
The Path produces obtaining; the Path causes one to obtain
disconnection. Hence, although the Path is not the cause of disconnec-
tion (=prastisamkhyanirodha), one can say that it is the result of the
Path, 380
4. Since no unconditioned thing has adhipatiphala (ii.58d), how
can one define it as kāraṇahetu?
Any unconditioned thing is kāraṇahetu, for it does not create an
obstacle to the arising of any dharma; but it does not have any result,
for, being outside of time, it can neither project nor produce a result
(ii.59a-b).
[5. The Sauträntikas deny that] an unconditioned thing is a cause.
In fact, the Sūtra does not say that a cause can be unconditioned; it says
that a cause is only conditioned, "All the hetus, all the pratyayas which
have for a result the production of physical matter... of the
consciousiness, are also impermanent. 381 Produced by impermanent
hetus and pratyayas, how can physical matter . . . and consciousness be
permanent?"
[The Sarvāstivādins answer:] If a permanent thing, that is, an
unconditioned thing is not a cause, it will not be "an object as
condition" (ālambanapratyaya, ii.63) of the conciousness that it refers
to.
[The Sautrāntikas:] The Sūtra declares that the hetus and the
pratyayas which are capable of producing are impermanent. It does not
say that all conditions (pratyayas) of the consciousness are imperma-
nent. An unconditioned thing could then be "an object as condition" of
the consciousness; for "an object as condition" is not itself productive.
[The Sarvästivādins:] The Sūtra says that productive causes are
impermanent: hence the Sūtra does not deny that an unconditioned
thing is kāraṇahetu, that is, "a cause that does not create an obstacle."
[The Sautrāntikas:] The Sūtra admits the existence of "an object as
a condition" (ii.61c); but it does not speak of a kāraṇahetu, "a cause
that does not create an obstacle." It is not proven that an uncondi-
tioned thing is a cause.
[The Sarvāstivādins:] In fact, the Sūtra does not say that that280 Chapter Two
which does not create an obstacle is a cause; but it does not contradict
this. Many Sūtras have disappeared. How can you be sure that some
Sūtra does not attribute the quality of karaṇahetu to unconditioned
things?
[ii. The Sautrāntikas:] What is the dharma that is called visamyoga
or disconnection?
[The Sarvästivadins: The Mulaśāstra (Jñanaprasthāna, TD 26, p.
923b6) says that] disconnection is pratisamkhyānirodha (ii.57d).
[The Sautrantikas:] When I asked you (i.6) what pratisamkhyā-
nirodha is, you answered, "It is disconnection;" I asked you what
disconnection is, and you answered, “It is pratisaṁkhyānirodha!” The
two answers are circular and do not explain the nature of the dharma,
the unconditioned, to which they refer. You owe us another
explanation.
[The Sarvastivādins:] This dharma, in its nature, is real, but
indescribable; only the Āryans "realize” it internally, each for himself.
It is only possible to indicate its general characteristics, by saying that
there is a real entity (dravya), distinct from others, which is good and
eternal, and which receives the name of pratisamkhyānirodha, and
which is also called disconnection or visamyoga.
iii. The Sauträntikas affirm that the three types of unconditioned
things (i.5b) are not real. The three dharmas that it refers to are not
distinct and real entities like color, sensation, etc. 382
1. What is called "space" (ākāśa) is solely the absence of any
tangible thing, that is, the absence of a resistant body. Persons say, in
their obscurity, that there is space when they do not encounter any
obstacle.
2. What is called pratisamkhyānirodha or Nirvāṇa is-when both
the defilements already produced and the existence already producedThe Indriyas 281
are destroyed the absence of any other defilements or any other
existence, and that by reason of the force of the consciousness
(pratisamkhya-prajñā). 383
3. When, independent of the force of consciousness (pratisaṁkhyā)
and by reason of the mere absence of causes there is an absence of
arising dharmas, this is what is called apratisamkhyānirodha. For
example, when premature death interrupts existence (nikāyasabhāga,
ii.10, 14), there is apratisaṁkhyānirodha of the dharmas which would
have arisen in the course of this existence if it had continued.
4. According to another school, 384 pratisamkhyanirodha is the
future non-arising of the defilements by reason of consciousness
(prajñā); apratisaṁkhyānirodha is the future non-arising of suffering,
that is, of existence, by reason of the disappearance of the defilements,
and not directly by reason of consciousness. (The first would then be
sopadhisesa nirvāṇadhātu, and the second would be nirupadhisesa
nirvaanadhātu).
But, [the Sautrāntikas remark,] the future non-arising of suffering
supposes consciousness (pratisamkhyā); it is then included within
pratisamkhyanirodha.
5. Another School 385 defines apratisamkhyānirodha as "later non-
existence of the dharmas which have arisen" by virtue of their
spontaneous destruction, 386
In this hypothesis, apratisaṁkhyānirodha would not be eternal,
since it is non-existent as long as the dharma as cause (i.e., the
defilement) has not perished.
But does not pratisamkhyānirodha have a certain consciousness,
the pratisamkhya, for its antecedent? Consequently it too would not be
eternal, for, if its antecedent were absent, its consequence would also be
absent..
You cannot say that pratisamkhyanirodha is not eternal because its
antecedent is pratisaṁkhyā: in fact, it does not have pratisamkhyā for
its antecedent. One cannot say that pratisamkhyā is earlier, or that the282
Chapter Two
"non-arising of the non-arisen dharmas" is later. Let us explain. Non-
arising always exists in and of itself. If pratisamkhyā is absent, the
dharmas would arise; but if pratisamkhyā arises, the dharmas would
absolutely not arise. The efficacy of pratisamkhyā with regard to their
non-arising consists in this: 1) that before pratisamkhyā, there is no
obstacle to their arising; 2) but given pratisaṁkhyā, the dharmas, the
arising of which has not been previously hindered, do not arise.
[iv. The Sarvästivādins refute the Sautrāntikas.] If Nirvāṇa is
simply non-arising (anutpäda), how does one explain the Sūtra
(Samyuktagama, TD 2, p. 182b15) which says, "The cultivation of the
five faculties,-faith, etc.,-has for its result the abandoning of past,
present, and future suffering"? 387 In fact, this abandoning is nothing
other than Nirvāṇa, and there can only be non-arising of a future
dharma, not of a past or present dharma.
[1. The Sautrāntikas:] This Sūtra does not contradict our definition
of Nirvāṇa. In fact, "the abandoning of past and present suffering"
means the abandoning of the defilements bearing past and present
suffering. Our interpretation is justified by another text (Samyukta,
TD 2, p.19a8?) which says, "Abandon desire (chandarāga ³88) relative
to rūpa, to sensation and to consciousness. When desire is
abandoned, rūpa, .
and consciousness will be abandoned and
comprehended by you."389 It is in this manner that we should
understand "the abandoning of past and present suffering" of which
the Sūtra speaks when it speaks of the faculties.
If one adopts another reading of this Sūtra on the faculties, to wit,
"The cultivation of the faculties . . . has for its result the abandoning
of past, present, and future defilements," the explanation is the same.
Or rather, past defilement is the defilement of a previous
existence; present defilement is the defilement of the present exis-
tence; these do not refer to the defilement of a given past or present
moment. The same for the eighteen tṛṣṇāvicaritas (Anguttara, ii.212)
or "modes of thirst": the modes (vicaritas) that are related to a pastThe Indriyas 283
existence are called past modes, those that are related to a present
existence are called present modes, and those that are related to a
future existence are called future modes.
Past defilements and present defilements place in the present
series seeds that bring forth the arising of future defilement: when
these seeds are abandoned, past and present defilement is abandoned:
in the same way as one says that an action is exhausted when its
retribution is exhausted.
The "abandoning" of future suffering and future defilement is the
fact that they absolutely do not arise, given the absence of seeds.
How does one otherwise understand the abandoning of past or
present suffering? There is no good reason to make an effort to
destroy that which has perished or that which is perishing.
[2. The Sarvāstivādins:] If unconditioned things do not exist, how
can the Sutra say “Detachment (virāga) is the best of all conditioned
and unconditioned dharmas?" How can a dharma which does not exist
be the best among the dharmas which do not exist? 390
[The Sautrāntikas:] We do not say that unconditioned things do
not exist. They exist in fact in the manner in which we say that they
exist. Let us explain. Before sound is produced, we say "There is
non-existence (of sound) prior to the sound;" after the sound has
perished, we say "There is non-existence (of sound) after the sound,"
and yet it had not been proven that non-existence exists: 391 the same
holds for unconditioned things.
Although it is non-existent, one unconditioned thing merits being
praised, namely detachement (viraga), the absolute future non-
existence of any 'wrong. This non-existent thing is the most distin-
guished of all non-existent things. The Sūtra praises it by saying that it
is the best, so that believers shall conceive joy and affection with regard
to it.
[3. The Sarvästivādins:] If pratisamkhyanirodha or Nirvāṇa is
non-existent, how can it be one of the Truths. How can it be the Third
Noble Truth?
What should we understand by "Noble Truth" or arayasatya?
Without doubt the sense of satya (Truth) is “not incorrect." The284 Chapter Two
Āryans see that which exists and that which does not exist in a not
incorrect manner: in that which is suffering, they see only suffering,
and in the non-existence of suffering, they see the non-existence of
suffering. What contradiction do you find between the non-existence
of suffering and pratisaṁkhyānirodha being a Truth?
And this non-existence is the Third Truth, because the Aryans see
it and proclaim it immediately after the Second Truth.
[4. The Sarvāstivādins:] But if unconditioned things are non-
existent, the consciousness that has space and the two extinctions for
its object would have a non-thing for its object.
We do not see any inconvenience in this, as we shall explain in the
discussion on the past and future (v.25).
[5. The Sarvāstivädins:] What harm do you see in maintaining that
unconditioned things really exist? What advantage do you see in this?
This advantage that the Vaibhāṣika doctrine is found to be
safegarded.
May the gods be charged with defending this doctrine, if they judge
that it is possible! But to maintain the existence of unconditioned
things in and of themselves is to affirm a non-existent thing to be real.
In fact, unconditioned things are not known through direct perception
(pratyaksa), as is the case for physical matter, sensation, etc.; and they
are not known through inference (anumāna), by reason of their
activity, as is the case for the sense organs.
6. Furthermore, if nirodha or extinction is a thing in and of itself,
how do you justify the genitive, duḥkhasya nirodhaḥ, "the extinction of
suffering," as the extinction of the defilement, or the extinction of the
object of defilement? In our system, the extinction of a thing is simply
the non-existence of this thing. "Extinction of suffering” means that
"suffering will not exist any more." But we cannot conceive of any
cause and effect relationship, of any effect and cause relationship, of a
relationship of the whole to the part, etc., between the things, that is to
say, the defilements, and its extinction conceived of as an entity in
itself, which would justify the genitive.
We affirm, [answer the Sarvāstivādins,] that extinction is a thing
in and of itself. Yet we can specify extinction as being in a relationshipThe Indriyas 285
with such things (extinction of lust, etc.), for one takes possession
(prāpti, ii.37b) of extinction at the moment when one cuts off the
possession of a certain thing.
But, we would answer, what is it that determines or specifies the
taking of possession of extinction? 392
[7. The Sarvastivadins:] The Sutra speaks of the Bhikṣu who has
obtained Nirvāṇa in this life. 393 If Nirvana is non-existence, how could
he obtain it?
[The Sautrānţikas:] The Bhikṣu, through the possession of the
adverse force of the antidote, that is, through the possession of the
Path, has obtained a personality (aśraya) contrary to the defilements,
and contrary to a new existence. This is why the Sūtra says that he has
obtained Nirvāṇa.
8. Moreover we have a text that shows that Nirvāṇa is pure
non-existence. The Sūtra (Samyukta, TD 2, p. 88a7) 394 says, “The
complete abandoning, the purification, the exhausting, the detach-
ment, the extinction, the abatement, the definitive passing away of this
suffering; and the non-rebirth, the non-grasping, the non-appearance
of another suffering this is calm, this is excellent, namely the
rejection of all upadhi, the exhausting of thirst, detachment, extinction,
Nirvāṇa."
[The Sarvāstivādins:] When the Sūtra says that Nirvāṇa is the
non-appearance of a new suffering, the Sūtra means that there is no
appearance of suffering in Nirvāṇa. 395
[The Sautrāntikas:] I do not see that the locative “in Nirvāṇa” has
any force to establish that Nirvāṇa is a thing. In what sense do you
understand the locative asmin? If this means asmin sati, “if Nirvāṇa
exists, there is no appearance of suffering," then suffering would never
appear, since Nirvāṇa is eternal. If this means asmin prāpta, “if
Nirvāṇa has been obtained," you would have to admit that future
suffering will not appear while the Path-by virtue of which you
suppose that Nirvāṇa is obtained-either is, or rather has been
obtained. 396
9. Consequently the comparison of the Sūtra is excellent, "The
deliverance of his mind is like the Nirvāṇa of a flame." 397 That is to286 Chapter Two
say, as the extinction of a flame is only the "passing away" of the flame
and not a certain thing in and of itself, so too is the deliverance of the
mind of the Blessed One.
[10. The Sautrāntikas] are still warranted by the authority of the
Abhidharma wherein we read, "What are the avastuka dharmas? They
are the unconditioned things." 398 The term avastuka signifies "unreal,"
"without self-nature."
[The Vaibhāṣikas do not accept this interpretation.] The term
vastu, in fact, is used in five different meanings: 1. vastu in the sense of
a thing in and of itself, for example, "When one has obtained this
vastu (aśubhā, vi.11), one is in possession of the vastu” (Jñānapras-
thāna, TD 26, p. 1026cll; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 985a22); 2. vastu in the
sense of any object of consciousness, for example "All the dharmas are
known through different knowledges, each knowing its own object"
(Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 713c20); 3. vastu in the sense of "bond of
attachment," for example, "Is the person who is bound to a vastu
through the bond of affection, bound to this same vastu through the
bond of hostility?" (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 298b-c); 4. vastu in the sense of
cause, for example, "What are the dharmas possessing a cause? The
conditioned dharmas" (Prakaraṇa, TD 26, p. 716a4); 399 5. vastu in the
sense of "act of appropriating to oneself", for example, "vastu of fields,
vastu of a house, vastu of a shop, vastu of riches: abandoning the act of
appropriating these to himself, he renounces them" (Vibhāṣā, TD 27,
p. 288b5), 400
The Vaibhāṣikas conclude: In the passage that concerns us, vastu
has the meaning of cause; avastuka signifies "that which has no cause."
Unconditioned things, although real, always lack activity, have no cause
which produces them, and produce no effects.
We must explain what type of result proceeds from each type of
cause.
56a. Retribution is the result of the last cause. 401The Indriyas 287
The last cause is the retributive cause, vipākahetu, because the
retributive cause is named last in this list. The first result, vipäkaphala
(iii.57), is the result of this cause.
56b. The predominating result is the result of the first. 402
The first cause is kāraṇahetu or reason for being; the last result
proceeds from it.
This result is called adhipaja, arisen from predominence, or
adhipata, belonging to predominance, because it is the result of the
predominating cause (adhipatiphala, ii.58c-d). The kāraṇahetu is
considered as playing the role of a master (adhipati).
But, we say, the quality of not creating an obstacle (anāvaraṇa-
bhāvamātrāvasthāna, ii.50a) suffices to constitute karaṇahetu. How can
one regard it as a "predominating cause?"
Karanahetu is either a "non-efficacious cause" and one then
regards it as predominant because it creates no obstacle; or an
"efficacious cause," and one then regards it as predominant because it
possesses mastery, a predominating and generating activity. For
example, the ten ayatanas (form and the organ of sight, etc.) are
predominant with regard to the five sense consciousnesses; the
collective action of living beings is predominant with regard to the
physical world. 4⁰³ The organ of hearing exercises an indirect pre-
dominence (adhipatya) with regard to the visual consciousness, for,
after having understood, a person experiences the desire to see. And
thus following. (See ii.50a).
56c-d. Outflowing is the result of the similar cause and the
universal cause.
An outflowing result (nisyandaphala) proceeds from sabhāgahetu
(ii.52) and from sarvatragahetu (ii.54): for the result of these two
causes is similar to its causes (ii.57c; iv.85).
56d. The pauruşa or virile result, is the result of two causes.
The result of sabhāgahetu (ii.59) and samprayuktakahetu (ii.53c) is288
Chapter Two
called prauruşa or virile, that is, the result of puruṣakāra or virile
activity.
Puruşakāra or virile activity is not distinct from the person himself,
for action is not distinct from him who accomplished the action. The
result of virile activity (puruṣakāraphala) can thus be termed the virile
(pauruşa) result.
What do we understand by "virile activity?"
The activity of a dharma is termed its virile activity (puruṣakāra),
because it is similar to the activity of a person (puruṣakāra). In the
same way, in the world, a certain plant is called kākajanghā, because it
resembles the foot of a crow; heros are called mattahastin, because they
resemble an enraged elephant.
Are samprayuktahetu and sahabhūhetu the only causes that result
in virile activity?
According to one opinion, all other causes have this type of result,
with the exception of retributive causes (vipākahetu). This result is, in
fact, either simultaneous to, or immediately following its cause; but
such is not the case with a retributive result.
According to other Masters, 404 a retributive cause also distantly
results in virile activity, for example the fruits reaped by a laborer.
(Hence a dharma is 1) nişyandaphala, because it arises similar to
its cause, 2) puruṣakāraphala, because it arises through the force of its
cause, and 3) adhipatiphala, because it arises by reason of the "non-
obstacle" of its cause.)
What are the characteristics of the different results?
57a. Retribution is a neutral dharma.
Retribution (vipaka) is an undefiled, neutral (anivṛtāvyākṛta)
dharma.
Among the undefiled, neutral dharmas, some belong to living
beings, while others do not belong to living beings. Consequently the
author specifiesPage
The Indriyas 289
57b. Belonging to living beings.
that is, they arise in the series of living beings.
Some of those dharmas belonging to living beings are said to be of
accumulation (aupacayika, having come from food, etc., i.37) and some
are said to be of an outflowing (naisyandika, coming from a cause
which is similar to them, i.37, ii.57c). Consequently the author specifies
57c. They arise later than a non-neutral dharma.
A non-neutral action is called this because it produces retribution;
non-neutral actions are bad actions and good-impure (kuśalasāsrava,
ii.54c-d) actions. From actions of this nature there arises later, not at
the same time, and not immediately afterwards, the result that one
terms "retributive result" or "matured result" (vipākaphala).
Why not consider the dharmas that do not form part of living
beings, mountains, rivers, etc.,—as retributive results? Do they not
arise from good or bad actions?
The dharmas that do not form part of living beings are, by nature,
common in that everyone may partake of them. Now retributive
results, by definition, are unique: another person never experiences the
retributive results of actions that I accomplish. Action produces a
"predominating result" (adhipatiphala) in addition to a retributive
result: all beings experience this result in common, because the
collectivity of their actions cooperate in their creation (see above, note
57d. A result that resembles its cause is called outflowing. 405
A dharma resembling its cause is an outflowing result (nisyanda-
phala). Two causes, the similar cause and the universal cause
(sabhāgahetu, ii.52, and sarvatragahetu, ii.54a-b) produce an out-
flowing result.
If the result of the universal cause is an outflowing result, a result
similar to its cause, why not give the universal cause the name of
similar cause?
A result of a universal cause is always similar to its cause 1) from290 Chapter Two
the point of view of the stage: like it, it belongs to Kāmadhātu, etc.;
and 2) from the point of view of its moral character: like it, it is defiled.
But it can belong to a different category than the category of its
cause. "Category" means the method of abandoning: it is susceptible of
being abandoned by Seeing the Truth of Suffering, etc. (ii.52b). When
there is a similarity between a cause and its result from this last point
of view, the universal cause is at one and the same time a similar cause.
Four alternative cases present themselves:
1. A similar cause which is not a universal cause: for example, a
non-universal defilement (rāga, etc.) related to the defilements of their
own category;
2. A universal cause which is not a similar cause: the universal
defilements related to a defilement of another category;
3. A universal cause which is also a similar cause: the universal
defilements related to a defilement of their own category;
4. All other dharmas are neither similar causes nor universal
causes.
57e. Extinction through intelligence is disconnection.
Disconnection (visamyoga) or visamyogaphala, "result that con-
sists of disconnection" is extinction (kṣaya=nirodha) obtained by the
speculative consciousness (dhi-prajñā). Visaṁyogaphala is hence
pratisamkhyānirodha. (See above p. 280).
58a-b. A dharma is the result of the virile activity of the
dharma through the force by which it arises.
This refers to a conditioned dharma.
Examples: the absorption of the First Dhyana is the result of the
virile activity of a mind in Kāmadhātu which instigates it or prepares
it; the absorption of the Second Dhyāna is the result of the virile
activity of a mind in the First Dhyāna.
A pure dharma can be the result of the virile activity of an impure
dharma (the laukikāgradharmas have duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti for
their result, vi.25c-d).The Indriyas 291
A mind that can create fictive beings (nirmāṇacitta) is the result of
the virile activity of a mind in a Dhyāna (vii.48). And thus following. 407
Pratisamkhyanirodha or Nirvāṇa is considered to be a "result of
virile activity;" now the definition given in Kārikā 58a-b does not apply
to nirodha which, being eternal, does not arise. We say then that it is
the result of the virile activity of the dharma by the force of which one
obtains possession of it.
58c-d. Any conditioned dharma is the predominating result
(adhipatiphala) of conditioned dharmas, with the exception of
the dharmas that are later than it. 408
What difference is there between the result of virile activity and a
predominating result?
The first refers to the agent; the second refers to both the agent
and the non-agent. For example, a created thing is the result of the
virile activity and the predominating result of the artisan who created
it; it is only the predominating result of what is not the artisan.
In what condition (avasthā)—the past, present, or future-is each
of the causes (hetu) found when they grasp and when they produce
their result?
[59. Five causes grasp their results in the present; two produce
it in the present; two produce it in both past and present; and
one produces it in the past.
What is understood by "grasping a result" and "producing a
result?" 410
A dharma grasps a result when it become its seed. 411
A dharma produces a result at the moment when it gives this
result the power of arising, that is, at the moment when, the future
result being turned towards arising or is ready to arise, this dharma
gives it the power that causes it to enter into the present.]292
Chapter Two
59a-b. Five causes grasp their result in the present.
Five causes grasp their results only when they are in the present: in
the past, they have already grasped their results; in the future, they
have no activity (v.25).
The same holds for kāraṇahetu; but the stanza does not mention it,
because kāraṇahetu does not necessarily have a result.
59b. Two produce their result in the present.
The mutually coexistent cause (sahabhū) and the associated cause
(samprayuktaka) produce their results only when they are in the
present: these two causes in fact grasp and produce their results at the
same time.
59c. Two produce their results in both the past and the present.
The similar cause (sabhāga) and the universal cause (sarvatraga)
produce their results both when they are in the present and when they
are in the past.
How can they produce their outflowing results (nisyanda, ii.56c)
when they are in the present? We have seen (ii.52b, 54a) that they are
earlier than their results.
One says that they produce their results in the present, because
they produce them immediately. When their result has arisen, they are
past: they have already produced it; they do not produce the same
result twice.412
i. It happens that, at a given moment, a good similar cause
(sabhāgahetu) grasps a result but does not produce a result. Four
alternatives: to grasp, to produce, to grasp and to produce, and to
neither grasp nor to produce. 413
1. The possession of the roots of good that the person who has cut
off the roots of good (iv.80a) abandons at the last moment, grasps a
result, but does not produce a result. 414The Indriyas
2. The possession of the roots of good that the person who again
takes up the roots of good (iv.80c) acquires in the first moment,
produces a result, but does not grasp a result.
We must say: 415 This same possession, the possession abandoned
at the last moment by the person who has cut off the roots of good,-
produces its result, but does not grasp it at the moment when this
person again takes up the roots of good.
3. The possession of the person whose roots of good are not cut
off-with the exception of the two proceeding cases: that of the
person who has achieved cutting them off, and that of the person who
again takes up the roots of good-both grasp and produce.
4. In all other cases, possession neither grasps nor produces: for
example, the possession of the roots of good of a person whose roots
of good are cut off; the possession of the roots of good of a superior
stage by a person who has fallen from this stage: these possessions
have already grasped their result, and hence do not grasp it any more;
they do not produce it, since the person cannot have possession of
these roots at the present time.
ii. The Vibhāṣā establishes the same alternatives with respect to
bad similar causes:
1. The possession of the bad dharmas that a person who obtains
detachment from desire abandons at the last moment.
2. The possession that a person who fell from detachment acquires
in the first moment.
We must say: These same possessions, when a person falls from
detachment.
3. The possession of a person who is not detached, with the
exception of the two preceding cases.
4. Possession in all other cases: for example the possession of a
person detached and not subject to falling.
iii. There are also four alternatives regarding defiled-neutral
similar causes:
1. The last possession of defiled-neutral dharmas that the saint
who becomes an Arhat abandons.
2. The first possession that a fallen Arhat acquires.294 Chapter Two
Or better: the aforementioned possession of an Arhat who has
fallen.
3. The possession of a non-detached person in Bhavagra, the two
preceding cases being excluded.
4. Possession in all other cases: the possession of an Arhat.
iv. When an undefiled-neutral similar cause produces its result, it
grasps it (for the undefiled-neutral lasts until Nirvāṇa), but it can
grasp its result without producing it: for example, in the case of the
last skandhas of an Arhat which have no outflowing (nişyanda).
v. We have up to now considered the dharmas that are not "subject
to consciousness" (sālambana). If we consider the mind and its mental
states in their sucessive moments, we can establish the four following
alternatives for good similar causes:
1. It grasps but does not produce. When a good mind is
immediately followed by a defiled or undefiled-neutral mind, this good
mind, as a similar cause, grasps, that is, projects an outflowing result,
namely a good future mind, which is or is not destined to arise; it does
not produce an outflowing result, since the mind that follows it, defiled
or undefiled-neutral, is not the outflowing of a good mind.
2. It produces but does not grasp. When a good mind immediately
follows a defiled or undefiled-neutral mind, a good earlier mind
produces an outflowing result, namely the good mind that we have just
considered; this earlier mind does not grasp a result, since it grasped it
formerly.
3. It grasps and it produces. Two good minds follow one another,
the first grasping and producing an outflowing result, which is the
second mind.
4. It neither grasps nor produces. When defiled or undefiled-
neutral minds succeed one another, the earlier good mind, as a similar
cause, formerly grasped its result and shall later produce its result; but
for an instant it neither grasps nor produces.
We can in like manner establish the alternatives regarding bad
similar causes.
59d. One cause produces its result in the past.The retributive cause produces its result when it is in the past, for
this result is not simultaneous to, nor immediately following its cause.
The Indriyas 295
Some other Masters, [the scholars of the West (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
630b15)] say that there are four results different from the five results
that we have just mentioned. These four are:
1. pratiṣṭhāphala, a base result: a circle of water is the result of the
circle of wind (iii.45) and thus following to plants, which are the result
of earth;
2. prayogaphala, a result of preparatory exercise: anut pādajñāna,
etc. (vi.50) is the result of śubhā, etc. (vi.11);
3. sāmagrīphala, a result of a complex: the visual consciousness is
the result of the organ of sight, of a visible thing, of light and of an act
of attention (Madhyamakavṛtti, 454);
4. bhāvanāphala, a result of meditation: a mind capable of creating
fictive beings (vii.48) is the result of a Dhyāna.
[According to the Sarvästivādins,] the first of these four results is
included in the category of the predominent result; the other three are
included in the category of virile result.
We have explained causes and results. We must now examine how
many causes produce the different dharmas.
From this point of view, the dharmas are ranged into four
categories: 1. defiled dharmas, that is, the defilements, the dharmas
associated with a defilement, and the dharmas having their origins in a
defilement (iv.8); 2. retributive dharmas or dharmas arisen from a
retributive cause (vipäkahetu, ii.54c); 3. the first pure dharmas, that is,
duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti (1.38b, vi.27) and the dharmas coexistent
with this kṣānti; and 4. the other dharmas, that is, the neutral dharmas,
with the exception of the dharmas of retribution, and the good
dharmas, with the exception of the first pure
dharmas.296
Chapter Two
60-61b. The mind and its mental states are: 1) defiled; 2) arisen
from a retributive cause; 3) others; and 4) pure for the first
time, arising from causes that remain when one excludes, in
this order, 1) the retributive cause, 2) the universal cause, 3)
these two causes, 4) these two causes plus the similar cause.
The associated cause is further excluded with respect to the
dharmas that are not mind or mental states. 416
The mind and its mental states, 1) when they are defiled, arise
from five causes excluding the retributive cause; 2) when they are
retributive, they arise from five causes with the exclusion of the
universal cause; 3) when they are different from these two categories
and from the fourth, they arise from four causes, with the exclusion of
the retributive cause and the universal cause; 4) when they are pure for
the first time, they arise from three causes, with the exclusion of the
aforementioned two causes and the similar cause.
The dharmas that are not mind or mental states, namely the
material dharmas and the saṁskāras not associated with the mind
(ii.35), accordingly as they fall into one of four categories, arising from
causes proper to this category with the exclusion of the associated
causes are: defiled and retributive, four causes; different, three causes;
pure for the first time (anāsravasamvara, iv.13), two causes.
These is no dharma that comes from a single cause: the reason for
being and the mutually coexistant cause are never absent.
We have explained causes (hetu). What are conditions (pratyaya)?
61c. The pratyayas are said to be four.417
Where is this said?
In the Sūtra, it says “There are four conditions (pratyayas), namely
causes as a condition (hetupratyayatā), an equal and immediately
antecedent condition (samanantarapratyayatā), an object as condition
(alambanapratyayata), and a predominating influence as condition
(adhipatipratyayatā)."Pratyayatā means "a type of pratyaya." 418
The Indriyas 297
What is "cause as a condition"?
61d. The pratyaya that bears the name of hetu is five hetus.
Excepting kāraṇahetu, the five remaining hetus constitute hetu-
pratyayatā, causes as condition.
What is "an equal and immediately antecedent condition"?
62a-b. The mind and its mental states that have arisen, with
the exception of the last ones, are an equal and immediately
antecedent condition.
If one excepts the last mind and the last mental states of the Arhat
at the moment of Nirvāṇa, all minds and mental states which have
arisen are an equal and immediately antecedent condition.
i. Only mind and mental states are equal and immediately
antecedent conditions. Of what dharmas are they the equal and
immediately antecedent conditions?
1. This type of condition is called samanantara (equal and
immediately antecedent) because it produces equal (sama) and im-
mediate (anantara) dharmas. The prefix sam is understood in the
sense of equality.
Consequently 419 only minds and their mental states are equal and
immediately antecedent conditions, for there is no equality between a
cause and its result with respect to the other dharmas, for example the
material dharmas. In fact, after a rūpa of the sphere of Kāmadhātu,
there can arise at the same time two rūpas, one of Kāmadhātu, the
other from Rūpadhātu 420, or two rūpas, one from Kāmadhātu, the
other pure; 421 whereas one mind in Kāmadhātu and one mind in
Rūpadhātu can never arise at the same time after a mind in298
Chapter Two
Kāmadhātu. The appearance of the rūpas is confused: now an equal
and immediately antecedent condition does not produce confused
results; hence material dharmas are not equal and immediately
antecedent conditions.
Vasumitra says: A second rupa of accumulation can arise in the
same body, without which the series of a rūpa of accumulation would
be broken; hence rūpa is not an equal and immediately antecedent
condition. 422
The Bhadanta 423 says: A rūpa dharma is immediately followed by
more or by less. Hence it is not an equal and immediately antecedent
condition. Less arises from more: as when a great mass of straw,
burned, becomes ash. More arises from less: as when a small seed
produces the roots of a fig tree, its trunk, its branches, and its leaves.
2. [Objection:] When minds immediately succeed one another, do
they always admit the same number of types of associated mental
states? No. The earlier mind admits of a larger number of types of
mental states, and the following mind, a lesser number; and vice versa.
Minds, good, bad, or neutral, succeed one another; but they do not
admit of the same number of associated mental states (ii.28-30); the
absorptions, which succeed one another, admit of or do not admit of
vitarka and vicāra (viii.7). Hence there is no equality for the mental
states as well as for the material dharmas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 52a21).
That is true: there is a succession from less to more, and vice versa
(second opinion of the Vibhāṣā); but only by the accumulation or the
diminution of the number of types of mental states (Vibhāṣā, TD 27,
p. 50c5). There is never any inequality with respect to a determined
type: more numerous sensations never arise after less numerous
sensations, nor vice versa; this means that a mind accompanied by a
single sensation is never followed by a mind associated with two or
three sensations. The same for ideas (saṁjñā) and the other mental
states.
Thus is it only in relation to its own type that an earlier mental
state is an equal and immediately antecedent condition of a later
mental state? Is sensation then the equal and immediately antecedent
condition of a single sensation?The Indriyas 299
No. In a general way the earlier mental states are equal and
immediately antecedent conditions of the mental states that follow,
and only of the mental states of their type. But there is no succession
from less to more with respect to one type, and vice versa: this justifies
the expression samanantara, “equal and immediate."
3. The Abhidhārmikas who take the name of Sāṁtānasabhāgikas
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 50c5) maintain on the contrary that a dharma of a
certain type is only an equal and immediately antecedent condition of a
dharma of that same type: mind arises from mind, sensation arises
from sensation, etc.
[Objection:] In this hypothesis, when a defiled (kliṣṭa-akuśala or
nivṛtāvyākṛta) dharma arises after an undefiled dharma, this defiled
dharma does not proceed from an equal and immediately antecedent
condition.
It is a previously destroyed defilement that is the equal and
immediately antecedent condition of the defilement that defiles this
second dharma. The previous defilement is considered as immediately
preceeding the later defilement, even though it is separated by an
undefiled dharma, separation by a dharma of a different nature
does not constitute separation, as the leaving-mind of the absorption
of extinction (nirodhasamāpatti, ii43a) has for its equal and immedi-
ately antecedent condition the mind-of-entry-into-absorption which
was previously destroyed: absorption does not constitute a separation.
We think that the theory of the Saṁtānasabhāgikas is inadmissible,
for, in this theory, a pure mind produced for the first time (i.38b)
would not have any equal and immediately antecedent condition.
4. The saṁskāras dissociated from the mind (viprayukta, ii.35), 424
like the material dharmas, are produced disparately: hence they are not
equal and immediately antecedent conditions. In fact after possession
in the sphere of Kāmadhātu, possession relative to the dharmas of the
three spheres of existence and to pure dharmas etc., can be produced at
the same time.
ii. Why deny that the future dharmas are equal and immediately
antecedent conditions?
Future dharmas are disparate: there is not, among them, any early300 Chapter Two
and later (see p. 266).4²5
A. Then how does the Blessed One know that such and such a
future dharma will arise first, and that such and such a dharma will
arise later? He knows the order of the arising of all that arises until the
end of time.
1. First answer. 426 His consciousness results from an inference
(anumāna) drawn from the past and the present. He sees the past: 427
"From such a type of action such a retributive result arises; such a
dharma proceeds from such a dharma," and he sees the present: "Here
is such a type of action: such a retributive result shall arise in the future
from this action; here is such a dharma: such a dharma shall proceed
from this dharma."
However the consciousness of the Blessed One is called pranidhi-
jñāna (vii.37), and is not a consciousness from inference. By means of
inferences drawn from the past and from the present, the Blessed One
immediately sees the dharma that resides, disparately, in the future,
and he produces the consciousness, "This man, having accomplished
such an action, shall certainly receive such a future retribution.” 428
To believe you, if the Blessed One does not consider the past, then
he does not know the future. Hence he is not omniscient.
2. According to other Masters, 429 there is in the series of beings a
certain dharma which is the indication of the results which will arise in
the future, namely a certain samskära disassociated from the mind.
The Blessed One contemplates it,430 and he knows future results
without his having cultivated the Dhyānas and the Abhijñas (vii.42;
cyutyupapadajñāna) for it.
The Sautrāntikas: If this is the case, then the Blessed One would be
an interpreter of signs; 431 he would not be a "seer."
3. Consequently the Blessed One knows immediately and at his will
all things, not be inference, and not by divination. This is the opinion
of the Sautrantikas, justified by the word of the Blessed One (Ekottara,
TD 2, p.640a4; comp. Dīgha, i.31), "The qualities of the Buddhas, the
spheres of the Buddhas, are incomprehensible."
B. If the future does not have any earlier or later division of time,
how can one say, "Only duḥkhe dharmajñānakṣānti arises immediatelyThe Indriyas 301
after the laukika agradharmas, and not any other dharma” (vi.27) and
thus following until "Ksayajñāna arises immediately after vajro-
pamasamadhi (vi.46c)?"
[The Vaibhāṣikas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 51bl) answer:] If the arising
of this dharma is bound to that dharma, then immediately after that,
this arises, as a bud arises after the seed without any equal and
immediately antecedent condition intervening.
iii. Why are the last mind and the last mental states of the Arhat
equal and immediately antecedent conditions (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, 50a22)?
Because no mind or mental states arise after them.
But you have said (i.17) that the manas is the mind that is
disappearing and which serves as the support of the following mind.
Since no mind follows the last mind of an Arhat, this last mind should
not receive either the name of manas, or the name of equal and
immediately antecedent condition; and yet you consider it as being
manas.
The case is not the same. That which constitutes the manas is not
its activity, the fact of supporting the susequent mind; rather, it is the
quality of being a support (aśraya) for this mind; whether his (latter
mind) arises or does not arise is of little importance. The last mind of
an Arhat is "support:" if a subsequent mind, which would be supported
by this support, does not arise, it is through the lack of other causes
necessary to its arising. On the contrary, what constitutes an equal and
immediately antecedent condition is its activity. Once this condition
has grasped or projected a result, nothing in the world can hinder this
result from arising. Hence the last mind of an Arhat is justly called
manas, but not an equal and immediately antecedent condition.
iv. Does a dharma which is cittasamanantara, that is, which has a
certain mind (cittanirantara) for its equal and immediate antecedent
condition, immediately follow this mind? 432
There are four alternatives:
1. The mind and the mental states of leaving of the two
absorptions free from mind (ii.41), and all the moments of these two
absorptions with the exception of the first, have the mind entering
into absorption for their equal and immediately antecedent condition,302 Chapter Two
but they do not immediately follow this mind (ii.64b).
2. The characteristics (lakṣaṇas, ii.45c) 1) of the first moment of
the two absorptions, and 2) of all minds and all mental states of a
conscious state, immediately follow a mind, but do not have any equal
and immediately antecedent condition.
3. The first moment of the two absorptions, and all minds and
mental states of a conscious state, have the mind that they immediately
follow for their equal and immediately antecedent condition.
4. The characteristics 1) of all the moments of the two absorptions
with the exception of the first, and 2) of the mind and the mental
states of leaving these two absorptions, have no equal and immediately
antecedent condition, for they are dharmas disassociated from the
mind (viprayukta, ii.35); and they do not immediately follow a mind.
What is an object as condition?
62c. All dharmas are the objects of consciousness.
All the dharmas, conditioned as well as unconditioned, are "objects
of consciousness" of the mind and its mental states, but not in-
discriminately so. For example, the visual consciousness and the
mental states, sensation, etc., which are associated with it, have all
visible things for their object; the hearing consciousness, sounds; the
smelling consciousness, odors; and the touch consciousness, tangible
things. The mental consciousness and the mental states that are
associated with it have all the dharmas for their objects. (Kärikā 62c is
then understood literally with respect to the manas).
When a dharma is the object of a mind, it is not possible that this
dharma, at any moment, is not the object of this mind. This means
that even if a visible object is not grasped as an object by the visual
consciousness, it is an object, for, whether it is grasped or not grasped
as an object, its nature remains the same, as fuel is combustible, even
when it is not on fire.
We can establish a threefold determination in considering theThe Indriyas 303
problem from the point of view of the mind that grasps a dharma as
its object. The mind is determined 1) with regard to its ayatana: for
example, a visual consciousness is supported only on a visible thing
(rūpa-āyatana); 2) with regard to the dravya or substantial thing: a
certain visual consciousness, the consciousness of blue, of red, etc., is
supported by blue, red, etc. (see i.10); and 3) with regard to a moment
(kṣaṇa): a certain visual consciousness is supported in a certain
moment of blue.
Is the mind determined in the same way with regard to its support
(aśraya), that is, its organ, the organ of sight, etc.?
The response is affirmative. 433 However, in the present, the mind
is bound to its support; but in the past and the future, it is separated
from it.
According to others, it is bound to its support in both the past and
the present. 434
What is a predominating condition?
62d. The cause termed kāraṇa is called adhipati, predominant.
Adhipatipratyayatā or predominating condition is kāraṇahetu, the
"reason for being" cause (ii.50a), for kāraṇahetu is a "predominating
condition" (adhipatipratyaya).
This name is justified from two points of view. The predominating
condition is that which belongs to the greatest number of dharmas,
and which is exercised with respect to the greatest number of dharmas.
1. All the dharmas are "an object as condition" of the mental
consciousness. However the dharmas coexisting with a certain mind
are not the object of this mind, whereas they are kāraṇahetu of it. Thus
the dharmas, without exception, are "predominating conditions" as
kāraṇahetu, not as "an object as condition."
2. Every dharma has all dharmas for its kāraṇahetu, with the
exception of itself.
No dharma of any type is a condition of itself. And a conditioned304 Chapter Two
dharma is not a condition of an unconditioned dharma, and vice versa.
In what state (avasthā), past, present, or future, are the dharmas
found with regard to which the diverse conditions exercise their
activity?
Let us first examine cause as condition, that is, as five causes, with
the exclusion of kāraṇahetu.
63a-b. Two causes exercise their activity with regard to a
perishing dharma. 435
"Perishing" means "of the present." A present dharma is called
"perishing," "in the act of perishing," because, having arisen, it is
turned towards its destruction.
Sahabhūhetu (ii.50b) and samprayuktakahetu (53c) operate with
regard to a present dharma, because they operate with regard to a
dharma that arises at the same time as they do. 436
63b-c. Three, with regard to an arising dharma.
"An arising dharma" means a future dharma, because a future
dharma, not having arisen, is turned towards arising.
The three causes in question are sabhāgahetu (ii.52a), sarvatra-
gahetu (54a), and vipäkahetu (54c).
Concerning the other conditions:
63c-d. Two other conditions, in reverse order.
First in the list of conditions there comes the equal and immedi-
ately antecedent condition: it exercises it activity as do the three causes,
namely with regard to an arising dharma, for the minds and mental
states of a given moment cede their place to the mind and mental
states which are arising.
Next in the list there comes an object as condition: it exercises its
activity as do the two causes, namely with regard to a perishing
dharma: this perishing dharma is mind and mental states, the "subjectsThe Indriyas
of the consciousness” (ālambaka), which, perishing,—that is, of the
present,-grasp a present object.
The activity of predominent influence as a condition only consists
in not creating any obstacle either to a past, present, or future dharma.
The different types of dharmas arise by reason of how many
conditions?
64a. The mind and its mental states arise by reason of four
conditions. 437
1. Causes as conditions: the five causes; 2. equal and immediately
antecedent condition: the earlier mind and mental states, which have
arisen not separated by other minds or mental states; 3. an object as
condition: the five objects of which physical matter is the first, or, in
the case of the mental consciousness, all the dharmas; and 4. a
predominating influence as condition: all the dharmas, except the
mind and its mental states whose arising is under consideration.
64b. The two absorptions, by reason of three.
One must exclude the object as condition, because the absorption of
non-consciousness (ii.42) and the absorption of extinction (ii.43) do
not grasp an object. We have: 1. causes as conditions: two causes,
sahabhūhetu (the lakṣaṇas, arising, etc. ii.45c, of the absorption), and
sabhāgahetu (the good former dharmas, already arisen, belonging to
the stage of absorption, that is, to the Fourth Dhyana or to Bhavāgra,
according to the case); 2. an equal and immediately antecedent
condition, the mind of entry into the absorption and the mental states
that are associated with this mind; the mind of entry is not separated
by any mind of any of the moments of the absorption; and 3. the
predominating influence as condition, as above.
These two absorptions arise from an application, from an inflec-
tion of the mind: they then have the mind as an equal and immediately
antecedent condition. They hinder the arising of the mind: thus they306 Chapter Two
are not equal and immediately antecedent conditions of the mind
leaving the absorption, even though they are immediately contigous to
it (nirantara, see p. 301).
64c. The other dharmas, by reason of two.
The other dharmas, namely the other saṁskāras disassociated
form the mind and the material dharmas, arise by reason of the causes
as conditions and the predominating influence as condition (Vibhāṣā,
TD 27, p. 702b21).
All the dharmas that arise arise by reason of the five causes and the
four conditions that we have just explained. The world does not
proceed from a single cause that is called God, or Purușa, or Pradhāna,
other name. 438
or any
How do you prove this thesis?
If think that the thesis is proven through arguments, you
betray your doctrine that the world arises from a single cause.
you
64d. Not from God or from any other cause, since there is a
succession, etc. 439
That things are produced by a single cause, by God, Mahadeva, or
Vasudeva, is inadmissable for many reasons.
1. If things were produced by a single cause, they would arise all at
the same time: now each of us knows that they arise successively.
[The Theist:] They arise successively by virtue of the desires of
God, who says, "May this arise now! May this perish now! May this
arise and perish later!”
If this were the case, then things do not arise from a single cause,
since the desires (of God) are multiple. Moreover these multiple
desires would have to be simultaneous, since God, the cause of these
desires, is not multiple, and things would all arise at the same time.
a. [The Theist:] The desires of God are not simultaneous, because
God, in order to produce his desires, takes into account other causes.The Indriyas
If this were so, then God is not the single unique cause of all things.
And the causes that God takes into account are produced successively:
they depend then on causes which are themselves dependent on other
causes: an infinite regression.
[The Theist:] It is admitted that the series of causes has no
beginning.
This would admit that samsāra does not have an origin. You then
abandon the doctrine of a single cause and return to the Buddhist
theory of causes (hetus) and conditions (pratyaya).
b. [The Theist:] The desires of God are simultaneous, but things
do not arise at the same time because they arise as God wishes them to
arise, that is, in succession.
This is inadmissible. The desires of God remain what they are. Let
us explain. Suppose that God desires "May this arise now! May that
arise later!" We do not see why the second desire, at first non-
efficacious, will be efficacious later; why, if it is efficacious later, it will
not be so initially.
What advantage does God obtain from this great effort by which
he produces the world?
[The Theist:] God produces the world for his own satisfaction
(prīti).
He is then not God, the Sovereign (īśvara), in what concerns his
own satisfaction, since he cannot realize it without a means (upāya).
And if he is not sovereign with regard to his own satisfaction, how can
he be sovereign with regard to the world? Further, do you say that God
finds satisfaction in seeing the creatures that he has created in the prey
of all the sufferings of existence, including the tortures of the hells?
Homage to this God! Well said, in truth, is the popular stanza, "He is
called Rudra because he burns, because he is excited, ferocious, terrible,
an eater of flesh, blood, and marrow." 440
3. The followers of God, the single cause of the world, deny visible
causes,-causes and conditions, the efficacy of the seed with regard to
the sprout, etc. If, modifying their position, they admit the existence of
these causes, and pretend that these causes serve God as auxiliaries,
this then is no more that a pious affirmation, for we do not maintain308 Chapter Two
any activity of a cause besides the activity of the so-called secondary
causes. Furthermore, God would not be sovereign with regard to
auxiliary causes, since these cooperate in the production of the effect
through their own efficacy. Perhaps, in order to avoid the negation of
causes, which are visible, and in order to avoid the affirmation of
present action by God, which is not visible, the Theist would say that
the work of God is creation: but creation, dependent only on God,
would never have a beginning, like God himself, and this is a
consequence that the Theist rejects.
We would refute the doctrine of Purusa, of Pradhana, etc., as we
have refuted the theist doctrine, mutatis mutandis. Thus, no dharma
arises from a single cause.
Alas, persons are unclear! Like the birds and the animals, truly
worth of pity, they go from existence to existence, accomplishing
diverse actions; they experience the results of these actions 441 and
falsely believe that God is the cause of these results. 442 (We must
explain the Truth in order to put an end to this false conception.)
We have seen (ii.64c) that the material dharmas arise by reason of
two conditions, causes as conditions and predominating influences as
conditions. We must specify and see how the primary elements (bhūtas
or mahābhūtas), and the dharmas of derived matter (upādāyarūpa or
bhautikas), are causes as conditions, either among themselves, or one
from the other.
65a. The primary elements are the cause of the derived
elements in two ways. 443
The four primary elements of earth, etc., are causes of the four
primary elements in the quality of similar causes (sabhāgahetu), and of
mutually coexistant causes (sahabhūhetu).
65b. And of the derived elements, in five ways.
The four primary elements are causes of the derived elements-The Indriyas 309
color, taste, etc.-in five ways, in the quality of janana, niśraya,
pratiṣṭhā, upastambha, and upabrmhaṇahetu. 444
Jananahetu or generating cause, because the derived elements arise
from them, like a child from his parents. 445
Niśrayahetu or tutelage cause, because the bhautikas, once arisen,
submerge their influence, as a monk is under the tutelage of his Ācārya
and his Upādhyāya.
Pratişthahetu or supporting cause, because the derived elements
are supported by them, as a picture is supported by a wall. 446
Upastambhahetu or maintaining cause, because the primary ele-
ments are the cause of the non-interruption of the derived elements.
Upabrmhanahetu or growth cause, because the primary elements
are the cause of the development of the derived elements.
This means that the primary elements (bhūtas) are, with regard to
the derived elements (bhautikas), the cause of arising (janmahetu), the
cause of transformation (vikärahetu), the supporting cause (adhara-
hetu), the cause of duration (sthitihetu), and the cause of development
(vṛddhihetu).
65c. Derived elements are the cause of the derived elements in
three ways.
In the qualtiy of sahabhū, sabhāga and vipäkahetu. We do not
mention kāraṇahetu, for any dharma is a kāraṇahetu of any other
dharma.
1. The actions of the body and voice of the category described in
ii.51a (i.e., the two disciplines), which are derived elements, are
sahabhūhetu.
2. All the derived elements which have arisen, are, with regard to
similar (sabhāga) derived elements, sabhāgahetu.
3. The actions of the body and voice are vipäkahetu: the eye is
produced through retribution of action, etc.
65d. And the cause of the primary elements, in one way.
The actions of the body and voice produce the primary elements as
a retributive result: they are then vipäkahetu.310
Chapter Two
We have seen that antecedent minds and mental states are the
equal and immediately antecent condition of subsequent minds and
mental states. But we have not explained how many types of mind
arise immediately after each type of mind.
In order to define its role, we must first establish a classification of
the mind.
First, we must distinguish twelve categories.
66a. Good, bad, defiled-neutral, undefiled-neutral minds in
Kāmädhātu, 447
Four types of minds belong to Kāmadhātu: good, bad, defiled-
neutral, and undefiled-neutral.
66b. Good defiled-neutral, undefiled-neutral minds in Rūpa-
dhātu and in Ārūpyadhātu.
Three types of minds are in the two higher spheres: all of the
above, excluding the bad mind.
66c. And two pure minds.
The two pure minds are those of the Saikṣa and the Arhat or
Asaikṣa. In all, these constitute twelve minds.
[These twelve minds do not indiscriminately arise one after the
other:]
67a. Nine types of minds can arise after a good mind in
Kämadhātu, 448
1. Immediately after a good mind in Kāmadhātu there can arise
nine minds, namely: (1-4) the four minds in Kāmadhātu; (5-6) two
minds in Rūpadhātu: good, when a ascetic enters into absorption, and
defiled-neutral, when a person who dies in Kāmadhātu with a good
mind passes into the intermediate existence of Rūpadhātu (iii.38); (7)
a mind in Ārūpyadhātu, a defiled-neutral mind, when one dying in
Kāmadhātu is reborn in Ārūpyadhātu; not good, for, since Ārūpya-The Indriyas 311
dhātu is estranged from Kāmadhātu by four estrangements,449 one
cannot pass directly from Kāmadhātu into an absorption of Arūpya-
dhātu; (8-9) the two pure minds, of Saikṣa or of Aśaikṣa, at entry into
the Understanding of the Truths (vi.27).
67b. Such a [good] mind can arise after eight types of minds.
2. A good mind can arise immediately after eight minds, namely:
(1-4) the four minds in Kāmadhātu, (5-6) two minds in Rūpadhātu,
good and defiled-neutral minds, upon leaving an absorption. It
happens in fact that an ascetic, bothered by a defiled (kliṣṭa) absorp-
tion, leaves this absorption: after the defiled (klista-nivṛta) mind,
which is this absorption, he produces a good mind of a lower stage
(viii.14); and (7-8) two pure minds, of Saikṣa or Asaikṣa, upon leaving
the Understanding of the Truths.
67c. A bad mind can arise after ten types of minds.
3. A klişta mind, that is to say, a bad and a defiled-neutral mind can
arise after ten minds—excluding the two pure minds, for a mind of
rebirth into Kāmadhātu is defiled (ii.14, iii.38) and can follow any kind
of mind belonging to the three spheres of existence.
67d. Four types of minds can arise after such a (= bad) mind.
4. Four minds can arise after a kliṣṭa mind, namely the four minds
of Kämadhātu.
67e. The same for a defiled-neutral mind.
5. An undefiled-neutral mind can arise after five minds.
68a. An undefiled-neutral mind can arise after five types of
mind.
Namely the four minds in Kāmadhātu, plus a good mind in
Rūpadhātu: for a mind capable of creating fictive beings (nirmāṇacitta)
in Kāmadhātu, a mind that has for its object the creation of an object
of Kāmadhātu, follows a good mind in Rūpadhātu.312
Chapter Two
68b. Seven types of mind can arise after an undefiled-neutral
mind.
6. After an undefiled-neutral mind there can arise seven minds,
namely: (1-4) the four minds in Kāmadhātu, (5-6) two minds in
Rūpadhātu, good minds, for, after the aforementioned mind of
creation, a good mind reappears in Rūpadhātu, and a defiled-neutral
mind, when a person, dying with this mind, is reborn in Rūpadhātu
the first mind of which is necessarily a defiled-neutral mind (iii.38); (7)
a mind of Ārūpyadhātu, a defiled-neutral mind, when a person, dying
with this mind, is reborn in Arūpyadhātu.
68c. In Rūpadhātu eleven types of minds can arise after a good
mind.
1. Eleven minds, excluding an undefiled-neutral mind in Rūpa-
dhātu, can arise immediately after a good mind in Rūpadhātu.
68d. A good mind can arise after nine types of minds.
2. A good mind can arise after nine minds, excluding the two
defiled minds in Kāmadhātu (bad and defiled-neutral) and an
undefiled-neutral mind in Ārūpyadhātu.
69a. A defiled-neutral mind can arise after eight types of minds.
3. A defiled-neutral mind can arise after eight minds, excluding the
two defiled minds in Kāmadhātu and the two pure minds.
69b. Six types of minds can arise after a defiled-neutral mind.
4. Six minds can arise after a defiled-neutral mind, namely the
three minds in Rūpadhātu, and the good, bad, and defiled-neutral
minds in Kāmadhātu.
69c. An undefiled-neutral mind can arise after three types of
mind.
5. An undefiled-neutral mind can arise after the three minds in
Rūpadhātu.The Indriyas 313
69d. Six types of mind can arise after such a (defiled-neutral)
mind.
6. Six minds can arise after an undefiled-neutral mind, namely:
(1-3) the three minds in Rūpadhātu, (4-5) the two defiled minds in
Kāmadhātu (bad and defiled-neutral), and (6) the defiled mind in
Arupyadhatu (defiled-neutral).
69e. As above, so too in Ārūpyadhātu, for these (undefiled-
neutral minds).
1. An undefiled-neutral mind in ÃĀrūpyadhātu can arise after the
three minds of this sphere.
2. Six minds can arise after an undefiled-neutral mind in Ārūpya-
dhātu, namely: (1-3) the three minds of this sphere, and (4-6) the
defiled minds in Kamadhatu (two) and Rūpadhātu (one).
70a. Nine types of minds can arise after a good mind.
3. Nine minds can arise after a good mind, with the exception of a
good mind in Kāmadhātu and an undefiled-neutral mind in Kāma-
dhātu and Rūpadhātu.
70b. Such a (good mind) can arise after six types of mind.
4. A good mind can arise after six minds, namely (1-3) the three
minds in Ārūpyadhātu, (4) a good mind in Rūpadhātu, and (5-6) the
two pure minds.
70c. Seven types of minds can arise after a defiled-neutral mind.
5. Seven minds can arise after a defiled-neutral mind, namely (1-3)
the three minds in Ārūpyadhātu, (4) a good mind in Rūpadhātu, (5-6)
two defiled minds in Kāmadhātu, and (7) a defiled mind in Rūpadhātu.
70d. And the same for it.
6. A defiled-neutal mind can arise after seven minds, with the
exception of the two defiled minds in Kāmādhatu, a defiled mind in
Rūpadhātu and the two pure minds.314
Chapter Two
70e. A Śaikṣa mind can arise after four types of minds.
A Śaikṣa mind, the mind belonging to the saint who is not an
Arhat, can arise after four minds, namely a Śaikṣa mind and a good
mind in each of the three spheres.
70f. But five types of minds can arise after such (a Śaikṣa
mind).
Five minds can arise after a Śaikṣa mind, namely the four that have
just been named and an Asaikṣa mind.
70g. An Aśaikṣa mind can arise after five types of minds.
An Aśaikṣa mind can arise after five minds, namely after a Śaikṣa
mind, an Asaikṣa mind, and a good mind of each of the three spheres.
71a. Four types of minds can arise after such (an Aśaikṣa
mind).
Four minds can arise after an Asaikṣa mind, namely an Asaikṣa
mind and a good mind of each of three spheres.
The twelve types of mind succeed one another in conformity with
these rules.
And again,
71b. The twelve types of mind make twenty.
How is this?
71c. By dividing the good mind of the three Dhātus into two,
the acquired and the innate minds.
1. A good mind of each of the three spheres is divided into two
categories, 1.) that acquired through effort, 450 and 2.) that acquired by
birth. 451 [We then have six types of good mind corresponding to three
types of the first list.]
72a. By dividing an undefiled-neutral mind in Kāmadhātu into
four: the retributive mind, the mind of attitude, the mind of
application, and a mind that can create fictive beings.The Indriyas 315
An undefiled-neutral mind of Kamadhātu is divided into four
categories: a.) arisen from a retributive cause (vipākaja, ii.57); b.)
relative to attitudes (airyāpathika), walking, standing, sitting, lying
down; c.) relative to the arts (failpasthānika); 452 and c.) relative to
fictive creations: the mind by which a possessor of supernatural power
creates visible things, etc., is called the result of abhijñā (abhijñāphala,
vii.49) (see above p. 270).
72b. By excluding the undefiled-neutral mind of application in
Rūpadhātu.
An undefiled-neutral mind in Rūpadhātu is divided into only three
categories, for failpasthānika does not exist in this sphere.
[There is no reason to divide the undefiled-neutral mind of
Arūpyadhātu, for it is exclusively arisen from a retributive cause.]
We then have seven types of undefiled-neutral minds correspond-
ing to the two undefiled-neutral minds of the first list. By taking into
account the good minds, we obtain a total of twenty.
Three undefiled-neutral minds, the airyāpathika mind and follow-
ing, have visible things, odors, taste, and tangible things for their
object.453 The failpasthānika mind, furthermore, has sound for its
object. 454
These three undefiled-neutral minds are solely mental conscious-
nesses. However the five sense consciousnesses preceed and prepare
the airyāpathika and sailpasthānika minds. 455
According to another opinion, 456 there is a mental consciousness
produced by the airyāpathika mind,457 which has the twelves āyatanas,
from the organ of sight to the dharmayatana, for its object.
2. Twenty minds arise one after another, in conformity with the
following rules:
i. Kāmadhātu: eight types of mind of the sphere of Kāmadhātu,
namely two good minds, two kliṣṭa (bad, defiled-neutral) minds, and
four undefiled-neutral minds.
1. Good Acquired through Effort.
Followed by ten: (1-7) seven minds of the same sphere, with the
exception of abhijñāphala (nirmāṇacitta); (8) a mind of Rūpadhātu316 Chapter Two
acquired through effort; and (9-10) a Śaikṣa mind and an Asaikṣa
mind.
It follows seven: (1-4) four minds of the same sphere, the two
good minds and the two klista minds; (5-6) a mind acquired through
effort and an undefiled mind of Rūpadhātu; (7-8) a Śaikṣa mind and an
Asaikṣa mind.
2. Good Acquired through Birth.
Followed by ten: (1-7) seven minds of the same sphere, with the
exception of abhijñāphala; (8-9) undefiled-neutral minds of Rūpa-
dhātu and Arūpyadhātu.
It follows eleven: (1-7) seven minds of the same sphere, with the
exception of abhijñāphala; (8-9) a mind acquired through effort and an
undefiled-neutral mind of Rūpadhātu; (10-11) a Śaikṣa mind and an
Asaikṣa mind.
3-4. Bad and defiled-neutral.
Followed by seven minds of the same sphere, with the exception of
abhijñāphala.
They follow fourteen: ((1-7) seven minds of the same sphere, with
the exception of abhijñāphala; (8-11) four minds of Rūpadhātu, with
the exception of a mind acquired through effort and abhijñāphala;
(12-14) three minds of Arūpyadhātu, with the exception of a mind
acquired through effort.
5-6. Vipākaja and airyāpathika.
Followed by eight: (1-6) six minds of the same sphere, with the
exeption of a mind acquired through effort and abhijñāphala; (7-8) an
undefiled-neutral mind of Rüpadhātu and of Arūpyadhātu.
They follow seven minds of the same sphere follow, with the
exception of abhijñāphala.
7. Sailpasthānika.
Followed by six minds of the same sphere, with the exception of a
mind acquired through effort and abhijñāphala.
They follow seven minds of the same sphere, with the exception of
abhijñaphala.
8. Abhijñāphala.
Followed by two minds, abhijñāphala of the same sphere and amind acquired through effort in Rūpadhātu.
It follows two: the same.
The Indriyas 317
ii. Rūpadhātu: six types of mind of the sphere of Rūpadhātu,
namely two good minds, one kliṣṭa (defiled-neutral) mind, and three
undefiled-neutral minds.
1. Good Acquired through Effort.
Followed by twelve: (1-6) six of the same sphere, (7-9) three of
Kāmadhātu: good acquired through effort, good acquired through
birth; and abhijñāphala; 10) a mind of Arūpyadhātu acquired through
effort; and (11-12) a Śaikṣa mind and an Aśaikṣa mind.
If follows ten: (1-4) four of the same sphere, excepting airyāpa-
thika and vipākaja, (5-6) two of Kāmadhātu, acquired through effort
and abhijñāphala; (7-8) two of Arūpyadhātu, acquired through effort
and defiled-neutral; and (9-10) a Śaikṣa mind and an Aśaikṣa mind.
2. Good Acquired through Birth.
Followed by eight: (1-5) five of the same sphere, except abhi-
jñāphala; (6-7) two of Kāmadhātu, bad and defiled-neutral; 458 and (8)
a defiled-neutral mind of Arūpyadhātu.
It follows five of the same sphere, except abhijñāphala.
3. Defiled-neutral minds.
Followed by nine minds: (1-5) five minds of the same sphere, with
the exception of an abhijñāphala mind; (6-9) four minds of Kāma-
dhātu, two good minds and two kliṣṭa minds.
They follow eleven minds: (1-5) five minds of the same sphere,
with the exception of an abhijñāphala mind; (6-8) three minds of
Kāmadhātu, an mind acquired through birth, an airyāpathika mind,
and a vipākaja mind; (9-11) three minds of Arūpyadhātu, with the
exception of a mind acquired though effort.
4-5. Vipākaja and airyāpathika minds.
Followed by seven minds: (1-4) four minds of the same sphere,
with the exception of a mind acquired through effort and an
abhijñāphala mind; (5-6) two minds of Kāmadhātu, a bad mind and a318
Chapter Two
defiled-neutral mind; (7) one mind of Arūpyadhātu, a defiled-neutral
mind.
They follow five minds of the same sphere, with the exception of
an abhijñāphala mind.
6. Abhijñāphala.
Followed by two minds of the same sphere, a mind acquired
through effort and an abhijñāphala mind.
It follows two minds: the same.
iii. Ārūpyadhātu: four types of mind of the sphere of Ārüpyadhātu,
namely two good minds, a defiled-neutral mind and a vipākaja mind.
1. Good Acquired through Effort.
Followed by seven mind: (1-4) four minds of the same sphere; (5)
a mind of Rūpadhātu acquired through effort; and (6-7) a Śaikṣa mind
and an Aśaikṣa mind.
2. Good Acquired through Birth.
Followed by seven minds: (1-4) four minds of the same sphere; (5)
a defiled-neutral mind of Rūpadhātu; (6-7) a bad mind and a defiled-
neutral mind of Kamadhātu.
It follows four minds of the same sphere.
3. Defiled-neutral.
Followed by eight minds: (1-4) four minds of the same sphere;
(5-6) a mind acquired through effort and a defiled-neutral mind of
Rūpadhātu; (7-8) a bad mind and a defiled-neutral mind of
Kāmadhātu.
It follows ten minds: (1-4) four minds of the same sphere; (5-10) a
mind acquired through birth, an airyāpathika mind, and an vipākaja
mind of Rūpadhātu and Kāmadhātu.
4. Vipākaja.
Followed by six minds: (1-3) three minds of the same sphere, with
the exception of a mind acquired through effort; (4) a defiled-neutral
mind of Rūpadhātu; (5-6) a bad mind and a defiled-neutral mind of
Kāmadhātu. Four minds follow, of this same sphere.v. The two pure minds:
1. Śaikṣa.
The Indriyas
Followed by six minds: (1-3) a mind acquired through effort of the
three spheres; (4) an mind acquired through effort of Kāmadhātu; and
(5-6) a Šaikṣa mind and an Aśaikṣa mind.
It follows four minds: (1-3) a mind acquired through effort of the
three spheres; (4) a Śaikṣa mind.
2. Asaiksa.
Followed by five minds: the six minds which follow Śaikṣa with
the exception of the Śaikṣa mind.
It follows five minds: (1-3) a mind acquired through effort of the
three spheres, (4-5) a Śaikṣa mind and an Aśaikṣa mind.
3. Remarks.
a. Vipākaja, airyapathika and failpasthānika minds arise immedi-
ately after a mind in Kāmadhātu acquired through effort. For what
reason is this not reciprocally true?
A vipākaja mind is not favorable to a mind acquired through effort,
because it is weak, and because it develops spontaneously.
Airyapathika and failpasthānika minds are not favorable to a mind
acquired through effort because their reason for being is the creation of
an attitude or a created thing.
Contrarily, the nișkramaṇacitta or the mind of leaving, that is,
any mind, a vipākaja mind, etc., by which a Yogin leaves the series of
minds acquired through effort, such as reading, philosophical reflec-
tion, etc.-develops spontaneously. The mind of leaving can then
immediately follow a mind acquired through effort.
b. Objection: If a mind acquired through effort does not arise
immediately after the vipākaja, etc., because these are not favorable to
it, still less will it arise after a defiled (kliṣṭa) mind which is contrary to
it.320 Chapter Two
A defiled mind is contrary to a mind acquired through effort. Yet,
when an ascetic is exhausted from the activity of the defilements, a
mind acquired through effort arises from the fact that the ascetic lays
hold of a perfect consciousness (parijñāna) of this activity.
c. The innate good mind of Kāmadhātu is sharp; hence it can arise
after the two pure minds and also after a mind in Rūpadhātu acquired
through effort, but, as it develops spontaneously, it is not followed by
these same minds.
An innate good mind of Kāmadhātu, being sharp, can arise after a
defiled mind of Rūpadhātu; but an innate good mind of Rūpadhātu,
not being sharp, cannot arise after a defiled mind of Arūpyadhātu.
[4. The minds arise immediately one after another, and they arise
by reason of an act of attention. We must then study the act of
attention.]
i. We can distinguish three acts of attention:
1. Svalakṣaṇamanaskāra, an act of attention to specific character-
istics, for example the judgements “Rūpa has rūpaṇa for its charac-
teristic . . . vijñāna has prativijñapti for its characteristic" (i.13, 16).
2. Sāmānyalakṣaṇmanaskāra, an act of attention to common or
general characteristics, to the sixteen aspects of the Truths, imperma-
nence, etc., and "The conditioned dharmas are impermanent" (see
vii.10).
3. Adhimuktimanaskāra: this act of attention is not, like the first
two, directed to that which exists; rather, it proceeds from adhimukti,
that is, from constructive imagination (adhimukṭyā . . . manaskāraḥ,
see p. 190); it presides over the contemplations of aśubhā (vi.9),459 the
apramāṇas (viii.29), the vimokşas (viii.32) the abhibhvayatanas
(viii.34) the kṛtsnāyatanas (viii.35), etc.
[c. The innate good mind of Kāmadhātu is sharp; hence it can arise
after the two pure minds and also after a mind of Rūpadhātu acquired
through effort, but, as it develops spontaneously, it is not followed by
these same minds.
An innate good mind of Kāmadhātu, being sharp, can arise after a
defiled mind of Rūpadhātu; but an innate good mind of Rūpadhātu,
not being sharp, cannot arise after a defiled mind of Ārūpyadhātu.]The Indriyas
[According to the first Master quoted by the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
53a19) one can realize the Path after these three acts of attention, and,
inversely, one can produce these three acts of attention immediately
after the Path. This opinion is supported by the text, “He produces the
part of Bodhi called memory in company with (that is, after) the
contemplation of repulsive things (aśubhā)." 460
[According to the third Master quoted in the Vibhāṣā) it is solely
after an act of attention to general characteristics that one can realize
the Path; after the Path, one can produce the three acts of attention. As
for the text quoted by the first Master, it should be understood in the
sense that, after having subdued his mind by means of the contempla-
tion of repulsive things, an ascetic is capable of producing an act of
attention to general characteristics, after which he realizes the Path.
The text refers to this indirect action of the contemplation of repulsive
things and so says, “aśubhāsahagatam . . .”
[According to the fourth Master of the Vibhāṣā,) it is only after an
act of attention to general characteristics that an ascetic can realize the
Path; furthermore, after the Path, he can only produce acts of attention
to general characteristics.
The author refutes the third Master: Certainly, we indeed see that
an ascetic who has entered into samyaktvaniyāma, onto the Path (see
iv.27) by relying on one of the three lower stages (i.e., anāgamya, First
Dhyāna, dhyānāntara), can produce, upon coming out of the Path, an
act of attention to general characteristics in Kāmadhātu and can be
established in hearing or in reflection, because the stages in question
are near; but, when an ascetic has entered samyaktvaniyāma by relying
on the Second, Third, or Fourth Dhyāna, to which stage could the act
of attention to general characteristics belong that he produces upon
coming out of the Path?
He will produce an act of attention to general characteristics in
Kāmadhātu, because Kāmadhātu is too estranged from the higher
Dhyānas. He will not produce an act of attention to general character-
istics of the sphere of one of the three higher Dhyānas, because he has
not previously obtained conscious acts of attention, except in the course
of the practice of the nirvedhabhägiyas (vi.17: contemplations pre-322 Chapter Two
liminary to entry onto the Path): now an Aryan cannot again realize
the nirvedhabhāgiyas, for we cannot admit that he would for a second
time realize the preparatory path, since he already possesses its result.
But, we would say, there exists other acts of attention to general
characteristics (sāmānyamanaskāras) which have been cultivated at the
same time as the nirvedhabhāgīyas (as they refer to the Truths, but
which differ by not refering to all their sixteen aspects): for example,
seeing that "all saṁskāras are impermanent,"” “all dharmas are
impersonal," "Nirvāṇa is tranquil" (a general or sāmānya judgement,
since it refers to any Nirvāṇa). It is this other type of sāmānyamana-
skāra that an ascetic brings forth upon leaving the Path.
The Vaibhāṣikas do not accept this opinion, because it is illogical.
[In fact, the cultivation of the manaskāras of this type is bound to the
nirvedhabhāgiyas]. (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 53b3).
(The correct doctrine is that the Path can be followed by the three
categories of the act of attention.) When one obtains the result of
Arhat based on Anāgāmya (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 53b25), the mind
leaving the absorption is either of this stage (Anāgāmya) or of the
sphere of Kamadhātu. When one obtains the same result based on
Akiñcanya, the mind of leaving is either of this same stage
(Ākiñcanya), or of naivasamjnanāsaṁjñāyatana (Bhavägra). When
one obtains the same result by relying on any other stage, the mind of
leaving is solely of this other stage.
ii. There are four types of acts of attention: 1.) an innate or natural
act of attention, upapatipratilambhika, 2.) attention produced from the
teaching, śrutamaya, 3.) from reflection, cintamaya, and from
meditation, bhāvanāmaya. Three are possible in Kāmadhātu, the first,
the second, and the third, for meditation is not of Kāmadhātu. Three
are possible in Rūpadhātu, the first, the second, and the fourth, for, in
this sphere, as soon as one meditates or reflects (cintă), one enters into
absorption. Two are possible in Ārūpyadhātu, the first and the fourth.
There are then eight acts of attention, three, three and two (Vibhāṣā,
TD 27, p. 53b14).
The Path is never produced after an act of innate attention, to
whichever sphere it may belong, for the Path requires effort. The PathThe Indriyas
is hence produced after five acts of attention, two of Kāmadhātu, two
of Rūpadhātu, and one of Ārūpyadhātu. But, after the Path, an act of
innate attention of Kāmadhātu can arise, because it is sharp.
How many minds are acquired when one manifests each of the
twelve types of minds?
73a-b. With the defiled mind of each of the three spheres, there
is obtaining of six, of six, and of two minds respectively.
"Obtaining" means taking possession of what one did not previ-
ously possess.
i. Obtaining the six minds with a defiled mind of Kāmadhātu.
a. One obtains a good mind of Kāmadhātu (1) when one again
takes up the roots of good with a mind of doubt, which is defiled
(iv.80c); or (2) when one returns to Kāmadhātu by falling from the
higher spheres. The mind of conception is necessarily defiled (iii.38);
with this mind one takes possession of a good mind of Kāmadhātu, for
one did not previously possess it. 461
b-c. One obtains a bad mind and defiled-neutral mind of Kāma-
dhātu (1) when one returns to Kāmadhātu by falling from the higher
spheres: for then one takes possession of whichever of these two
minds manifests itself; or (2) when one falls from the detachment of
Kāmadhātu.
d. One obtains a defiled-neutral mind of Rūpadhātu when one falls
from Ārūpyadhātu into Kāmadhātu. One in fact takes possession of a
defiled-neutral mind of Rūpadhātu with a defiled mind of conception
in Kāmadhātu.
e-f. One obtains a defiled-neutral mind of Arūpyadhātu and a
Śaikṣa mind when one falls from the quality of an Arhat through the
mind of Kamadhātu.
ii. Obtaining the six minds with a defiled mind of Rūpadhātu.
One obtains one undefiled-neutral mind of Kāmadhātu (the mind
capable of creating fictive beings, nirmāṇacitata) and the three minds324 Chapter Two
of Rūpadhātu when one falls from Ārūpyadhātu into Rūpadhātu.
One obtains a defiled-neutral mind of Ārūpyadhātu and a Saikṣa
mind when one falls from the quality of an Arhat through a mind of
Rūpadhātu.
iii. One obtains a defiled-neutral mind of Ārūpyadhātu and a Śaikṣa
mind with the defiled mind of Arūpyadhātu when one falls from the
quality of Arhat through a mind of Arūpyadhātu.
73b-c. There is the obtaining of three with a good mind of
Rūpadhātu.
One obtains three minds with a good mind of Rūpadhātu: this
mind itself, and the undefiled-neutral minds of Kāmadhātu and
Rūpadhātu, that is, the minds capable of creating fictive beings relative
to these two spheres.
73c-d. There is an obtaining of four with a Śaikṣa mind.
When one realizes the first Śaikṣa mind, namely duḥkhe dharma-
jñānakṣānti (vi.25d), one obtains four minds: (1) the Śaikṣa mind itself,
(2-3) two undefiled-neutral minds, one of Kāmadhātu and one of
Rūpadhātu (the mind capable of creating fictive beings), and (4) a
good mind of Arūpyadhātu: there is, by virtue of the Path, entry into
the Path (niyāmāvakrānti, vi.26a) and detachment from Kāmadhātu
and Ārūpyadhātu.
73d. One obtains these same minds with the other minds.
One obtains the minds not specified above only when they
manifest themselves.
According to another opinion, without making any distinction
among the spheres, it is said that "The wise say that, with a defiled
mind, one obtains nine minds; with a good mind one obtains six; and
with a neutral mind one obtains a neutral mind." 462
Concerning the good mind, one should correct this passage so that
it reads "one obtains seven." When a person again takes up the roots
of good by means of Right View (samyagdṛṣṭi, iv.80), he obtains a
good mind of Kamadhātu; when he detaches himself from Kāma-The Indriyas 325
dhātu, he obtains the minds capable of creating fictive beings of
Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu, which are two undefiled-neutral minds;
when he takes up the absorptions of Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu, he
obtains the good minds of these two spheres; upon entry onto the
Path, he obtains a Śaikṣa mind; upon his entry into the result of
Arhatship, he obtains an Asaikṣa mind.
For the two other minds, the reckoning of the minds obtained is
established according to the explanation that we have given. Here is a
stanza which serves as a memory-aide:
"At conception, in absorption, in detachment, in falling, and in
the taking up again of the roots of good, one obtains minds that
one did not possess."326 Chapter Two
The author wishes to explain the diverse topics of mind that are
produced in Kämadhātu, Rūpadhātu, and Arūpyadhātu, the realms of
desire, physical matter, and no physical matter (ii.66-73).
What are these three realms?
la-c. Kāmadhātu consists of hell, the Pretas, animals, humans,
and six gods. ¹
Kāmadhātu consists of four complete realms of rebirth (gati, iii.4)
and one part of the heavenly realm of rebirth, namely the six groups of
gods, the Cāturmahārājikas, the Trāyastrimśas, the Yamas, the Tuşitas,
the Nirmāṇaratis, and the Paranirmitavaśavartins; plus the physical
world (bhajanaloka, iii.45) that contains these beings.
How many places (sthāna) are there in Kāmadhātu?
Ic-d. Twenty, through the division of the hells and the differences
in the continents.
The twenty places are eight hells (iii.58): Saṁjīva, Kālasūtra,
Saṁghāta, Raurava, Mahāraurava, Tapana, Pratāpana, and Avici; four
continents (iii.53): Jambudvīpa, Pūrvavideha, Avaragodānīya, and
Uttarakuru; and six heavenly abodes as above (iii.64). And the Pretas
and animals. Hence, from Avici hell up to the heaven of the
Paranirmitavaśavartins, there are twenty places which constitute, with
the physical world which rests on the circle of wind (iii.45), Kāmadhātu.
2a-b. Above is Rūpadhātu, of seventeen places
The seventeen places of Rūpadhātu are above Kāmadhātu,2b-d. made up of dhyānas which are each of three stages. But the
fourth is of eight stages. ²
Each of the dhyānas contains three stages or spheres, with the
exception of the fourth.
The First Dhyāna is made up of the Brahmakāyikas, the Brahma-
purohitas, and the Mahābrahmanus.
The Second Dhyana is made up of the Parīttābhas, the Apramā-
nābhas, and the Abhāsvaras. ³
The Third Dhyana is made up of the Parittaśubhas, the Apramā-
naśubhas, and the Subhakṛtsnas.
The Fourth Dhyāna is made up of the Anabhrakas, the Puṇya-
prasavas, the Bṛhatphalas, [and the five Śuddhāvāsikas:] Avṛhas,
Atapas, Sudṛśas, Sudarśanas, Akanisthas. These seventeen places
constitute Rūpadhātu. 4
But the Kāśmirians say that Rūpadhātu is made up of only sixteen
places. In the heaven of the Brahmapurohitas there rises, they say, a
lofty dwelling which is named the Heaven of Brahmã,6 inhabited by a
single ruler¹-such as a terrace or a high place8-but which does not
constitute a stage (bhūmi).
3a. Ārūpyadhātu is not a place.⁹
In fact non-material dharmas do not occupy a place: likewise the
material dharmas when they are past or future, avijñāpti and the
nonmaterial dharmas, do not occupy a location. But
3b. It is fourfold through its mode of existence.
Ākāśānantyāyatana, Vijñānāntyāyatana, Ākiṁcanyāyatana, and
Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana (or Bhavägra) constitute Ārūpyadhātu
which is thus of four types. "Existence" means the appearance of the
skandhas in a new existence by reason of action: it is not through one
and the same action that one obtains these different ayatanas that are
superior to one another. But this superiority does not imply difference of
stage. Where a person exists who possesses an absorption [which
produces an existence in Ārūpyadhātu], here the existence in question
begins; here too, at the end of this existence, the intermeditate being
who is called to take up a new existence will be formed [in Kāmadhātuor Rūpadhātu] (See below, note 36).
Ine w OTIA
The mental series, the mind and mental states (citta and caitta, ii.23)
of material beings is supported on physical matter, rūpa, and in this way
can exist. What is the support of the mental series of beings in
Ārūpyadhātu?
3c-d. Here the mental series exists supported by the nikāya and
the vital organ.
According to the Ābhidhārmikas, the mental series of beings in
Ārūpyadhätu has for its support two dharmas disassociated from the
mind, nikāyasabhāgatā, genre or genus, and jīvitendriya, the vital organ
(ii.45).
11 The mental series of material beings is not supported by these two
dharmas, because they lack force; but the mental series of nonmaterial
beings possess the necessary force, because they proceed from an
absorption from whence the idea of physical matter has been
eliminated.
But, one would say, genre and the vital organ of material beings is
supported by physical matter: but what is the support of genre and the
vital organ for nonmaterial beings?
These two support one another. Among material beings, genre and
the vital organ do not have the force necessary to support one another,
but they have this force among nonmaterial beings, because they
proceed from a certain absorption.
According to the Sautrāntikas, the mental series, mind and mental
states, does not have, among nonmaterial beings, any support which is
external to it. This series is strong and can serve as a support.
Or rather, we say that the mind is supported by the mental states,
and the mental states by the mind, in the way that you say that genre and
the vital organ support one another.
The series of minds of a new existence is "projected" by a certain
cause (action-defilement, karma-kleśa); if this cause is not free from
attachment to physical matter, the mind will be reborn with matter, and
its series will be supported by matter; if this cause is free from200
CHAPIET LITEE
attachment to physical matter-as in the case for absorption which is
the cause which projects an existence in Ārūpyadhātu—the mind will be
reborn and will exist without relation to physical matter.
What is the meaning of these terms, Kāmadhātu, etc., 12
Dhātu is that which carries (dadhāti) 13 a svalaksana (namely the
kāmas, etc.); or dhatu signifies gotra as has been explained above (i.20a,
English trans. p. 78).
1. Kāmadhātu can be understood as "a dhātu associated with kāmas,"
by ommitting the middle word "assocated with" (samprayukta), as we
say "diamond ring” (vajravālaka) for "a ring decorated with diamonds"
(vajrena samprayukto'nguliyakaḥ), or "pepper potion" (maricapānaka)
for "a potion mixed with pepper.
In the same way Rūpadhātu signifies "a dhatu associated with
matter."
We have the adjective arūpa or "free from matter," from whence the
abstract noun ārūpya, absence of matter. 14
Or rather rūpa is that which is susceptible to being struck (rūpaņa),
to resistance (i.24, English trans. p.85); arūpa, by absence of rupa;
ārūpya, the fact of being such. Arūpyadhātu is that which is associated
with ārūpya.
2. Or rather these terms are compounds the first term of which is a
genitive: Kāmadhātu, the receptacle of dhatu of the kāmas; Rūpadhātu,
the receptacle of matter; Ārūpyadhātu, the receptacle of ārūpya.
What is kāma?
Concupiscence, the desire to eat by mouthfuls (kavadīkārāhāra,
iii.39) and sexual desire. [Kāma does not signify the object of desire,
which is called more exactly kamaguna, but "that which desires,"
kāmyata aneneti kamah]. We will see this by the following stanzas.
Śāriputra said to an Ajīvika, "The fine things of this world are not
kāmas; kāma is the desire that the imagination nourishes among
humans. The objects of the universe are of little importance: the sage
overcomes all desire with regard to them." The Ajivika answered, "If the
fine things of this world are not kāmas, if kāma is the desire that is
nourished by the imagination, the same Bhikṣu would be a 'taster of the
kāmas' when he produces bad imaginations." Säriputra answered, "If theIne w OTIA
Joy
fine things of this world are kämas, if kāma is not desire which the
imagination nourishes, then the Master himself would be a taster of the
kāmas when he sees objects." 15
Should one consider as “intergral" to one Dhātu [= as being of the
domain of a Dhātu], all the dharmas that are produced in this Dhātu? 16
No, but merely the dharma with regard to which there develops, and
in which there resides craving (rāga) proper to this Dhatu, craving of
Kāmadhātu, Rūpadhātu, and ĀĀrūpyadhātu.
What is the craving proper to each Dhātu?
The craving that develops, that resides in the dharmas of this Dhātu.
This is the example of the tether: "To whom does this tether
belong?" "To the owner of this horse." "To whom does this horse
belong?" "To the owner of this tether." This answer does not teach us
anything.
We have enumerated the places that constitute Kāmadhātu.
"Craving proper to Kāmadhātu" is the craving of the being who is not
detached from this place, who has not rejected craving with regard to the
dharmas of this place. The same for the other two Dhātus.
Or rather, "craving proper to Kāmadhātu” is the craving of a being
who is not absorbed (samāhita); “craving proper to Rūpadhātu, to
Ārūpyadhātu" is craving relative to the absorption of dhyana, to the
absorptions of ārūpya.
The mind ¹7 by which one creates magical objects in the sphere of
Kāmadhātu is the result of a dhyāna.
But this mind is produced only among beings detached from
Kāmadhātu.
How can one say that this mind is of the sphere of Kamadhātu? In
fact this mind is not produced among a being not detached from
Kāmadhātu, and, when this mind is produced among a being detached
from Kāmadhātu, it cannnot be for him the object of a craving of the
order of Kāmadhātu. This mind is hence of the sphere of Kamadhātu370 Chapter Inree
without there being, with regard to it, any craving of the order of
Kāmadhātu: this is a difficulty that contradicts your definition of the
Dhātus.
This mind is of the sphere of Kämadhātu because a craving of the
order of Kāmadhātu is produced with regard to it in a person who
intends to speak of this mind as belonging to another, or who
remembers having possessed it previously, or who sees magic creations.
Or rather because this mind creates some odors or tastes: now a mind of
the sphere of Rūpadhātu cannot create odors or tastes because beings in
Rūpadhātu are detached from both of these.
Is this triple Dhātu unique?
The triple Dhātus are infinite, like space; 18 although there has not
been any production of new beings, and although innumerable Buddhas
convert innumerable beings and cause them to obtain Nirvāṇa, the
beings of innumerable Dhātus are never exhausted. 19
How are the three Dhātus arranged?
Horizontally, 20 as the Sūtra proves, 21 "as when the cloud İşādhāra 22
rains, there is no interval or discontinuity of the drops of water that fall
from space, so too towards the East there is no interval or discontinuity
of universes (lokadhātus) in a state of creation and of dissolution; as
towards the East, the same towards the South, the West and the North."
The Sūtra does not add "toward the zenith and the nadir.”
According to another opinion, 23 the universe superimposes itself
toward the zenith and the nadir, for, according to other Sūtras, 24 the
universes are arranged towards the ten cardinal points. There is then a
Kāmadhātu above Akaniṣṭha and an Akaniṣṭha below Kāmadhātu. 25
Whoever is detached from one Kāmadhātu is detached from the
Kāmadhātus of all the universes; the same for the other two Dhātus.The World 371
Whoever produces the abhijñā or higher knowledge of magical
power in the First Dhyana, creates a magical being that can only be the
Brahmaloka of the universe wherein the creator of this magical being is
born; not in the other universes (vii.50b).
4a-b. In these Dhātus, there are five realms of rebirth that have
been designated by their names.26
The five gatis or realms of rebirth are hellish beings, animals, Pretas,
humans, and gods. In Kāmadhātu there are the first four realms of
rebirth and a part of the heavenly realm of rebirth; the other parts of the
heavenly realm of rebirth exist in the other two Dhātus.
The stanza speaks of "five realms of rebirth" in the Dhātus. Is there
then a part of the Dhātus that are not included in the realms of rebirth?
Yes. The good, the bad, the physical world, and intermediate
existence are included in the Dhātus. Whereas, as for the five destinies
4b-d. They are undefiled-neutral, they are the world of beings,
and they do not include intermediate existence. 27
The realms of rebirth are undefiled-neutral, being the result of
retribution (ii.57).28 In the contrary hypothesis, the five realms of
rebirth would be confounded: [in fact, a person can do actions which are
repaid through a hellish rebirth, or by a heavenly rebirth: but if action
were to be intergal to the realms of rebirth, the humam realm of rebirth
would be at one and the same time hellish and heavenly. A being born in
Kāmadhātu is filled with the defilements of this sphere (bhūmi) and can
be filled with the defilements of higher spheres.]
They are sattvakhya (i.10b), only pertaining to living beings: the
physical world is not included within the realms of rebirth.
Intermediate existence is not a realm of rebirth (see below
line 12; iii.10).
The nature of the realms of rebirth is illustrated by many texts: 1.
The Prajñāpti says, "The four wombs (yoni, iii.8c) exist in the five
realms of rebirth; but do the five realms of rebirth contain all four
wombs? Intermediate existence, which is an apparitional womb, is not
p. 373,372 Chapter Three
included within the five realms of rebirth."
2. The Dharmaskandha (TD 26, p. 498b23-c11) says, "What is the
eye-element (cakṣurdhātu)? Subtle matter derived from the primary
elements which, in hell, among animals, among the Pretas, among the
gods, among humans, among beings born in an absorption, and among
intermediate beings, is eye, eye-organ, eye-source of knowledge,
eye-element."
3. The Sūtra itself says that intermediate existence is not included
among the realms of rebirth: "There are seven bhavas or existences:
existence in hell, animal, Preta, heavenly, human, plus karmabhava and
intermediate existence (antarābhava).” This Sūtra²9 indicates the five
realms of rebirth (hellish, etc., existences) with their cause, namely
action or karmabhava (iii.24a), and their access, namely intermediate
existence through which a being arrives at a reams of rebirth. At the
same time this Sūtra shows that the realms of rebirth are undefiled-
neutral, since it distinguishes the realms of rebirth (hellish, etc.,
existences), from the causes of these realms of rebirth, namely action
which is non-neutral (=good, bad).
4. This last point is again proved by a Sūtra which the Kāśmīrians 30
read: “Śāriputra said, 'Venerable One, when the hellish cankers
(asravas) become active, one does and one accumulates actions which
should be renumerated by hell. These action of the body, voice, and
mind, tortorous, corrupted, 'tainted' (iv.59) action have for retribution
rūpa, vedanā, saṁjñā, saṁskāras and vijñāna in hell. When this
retribution is realized, there is what is called hell. Venerable One, outside
of these five dharmas, one cannot maintain the existence of any being in
hell." [This says that a being in hell does not exist outside of these five
dharmas which are retribution, thus undefiled-neutral).
But how can this thesis accord with the declaration of the
Prakaraṇagrantha (according to Saeki, this is a summary of TD 26, p.
702a8-711b5): "All the latent defilements (anuśayas) reside in and
develop in realms of rebirth?" 31
The answer is that this declaration refers to the initial mind
(samdhicitta) of the realms of rebirth, 3² which can be of five types,
abandoned through Seeing the Four Noble Truths or through Medita-
tion: hence all the latent defilements can reside there. 33 As one says
'village' for 'the confines of the village,' the Prakarana can express itselfas it does.
The World 373
According to another opinion, the realms of rebirth are both good
and defiled. In fact, say the followers of this opinion, the argument
quoted from the Sutra of the Seven Existences (note 29) does not hold: it
is maintained that action is separate from the five realms of rebirth, but
this does not prove that it is excluded from them. Among the five
corruptions (kaşaya) the corruption of defilements (kleśakaṣāya) and
the corruption of views (dṛṣṭikaṣāya, iii.95a) are quoted separately: shall
one say that views are not a defilement? Action (karmabhava) is also
included within the realms of rebirth. 34 It is quoted separately because it
is the cause of the realms of rebirth.
[The Sarvāstivādins:] Does your reasoning apply to the inter-
mediate existence which would then be a realm of rebirth? 35
No. The word gati or realm of rebirth signifies "the place where one
goes." Now the intermediate existence begins in the place where death
has taken place.
[The Sarvāstivādins:] This is also the case for the existences of
Ārūpyadhātu which then are not included among the realms of
rebirth. 36
We say then that intermediate existence is so called because it is
intermediate between two realms of rebirth, but it is itself not a realm of
rebirth. If it were a realm of rebirth it would not be intermediate, and so
it would not be called an intermediate existence.
[The Sarvāstivādins:] Admitting that you have refuted the ar-
gument taken from the Sutra of the Seven Existences, what do you make
of the declaration of Sariputra (above, p. 372, line 20)?
Śāriputra says that there is a being in hell when the retribution of
hellish actions is realized; it does not say that the realm of rebirth is part
retribution, part non-retribution. The text says that there does not exist
any being in hell outside of these dharmas, rūpa, etc.: its intention is to
negate the reality of any person passing from one realm of rebirth into
another, not to affirm that the skandhas (rūpa, etc.) of the beings in hell
are solely retribution.
***374 Chapter Three
For the Vaibhāṣikas, the realms of rebirth are exclusively undefiled-
neutral dharmas. Among the Vaibhāṣikas, some think that they are
dharmas of retribution (vipākaja); others think that they are dharmas of
retribution and accumulation (aupacayika).37
In the three Dhātus with their five realms of rebirth, there is, in
ascending order,
5a-6a. Seven abodes or types of consciousnesses (vijñānasthitis),
namely: 1. beings different in bodies and ideas; 2. beings of
different bodies but similar in ideas; 3. beings similar in body but
different in ideas; 4. beings similar in body and ideas; and 5. - 7.
three classes of non-material beings. 38
According to the Sūtra (Madhyama, 24, 11):
1. "Material beings different in bodies and ideas, namely humans
and certain gods, are the first vijñānasthitis."
What are these certain gods? ³9 The six gods of Kāmadhātu (i.1) and
the gods of the First Dhyāna (world of Brahmā) except the prathama-
bhinirvṛttas. 40
They are of different bodies, because their color, their marks
(clothes, ornaments, etc.), and their figures (height, etc.) are not
identical. They are of different ideas, because their ideas, ideas of
pleasure, displeasure, neither-pleasure-nor-displeasure, are not iden-
tical. 41
2. "Material beings different in bodies but of similar ideas, namely
the prathamabhinirvṛtta Brahmakãyika 42 gods, are the second vijñā-
nasthitis."
All these prathamabhinirvṛtta gods are of similar ideas, for all have
the same idea of a single and same cause, Brahmã, who thinks, "They are
created by me," and the associates of Brahmä who think, "We are created
by Brahmā;" 43 there is diversity of body, for one is Brahmā, and the
others his followers through their height, their greatness, their bodies,
their speech, their clothing and their ornaments. 44
We read in the Sūtra that these gods remember, "We have seen this
being of great sight, who lasts so long," and so on to "when he made theThe World 375
vow, 'May other beings be born here in my company!,' we were born in
his company. "45 (See iii.90c-d.). We ask then where were these gods
when they saw Brahmā? 46
According to certain masters [who take their authority from the
Sūtra that teaches that the Brahmakāyikas are reborn in the world of
Brahma after dying in Abhāsvara Heaven], they saw Brahmā when they
were in Ābhāsvara Heaven.
But, we would say, when they fell from Abhāsvara Heaven, a heaven
of the Second Dhyana, they lost the Second Dhyāna, and the Second
Dhyāna is necessary to the memory of a past existence in the heaven of
the Second Dhyāna (vii.44a). Further, they have not re-acquired the
Second Dhyana since they have fallen into the erroneous view (e.g.
śīlavrataparāmaría) of considering Mahābrahmā as a creator: one
cannot say that this erroneous view can accompany the Second Dhyāna,
since no erroneous view (or any defilement, kleśa) of a certain sphere
has ever had a lower, inferior sphere as its object.
According to another opinion, they saw Brahmã when they were in
the intermediate existence (antarabhava) which proceeded their birth in
the world of Brahmā.
But one would object that this intermediate existence is very short
for it cannot have any slowing down of birth in this world. 47 How then
can they say, "We have seen this being of great sight, who lasts so long?"
As a consequence, a third opinion, one would say: It is in the world of
Brahmä itself that these gods remember the past of Brahmă. At the
moment when they are born there, they saw him who being born before
them, who lasts a long time. Having seen him, they think: “We have
seen this being . . .;" and they know the vow that he made through
memory of the sphere of the First Dhyana which they obtained through
the very fact of their birth; or rather because Brahmä told them. 48
3. "Material beings similar in body but of different ideas, namely the
Ābhāsvara gods, are the third vijñānasthiti."
The Sūtra, in naming the highest gods of the Second Dhyāna, the
Ābhāsvaras, also designates the Parīttābha and the Apramāṇābha gods.
If it were otherwise, to which vijñānasthiti would these two classes
belong?
There is no difference of color, mark, or figure among them: thus376 Chapter Three
these gods have similar bodies. They have ideas of pleasure and of
neither-pleasure-nor-displeasure: thus there is diversity of ideas.
In fact, it is said (Vibhāṣā, TD, p. 707b6),—wrongly according to us
(kila), that these gods, fatigued with the sensation of mental
pleasure which is the sensation proper to the Second Dhyana-pass
into the threshold (samantaka) absorption of this Dhyana, an ab-
sorption which allows the sensation of neither-pleasure-nor-displeasure
(viii.22). Fatigued from this second sensation, they again take up the
Second Dhyana and the sensation of mental pleasure. In this same way
kings fatigued with the pleasures of lust (kāmasukha) take up the
pleasure of government (or of dharma), and fatigued with dharma take
up again the pleasure of lust.
One would object that it should hold for a god of the Third Dhyana
(Subhakṛtsnas, etc.: fourth vijñānasthits) as for the gods of the Second
Dhyāna: yet the gods of the Third Dhyāna do not pass into sāmantaka,
and always possess the sensation of pleasure.
But this objection is in vain. The Šubhakṛtsnas do not become
fatigued with the pleasures of the Abhāsvaras, since they are calm,
whereas the pleasures of the Abhāsvaras, being mental pleasures,
trouble the mind and are not calm.
The Sauträntikas are of a different opinion. They quote the Sūtra
(Saptasuryavyākaraṇa, Dirgha TD 1, p. 138b25, and Madhyama, TD 1,
p. 429a22):49 "Beings that are born for a short time in Abhāsvara
Heaven know poorly the laws of the destruction of the universe. When
the destruction of the universe takes place through fire, they see the
flames rising and destroying the palace of the world of Brahmā: they are
frightened, grieved, confused, 'May these flames not rise up to here!' But
the beings who have lived for a long time in Abhäsvara Heaven know of
these cosmic changes and reassure their frightened companions, 'Do not
be afraid, friend! Do not be afraid, friend! Already previously this fire,
having burnt the Palace of Brahmã, disappeared.' Then one sees indeed
how the gods of the Second Dhyana have different ideas: at the burning
up of the worlds in the First Dhyāna, they have ideas of the arriving or
the non-arriving of the flames amongst them, and they have ideas of
fear and no fear. The explanation of the Vaibhāṣikas then, that these
gods exchange the sensation of pleasure and indifference, is not good.
4. "Material beings of similar bodies and ideas, namely theThe World 377
Subhakṛtsnas, are the fourth vijñānasthiti."
They have the same ideas, because they have the sensation of
pleasure.
In the First Dhyāna, there is uniformity of ideas, ideas defiled since
they are associated with fīlavrataparamaría; in the Second Dhyana,
there is diversity of ideas, namely good ideas of the Dhyāna proper and
of its threshold absorption; and in the third Dhyāna, there is uniformity
of ideas, ideas arisen from retribution.
5.-7. The first three Ārūpyas are the last three vijñānasthitis as it
says in the Sutra, so
What are the vijñānasthitis? The five skandhas of Kāmadhātu or
Rūpadhātu for the first ones (see iii.7c), and four skandhas for the last
three.
Why are not the rest vijñānasthiti?
6b. The rest reduce the vijñāna. 51
The "rest" refers to the painful realms of rebirth (durgati, apāya:
hell, etc.), the Fourth Dhyāna, and the Fourth Ārūpya (=Naivasa-
mjñānāsaṁjñāyatana) which is called Bhavagra or the summit of
existence.
Here, in these realms, the vijñāna is reduced, or cut off: 52 in the
painful realms of rebirth, painful sensation damages the vijñāna; in the
Fourth Dhyāna, an ascetic can cultivate asaṁjñisamāpatti, the ab-
sorption of unconsciousness (ii.42), and in this Dhyāna there is also
āsaṁjnika, namely the dharma (ii.41b) that creates the Unconcsious
Gods (Asaṁjñisattva); in Bhavāgra, the ascetic can cultivate nirodha-
samāpatti (ii.43a), the absorption of the cessation of ideas and
sensations.
According to another explanation (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 708a14),
vijñānasthiti is "the place where those who are here desire to go, the
place from whence those who are there do not desire to fall." These two
conditions are absent in the painful realms of rebirth. As for the Fourth
Dhyāna, all those who are in it desire to leave it: Pṛthagjanas desire to
pass to the realm of the Asamjñisattvas; Aryans desire to pass to the378
Chapter Three
Suddhāvāsikas [or to the Ārūpyāyatanas; and the Suddhāvāsikas desire
to realize the calm of extinction, śāntanirodha]. 53
Bhavagra is not a vijñānasthiti because there is little activity of the
vijñāna in it. 54
The seven vijñānasthitis,
6c-d. With Bhavāgra and unconscious beings, are the nine
"dwellings of beings."
For creatures dwell therein as they will.
7a. There are no other dwellings of beings, for elsewhere one
lives without desiring it.
"Elsewhere" refers to the painful realms of rebirth. Beings are
brought there by the Rākṣasa which is Karma and live there without
desiring it. This is not one of the "dwellings" in the same way that a
prison is not a dwelling. 56
If one Sūtra says that there are seven vijñānasthiti, according to
another Sūtra
7b. There are four other sthitis.57
These four are: rūpa as an abode of vijñāna, (rūpopagā vijñāna-
sthitiḥ), vedanā or sensation as an abode of vijñāna (vedanopagā
vijñānasthitiḥ), ideas as an abode of vijñāna (samjñopagā vijñāna-
sthitih), and the samskäras or forces as an abode of vijñāna (saṁskā-
ropagā vijñānasthitih).
7c-d. They consist of the four impure skandhas, which are of the
same sphere as the vijñāna, 58
The consciousness or vijñāna can grasp visible things and the other
skandhas of a different sphere as its object: but it cannot grasp them as
object under the impulse of craving; thus they are not considered as itsThe World 379
abode or sthiti (see above, note 16).
But why is the fifth skandha, the consciousness itself (mind and
mental states), not considered as an abode of the consciousness?
The Vaibhāṣikas observe that the sthiti, "that upon which, or within
which one grasps" is opposed to sthätar, "he who grasps." Devadatta is
opposed to the horse that he is sitting on. The king is not the throne. Or
again vijñānasthiti signifies an abode of the mind, and the dharmas
upon
which the mind rides in order to move forward, are like the sailors
on the ship: now the mind does not ride on the mind in order to move;
hence the mind is not an abode of the mind.
But another Sūtra says, "There is delight (nandi-saumanasya-satis-
faction) and attachment with regard to this food which is the
consciousness" (iii.40a). If there is delight and attachment with regard to
the consciousness then the consciousness rides in it and resides in it. 59
On the other hand, you teach that the five skandhas (including the
consciousness) constitute the sevenfold abode of consciousness (iii.5a);
why do you not add the consciousness to the fourfold abodes of
consciousness?
The Vaibhāṣikas answer: When we consider, without making any
distinction between the skandhas, the process attached to the con-
sciousness with regard to its arising which is made up of the five
skandhas, then we can say that the vijñāna is a vijñānasthiti. But, if we
consider the skandhas one by one, we see that matter, sensation, ideas,
and the saṁskāras-which are the support of the consciousness, and are
associated or coexistent with the consciousness-are the causes of the
defilement of the consciousness: but the consciousnesss is not, in this
way, the cause of the defilement of the consciousness, since two
consciousnesses do not coexist. Thus
7d-8a. Taken separately, the consciousness is not defined as an
abode of the consciousness.
Further, the Blessed One described the four abodes of consciousness
as "a field," and he describes the consciousness, accompanied by desire,
as "a seed." 60 He does not give the seed as a field of the seed; and we see
indeed that the dharmas that coexist with the consciousness merely
serve as its field.380 Chapter Three
Do the four sthitis contain the seven, and do the seven contain the
four?
No.
8b. The correspondance admits of four cases.
First case: the consciousness is included among the seven, but not
among the four.
Second case: the four skandhas (excluding the consciousness) of the
painful realms of rebirth, the Fourth Dhyāna and Bhavagra, are included
among the four.
Third case: the four skandhas are included among the seven, and are
also included among the four.
Fourth case: the other dharmas are included neither among the
seven nor among the four, [namely the consciousness of the painful
realms of rebirth, etc., and the pure dharmas].
etc.
We have said that the three Dhātus include five realms of rebirth,
8c-d. There are here four "wombs" of beings, beings born from
eggs, etc. 61
Yoni or womb signifies birth. Eytmologically, yoni signifies
"mixture": in birth-birth being common to all creatures-beings are
mixed together in confusion. 62
"Womb of beings born from eggs" are those beings who arise from
eggs, geese, cranes, peacocks, parrots, thrushes, etc.
"Womb of beings born from wombs" are those beings who arise
from a womb, elephants, horses, cows, buffalos, asses, pigs, etc. 63
"Wombs of beings born from moisture" 64 are those beings who arise
from the exudation of the elements, earth, etc.,-worms, insects,
butterflies, mosquitos.
"Womb of apparitional beings"65 are those beings who arise all at
once, with their organs neither lacking nor deficient, with all theirmajor and minor limbs. These are called upapāduka, apparitional,
because they are skillful at appearing (upapādana), and because they
arise all at once [without an embryonic state, without semen and blood];
such as gods, beings in hell, or beings in an intermediate existence.67
The World 381
How are the wombs distributed among the realms of rebirth?
9a. Humans and animals are of the four types.
Humans can be born from an egg, such as Śaila and Upaśaila who
were born from the eggs of a crane; 68 the thirty-two sons of (Viśākhā),
the mother of Mṛgara; 69 and the five hundred sons of the King of
Pañcāla. 70
Humans can be born from moisture, such as Māndhātar,7¹ Cāru
Upācaru, Kapotamalini,72 Amrapālī,73 etc.
Apparational humans (ii.14) are humans at the beginning of the
cosmic period (prāthamakalpika, ii.14, iii.97c).
Animals are also of four types. These types are known through
common experience. Nāgas and Garudas are also apparitional (see
below, note 83).
9b-c. Beings in hell, intermediate beings, and the gods are
apparitional too.74
These three classes of beings are exclusively apparitional.
9d. Pretas are also born from a womb.
They are of two types, apparitional and born from a womb. That
they are born from a womb results from a discourse that a Pretī had with
Maudgalyāyana, "I gave birth to five sons a night, to five sons a day: I ate
them and was not satisfied."75
What is the best womb?
The apparitional womb.
But the Bodhisattva in his last birth evidently possesses "mastery382 Chapter Three
relating to arising" (upapattivasitva). 76 Why did he then choose to be
born from a womb? (See iii.17)77
There are two answers to this question. 1. The Bodhisattva sees
great advantage in it: by reason of their relationship with him, the great
Śākya clan enters into the Good Law; and, recognizing in him a member
of the family of the Cakravartins, persons experience a great respect
towards him; persons are encouraged seeing that, being a man, he has
realized this perfection. If the Bodhisattva were not born from the
womb, we would not know his family, and persons would say, "What is
this magician, a god or a Piśāca?" In fact non-Buddhists masters
calumniously say that at the end of one hundred cosmic periods there
would appear in the world such a magician who devours the world
through his magic.78
2. Others 79 explain that the Bodhisattva has taken up the womb in
order that his body remains as relics after his Nirvāṇa: 80 through the
adoration of these relics, humans and other creatures by the thousands
obtain heaven and deliverance. In fact, the bodies of apparational beings,
not having any external seed (semen, blood, bone, etc.), do not continue
to exist after their deaths, like a flame which disappears without
remnant. 8¹ But we see indeed that this explanation cannot be admitted
by the masters who attribute ṛddhi ādhiṣṭhānikī to the Buddha.82
One question arises from another.
If the bodies of apparitional beings disappear at their deaths, how
can the Sūtra say, "The apparitional Garuda seizes the apparitional
Nāga in order to eat it?"83
The text says that he seizes the Näga in order to eat it, not that he
does eat it.
Or rather he eats the Nāga as long as the Nāga is not dead: but he
does not feast on the dead Näga.
What is the least desirable of the wombs?
The apparitional womb, for it embraces all hellish realms of rebirth,The World 383
all heavenly realms of rebirth, plus one part of the three other realms of
rebirth, plus intermediate beings. 84
What is an intermediate being, and an intermediate existence?
10. Intermediate existence, which inserts itself between ex-
istence at death and existence at birth, not having arrived at the
location where it should go, cannot be said to be born.85
Between death-that is, the five skandhas of the moment of
death-and arising—that is, the five skandhas of the moment of
rebirth-there is found an existence-a "body" of five skandhas-that
goes to the place of rebirth. This existence between two realms of
rebirth (gati) is called intermediate existence. 86
This existence is produced: why not say that it arises (upapanna);
why not attribute birth (upapatti) to it?
We say that it is arising (upapadyamāna); but it is not born (see
iii.40c). In fact as its etymology indicates (pad-gam, upapanna=upagata),
to be born is to arrive. Intermediate existence (or intermediate being),
when it begins, has not arrived at the place where it should go, namely to
the place where the retribution of actions is manifested and achieved. 87
According to other sects,88 there is a cutting off, a discontinuity
between death and birth: but there is no intermediate existence.
This opinion is false, as reasoning and Scripture prove.
lla-b. Being similar to the series of rice, existence does not
reproduce itself after having been interrupted.
The momentary dharmas exist in a series; when they appear in a
place distant from that in which they have been found, it is because they
are reproduced without discontinuity in intermediate places, such as the
series that constitutes a grain of rice and which one transports to a
distant village by passing through all the villages in the interval. In the
same way, the mental series takes up birth after being reproduced
without discontinuity (intermediate existence) from the place where
death took place.89
But, one would say, a reflection (pratibimba) arises on a mirror, on384 Chapter Three
the water, etc., without being continuous to the image (bimba) with
which it forms a series. Hence the elements of arising do not depend on
the elements forming an uninterrupted series between the place of
death and the place where they reappear.
llc-d. The existence of the reflection is not proved; should it be
proved, the reflection is not similar; hence it does not serve as an
example.
A reflection is a thing in and of itself (dravya) namely a certain type
of color (varna). The existence of the reflection is not proved.
12a. For two things do not exist in the same spot.
a. In one and the same spot, a person placed to the side of a mirror
perceives the rupa or physical matter of this mirror, matter derived
from the primary elements (upādāyarūpa); a person placed facing (the
mirror) perceives his own reflection, which is a "certain type of color,"
derived matter. Now one can admit only that two derived matters exist
at the same time in the same spot, for each of them should have as its
support two distinct groups of primary elements.
b. Two persons who both look at the same object, a jar, etc., see it at
the same time. Now two persons placed at the two sides of a pond see
the reflection of the object that faces them: the same reflection is not
seen at the same time by both of them.
c. Shade and sunlight do not coexist in the same spot. Now, if one
places a mirror in the shade (i.10a), in a shed situated close to a pond lit
by the sun, one would see in this mirror the reflection of the reflection of
the sun on the surface of the water.
It is thus proved, by these three observations, that a reflection is not
a real, substantial thing (dravya).
The Kärikā is liable to another interpretation. "For the two things
do not exist in the same spot": the "two things" are the surface of the
mirror and the reflection of the moon. We do not see, in the same spot,
the surface of the mirror and the reflection of the moon, reflected in the
mirror: this reflection appears recessed, at a depth, like the water in awell.⁹0⁰ Now if a real physical matter, the reflection, should arise, it
would arise on the surface of the mirror, and would be perceived as being
on the surface of the mirror. A reflection is thus only an illusory idea
taking the form of the reflection (pratibimbākāraṁ bhrāntaṁ
vijñānam). Such is the power of this complex, mirror and object, that it
produces the seeing of a reflection, of an image resembling the object.
Incomprehensible is the power of the dharmas and the variety of this
power.
The World 385
Let us admit nevertheless the real existence of the reflection. It still
cannot serve as an example in your reasoning, for it cannot be compared
to arising. It is not similar to arising:
12b. For it does not form a series.
The reflection does not form a series with the object reflected,
because the reflection arises supported by the mirror, and because the
reflection is simultaneous to the object reflected. But on the contrary
death and arising form a series, the second being later to the first and
being produced in another place than the first without there being a
cutting off between them [due to intermediate existence].
12b. For it arises from two causes.
It is by reason of two causes that a reflection arises, by reason of the
mirror and of the object. The principal of these two causes is the cause
upon which it takes its support in order to arise, namely the mirror. But
it happens that arising, or birth, proceeds from only one cause; and it
never has a principal cause which is not death. Arising has no external
support in the case of apparitional beings, because they appear suddenly
in space. And these external elements cannot be the principal cause for
the beings that arise from semen, blood, or mud, since these items are
absent from the mind
Reasoning thus proves the existence of an intermediate being since
arising proceeds from death without there being any discontinuity
between these two existences.
Chapter Three
Scripture also proves
12c. The intermediate being is called by its name.
the existence of an intermediate being.
The Sūtra says, "There are seven existences (bhavas): existence in
hell (naraka), as an animal (tiryagyoni), as a Preta, as a heavenly being
(deva), and as a human (manuşya), as well as karmabhava and
antarābhava."91
If the school that we are combating does not read this Sūtra, at least
they read the texts pertaining to Gandharvas.
12c. It is the Gandharva.
We read in the Sūtra, "Three conditions are necessary for an embryo
to descend, [in order for a son or daughter to be born]: the woman must
be in good health and fertile, the pair must be united, and a Gandharva
must be ready." What is the Gandharva if not an intermediate being? 92
But our opponents do not read the Sūtra in these terms! They
replace the third condition by a text that says, “a dissolution of the
skandhas [that is, one dying] must be made ready."93
Very well, but one doubts if they could explain the Aśvalāyana-
sūtra,94 which says, "This Gandharva which is made ready, do you
know if it is a Brahmin, a Ksatriya, a Vaiśya, or a Śūdra? Do you know if
it comes from the east, the south, the west, or the north?" This
expression "to come" shows that it refers to an intermediate being, not
to a "dissolution of the skandhas."
If our opponents do not read this Sūtra,
12d. An intermediate being is proved by the text relative to the
Five.
The Blessed One teaches that there are five types of Anāgāmins: one
who obtains Nirvāṇa in an intermediate existence (antarăparinirvāyin),
one who obtains Nirvāṇa as soon as he is reborn (upapadyapari-
nirvāyin), one who obtains Nirvāṇa without effort (anabhisaṁskāra-
parinirvāyin), one who obtains Nirvāṇņa by means of effort (anabhisa-
ṁskāraparinirvāyin), and one who obtains Nirvāṇa by going higher
(ürdvasrotas).95
Certain masters (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 357b21) maintain that an
antarāparinirvāyin is a saint who obtains Nirvāṇa after having beenThe World 387
reborn among some so-called Antara gods. But they should then admit
the existence of Upapadya gods, etc. An absurd opinion.
12d. And by the Sūtra of the gatis.
By the Sūtra of the Seven Satpuruşagatis. % This Sūtra teaches that
one should distinguish three types of antarāparinirvāyins on the basis of
their differences of duration and place: the first is similar to a spark that
is extinguished as soon as it arises; the second to a fragment of reddened
mental which enlarges in its flight; the third to a fragment of reddened
mental which enlarges in its flight, but later, and without falling back
into the sun. Given this text, it is pure fantasy to suppose that an
antarāparinirvāyin is an inhabitant of a heaven of the Antara gods, for
these Antaras cannot be divided into three classes by reason of duration
and place.
But yet other scholars-(the Vibhajyavādins as the Vibhāsā, TD 27,
p. 357a4-358a25 testifies)-present the explanation here. An antară-
parinirvayin obtains Nirvāṇa, that is, eliminates the defilements, either
in the interval of his lifetime, or in the interval of his cohabitation with
the gods. He is threefold: he is termed a dhātugata if he obtains Nirvāṇa
having just arrived in the Dhātu [that is, in a heaven of Rūpadhātu, and
as a consequence if he eliminates the defilements that cause him to be
reborn in Rupadhatu whereas they (the defilements) are still in a
seed-like state]; he is called a samjñāgata if he obtains Nirvāṇa later, at a
moment when the idea (samjña) of the objects of Rūpadhātu is active in
him; and he is called a vitarkagata if he obtains Nirvāṇa still later, at a
moment when the vitarka (volitions, etc.) produced by these objects is
active. In this way we would have three antaraparinirvayins conforming
to the definitions of the Sutra and who obtain Nirvāṇa in the interval of
the duration of their life, that is, without achieving the end of their life as
gods of the heaven where they were reborn. Or rather, the first
antarāparinirvāyin obtains Nirvāṇa as soon as he has taken possession
of a certain divine existence; the second after having experienced a
heavenly bliss; and the third, after having entered into company or
conversation with the gods.
An objection: if an antarāparinirvayin is a saint who is reborn,
experiences bliss, and enters into the company of the gods, what will an
upapadhyparinirvayin be, literally "one who obtains Nirvana as soon as388
Chapter Three
he is reborn?"
We answer that an upapadyaparinirvāyin enters entirely into their
company; and, as this answer is not conclusive, we further answer that
an upapadyaparinirvayin reduces the duration of his life by much [and
more than an antarāparinirvāyin]: [he is called an upapadya because he
obtains Nirvāṇa ayur upahatya].⁹7
But we must observe that all these persons, the dhatugata, etc., go to
the same place. Thus they do not correspond to the examples of the
Sūtra. On the other hand, there are saints in Ārūpyadhātu who obtain
Nirvāṇa without having fully lived their lives to the end (iii.85a), ⁹8 and
yet no antarāparinirvāyins are there. This point is illustrated in the
metrical formula,
By the dhyānas, four decades;
by the ārūpyas, three heptades;
by ideas, one hexade:
thus is the group bound.⁹⁹
Yet if our adversaries do not read this Sūtra, what can we do about it?
The Master has entered Nirvāṇa, and the Good Law no longer has a
leader. Many sects have been formed that change the meaning and the
letter to their fantasies. 100 We say that, for the masters who admit these
Sūtras, the existence of an intermediate being or the “skandhas in the
interval" is proved both by Scripture and reasoning.
Yet there are some difficulties:
a. We must reconcile the doctrine of an intermediate being with the
Sutra on Māra. This Sūtra says, "The Māra called Düşin, [having struck
the head of Vidura, the disciple of Krakucchanda,] fell, with his own
body, into great Avici Hell." 101 Actions very grave (by intention and in
scope) and complete (that is, "accumulated," iv.12) ripen before death
itself. Māra then felt a retribution in this life before feeling a retribution
in hell. The text thus means that Māra was enveloped, while still alive,
by the fires of hell; that he dies; and that he then takes up an
intermediate existence which leads to hell where birth in hell takes
place.The World 389
b. According to the Sütra, there are five anantarya transgressions:he
who commits them is immediately born in hell (samanantaraṁ
narakeṣūpapadyate, iv.97). We hold that the expression "immediately"
signifies "without intermediary," without passing through another
realm of rebirth (gati): which is an action "retributable in the next
existence" (upapadya, iv.50b). If you take the Sūtra literally, you come to
absurd conclusions: you would have to say that one must have
committed the five crimes in order to be reborn in hell and you would
have to say that the transgressor is reborn in hell immediately after the
transgression, or that he is reborn there without dying here. Moreover,
according to our doctrine, rebirth in hell is immediate; it is not preceeded
by a "birth" as an intermediate being. We maintain that, by its nature,
the intermediate being is "arising" (upapadyamana) because he is
turned towards the birth (upapatti) that follows death; we do not say
that he is born (upapanno bhavati) (iii.10d). 102
c. You should explain the stanza, "Your life is approaching its end,
Oh Brahmin; you are old and sick; you are in the presence of Yama; there
is not for you any intervening (antarā) dwelling (vāsa) and you have no
provision." 103
[Vasubandhu:] You think that this stanza shows that there is no
intermediate existence. But we understand the words antarā vāsa in the
sense of dwelling among humans: "Once dead, you shall not reappear
here;" or rather, the text means that "No one can retard the progress of
the intermediate being that you are going to become on the way to the
place of your rebirth in hell."
The one who denys the existence of intermediary beings asks us
upon what do we base ourselves in order to for us to say that such is the
intention of this text, or that such is not its intention.
We would reply with the same question.
If, in this manner, the two objections are made equal, what proof can
you come to? Let us observe that for the Sutra on Māra, etc., the
explanation of the person who denies the existence of intermediate
beings, and our explanation, are not contradicted by the text itself. The
texts are thus not conclusive for or against intermediate beings. Texts
that are conclusive and which serve as proof are those which can be
interpreted in only one way: [as we have quoted, pp. 386-387.]
Chapter Three
What is the form of an intermediate being?
13a-b. Being projected by the same action that projects the
pūrvakālabhava, an intermediate being has the form of this
being, that is, the being of the realm of rebirth to come after his
conception.
The action that projects the gati or the realm of rebirth-an existnce
in hell, etc.-is the same action that projects the intermediate existence
by which one goes to this realm of rebirth. 104 As a consequence
antarabhava or intermediate existence has the form of the future
pūrvakālabhava (p. 39, line 19) of the realm of rebirth towards which he
is going.
Objection: In the womb of a dog, a sow, etc., there can die in its
embryonic stage a being who should then be reborn in any one of the
five realms of rebirth. Let us suppose then that this embryo is replaced
by an intermediate being destined to go to hell. 105 This intermediate
being,if he has the form of a being in hell, will burn the womb of the dog.
Answer: Even in a perfect state (pūrvakālabhava), beings in hell are
not always incadescent, for example the "annexes" (utsadas, iii.58d). But
even if one believes that intermediate beings bound for hell are
incandescent, as their bodies are "ethereal" (accha, transparent, viii.3c),
they are not any more tangible than they are visible. There is thus no
adherence of the intermedate being. 106 Thus the womb is not burned;
moreover the influence of actions is opposed to this.
The dimensions of an intermediate being are those of a child of five
or six years of age, but his organs are perfectly developed.
The intermediate being of the Bodhisattva is similar to the
Bodhisattva in the fullness of his youth; he is adorned with the major
and minor marks; 107 that is why, when this intermediate being comes to
enter his mother's womb, he illumines a thousand universes with their
four continents.
But we know that the mother of the Bodhisattva saw in a dream a
small white elephant enter her side. This was only an "omen," because
for a long time the Bodhisattva has been disengaged from animal
rebirth. 108 King Krkin also saw ten dreams: an elephant, wells, a pole,
sandalwood, a park, a young elephant, two monkeys, cloths, andcontests, which were omens. 109 Furthermore, intermediate beings do
not enter into the womb by splitting open the side, but rather by the
door of birth: this is why the eldest of twins is the one born last.
But how do you explain the stanza of the Bhadanta Dharma-
subhūti, 110 "Changing his body into that of a white elephant having six
tusks and four feet, he enters the womb and lies therein in full
consciousness as a Rși entering a forest?"
There is no reason to explain this text: it is neither Sūtra, nor
Vinaya, nor Abhidharma; it is a personal composition. But if it
demands an explanation, we would say that this stanza describes the
Bodhisattva just as his mother saw him in a dream.
The World 391
An intermediate being in Rūpadhātu is complete in size and is
dressed by reason of his great modesty (iii.70c). 112 The Bodhisattva in
his interdiate existence
who, through the force of her vow, was clothed in her intermediate
existence: she entered the womb and left it dressed, and she remained
dressed until her Nirvāṇa and cremation. ¹13 But lacking modesty, other
intermediate beings of Kāmadhātu are nude.
What is the pūrvakālabhava which is parallel to antarābhava?
13c-d. This is before death, after conception.
Bhava is existence, the skandhas.
In intermediate existence, the five skandhas enter two realms of
rebirth: upapattibhava, which is the skandhas at the moment of their
entry into a realm of rebirth, at the moment of their pratisamdhi (iii.38
and p.); and pūrvakālabhava which is all the skandhas of the following
moments until death, the last moment of the realm of rebirth and which
will be followed by a new antarabhava. 114
There is no antarābhava in Ārūpyadhātu.
Chapter Three
Let us return to the intermediate being:
14a-b. He is seen by the creatures of his class, and by the divine
eye.
He is seen by the intermediate beings of the class,-heavenly,
etc., to which he belongs. He is also seen by the pure divine eye, that is,
by the divine eye that is obtained through higher knowledge (abhijñā,
vii.55d), for this eye is very pure. 115 He is not seen by a natural divine eye
or a divine eye obtained through birth, such as the divine eye of the gods.
According to other masters, a heavenly intermediate being sees all
intermediate beings; a human intermediate being sees all intermediate
beings with the exception of heavenly intermediate beings, and so on. 116
14b. He is filled with the impetus of the supernormal power of
action, 117
He is a karmaṛddhivegavān: endowed (-vān) with the impetus
(vega) which belongs to supernatural power (rddhi)-that is, the
movement through space-which issues from action (karman) (vii.53c).
The Buddhas themselves cannot stop him because he is endowed with
the force of action.
14c. His organs are complete.
He is sakalākṣa; akṣa signifies indriya.
14c. No one can resist him. 118
He is an apratighavān: a pratigha is a strike that repels; an
apratighavan is one in whom there is no pratigha. Even a diamond is
not impenetrable to him. For, they say, when we split open a mass of red
hot iron we find that some small animals are born inside it.
When an intermediate being is to be reborn in a certain realm of
rebirth, from this realm of rebirth, by force,
14d. He cannot be turned away. 119
A human intermediate being, ceasing to be such, will never become
a heavenly intermediate being. He will go to be born in the realm of
rebirth with a view to which he has been formed.***
The World 393
Does an intermediate being of Kāmadhātu eat, like the other beings
of Kāmadhātu, solid food (iii.39)?
Yes, but not coarse food.
14d. It eats odors. 120
From whence it gets its name of Gandharva, "he who eats (arvati)
odors (gandham)." The meanings of the roots are multiple: arv,
if one
takes it in the sense of "to go," justifies "he who goes to eat odors” (arvati
gacchati bhoktum). We have gandharva, and not gandhārva, as we have
śakandhu, or karkandhu.
A Gandharva of low rank 121 eats unpleasant odors; a Gandharva of
high rank eats pleasant odors.
How long does an intermediate being exist?
a. There is no fixed rule, says the Bhadanta. ¹22It lasts as long as it
does not encounter the coming together of the causes necessary for its
rebirth. In fact an intermediate existence and the existence that follows
are projected by the same action and form part of the same
nikāyasabhāga, [of the same existence, ii.41]: ¹23 it is for this reason that,
when the life (or the vital organ, jiyitendriya) of an intermediate being
comes to an end, there is no death.
Objection: There is a mass of meat as big as Mount Meru which, in
the summer rains, changes into a mass of worms. It is in this spot that
intermediate beings arrive, being reborn in these worms arising
together in such a large number; or rather, from whence do these
intermediate beings come?
There exists an infinite number of small animals having short life,
coveters after odors and tastes; perceiving an odor, they remember the
taste that was associated with it, and they eventually die, coveting these
odors and tastes. When they die, they had in their minds (vibodhya) an
action the nature of which was to produce an existence among worms;
and, by their desire for odors and tastes, they are reincarnated among
worms. Or rather it is only when the external causes necessary for the394 Chapter Three
birth of worms (namely, a great mass of decomposition) is brought
together in a great amount that the action which should produce
existence among worms enters into activity with a view to their
retribution. ¹24 In the same way a certain being accomplishes actions
which should be remunerated as a Cakravartin: these action will not
enter into activity before the moment of the comsic period has come
when human life is twenty-four thousand years in length (iii.95). It is for
this reason that the Blessed One declared that the retribution of actions
is incomprehensible (Samyukta, 21).
b. The Bhadanta Vasumitra says: An intermediate being lasts seven
days. If the complex of causes necessary to reincarnation has not been
realized, then the intermediate being dies and is reborn. 125
c. Other scholars say that it lasts seven weeks. 126
d. The Vaibhāṣikas say: 127 As it desires birth, it lasts only a short time
and then its life is reincarnated. If the complex of external causes is not
realized, then one of two things happens: either old actions are such that
a birth should take place in such and such a place, and should be of such
and such a nature, and, in this case, these actions cause the complex of
causes to be realized; 128 or rather this determination is absent, and, in
this case, birth takes place in another place, and it is of another nature. 129
According to others (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 360c25), if the causes have
not come together, the intermediate being is born in conditions
analogous to those where he would have been reborn. Cattle are not
born during the rains, nor gods in autumn, nor black bears in winter, nor
horses in summer. But on the other hand, there is no season for buffalos,
etc. The intermediary being who, if it is the season of rains, would be
reborn a cow, is reborn a buffalo; in the same way a jackal instead of a
dog, a brown bear instead of a black bear, or an ass instead of a horse. 130
But we admit a similar theory. We know in fact that existence and
intermediate existence are projected by the same action. One cannot say
that an existence as a buffalo is preceeded by an intermediate existence
as a cow.
How does reincarnation take place?
15a-b. The mind (mati) troubled by defilements, goes, throughThe World
its desire for sex, to the place of its realm of rebirth.
An intermediate being is produced with a view to going to the place
of its realm of rebirth where it should go. It possesses, by virtue of its
actions, the divine eye. Even though distant he sees the place of his
rebirth. There he sees his father and mother united. His mind is
troubled by the effects of sex and hostility. When the intermediate being
is male, it is gripped by a male desire with regard to the mother; when it
is female, it is gripped by a female desire with regard to the father; and,
inversely, it hates either the father, or the mother, whom it regards as
either a male or a female rival. ¹31 As it is said in the Prajñāpti, “Then
either a mind of lust, or a mind of hatred is produced in the Gandharva.
When the mind is thus troubled by these two erroneous thoughts, it
attaches itself through the desire for sex to the place where the organs
are joined together, imagining that it is he with whom they unite. Then
the impurities of semen and blood is found in the womb; the
intermediate being, enjoying its pleasures, installs itself there. Then the
skandhas harden; the intermediate being perishes; and birth arises that
is called "reincarnation" (pratisamdhi). When the embryo is male, it
remains to its right in the womb, with its head forward, crouching;
female, to the left of the womb, vagina forward; 132 with no sex, in the
attitude in which one finds the intermediate being when it believes it is
having sex. In fact, when an intermediate being possess all the organs, it
then enters as a male or female and places itself as befitting its sex. It is
only after reincarnation that a developing embryo can lose its sex.
What is the support (āśraya) of this matter which is from the
primary elements, the organs of the new being, its eyes, etc.?¹33
According to one opinion, the primary elements of the blood and
semen. According to another opinion, their support are some primary
elements different from these, arisen from actions, and which repose
(samniśraya) in the semen and blood.
First opinion: Semen and blood do not have any organs. When an
intermediate being perishes, it has some organs and so constitutes what
is called the first embryonic stage, or kalala. In the same way the arising396 Chapter Three
of a bud takes place at the same time as the destruction of its seed. 134 In
this same manner the Scriptural texts are justified which say that "the
body is produced from the kalala which consists of semen and blood" 135
[mātāpitraśucikalalasaṁbhūta, literally: in the impure wombs of the
father and mother], and that "after a long time, Oh Bhikṣus, you increase
the cemetary and grasp the drop of blood." 136
Second opinion: The organs have different primary elements for
their support, as is the case for the organs of leaf worms [for these,
through the force of their actions, repose on the primary elements of the
leaves, and there arises other primary elements that take on the nature
of organs.]
One would object that the phrase in the Sūtra, mātāpitraśuci-
kalalasambhū is not explained in this hypothesis. According to the Sūtra,
the body (with its organs) comes from the kalala which is semen and
blood (mātāpitraśuci). But the word kalala is placed there to designate
some other primary elements that arise reposing on the semen and
blood: [reposing on semen and blood they arise, together with the
semen and blood, from other primary elements that are called kalala and
which include the organs.]
It is in this manner that beings who are born from wombs and eggs
go to the places of their rebirth (gati). For other beings, say the masters
of the Abhidharma, the modes vary according to the case.
15c. Other go in their desire for odor or in their desire for
residence.
Beings which arise from moisture go to the place of their rebirth
through their desire for its odors: these are pure or impure by reason of
their actions. Apparitional beings, through their desire for residence
there.
But how can one desire a residence in hell?
[The mind of an intermediate being is troubled by lust and hatred, as
we have seen, when it goes to be reincarnated in a womb.] In the present
case, an intermediate being is also troubled in mind and misunderstands.
He is tormented by the cold of rain and wind: he sees a place burningwith hot fires and through his desire for warmth, he runs there. Or he is
tormented by the heat of the sun and hot winds: he sees a cold place of
frozen fires, and through his desire for coolness, he runs there.
According to the ancient masters, 137 he sees these things in order to
experience the retribution of actions that should be retributed in hell; 138
he sees beings similar to him and he runs to the place where they are.
The World 397
Intermediate heavenly beings-those who go towards a heavenly
realm of rebirth-go high, like one rising up from a seat. Humans,
animals, Pretas, and intermediate beings go in the manner in which
humans, etc., go.
15d. Beings in hell hang from their feet.
As the stanza says, "Those who insult Rṣis, ascetics and penitents
fall into hell head first." 139
We have said that the intermediary beings who are reincarnated in a
feminine womb (jarayuja and andaja) go there troubled in mind,
through their desire for sex. Is this a general rule?
No. The Sūtra teaches that there are four ways to descend into,
(abide and leave) the womb (garbhāvakrānti). ¹40
16. The first enter in full consciousness; the second, further,
dwell in full consciousness; the third, further, leave in full
consciousness; the fourth accomplishes all these steps with a
troubled mind. Beings born from eggs are always of this last
class.
The first do not dwell and do not leave in full consciousness; the
second do not leave in full consciousness; the third, in all these moments,
are in full consciousness; the fourth are, in all these actions, without full
consciousness. Here are the four garbhāvakrāāntis that the author
teaches, in his śloka in an order different from that of the Sūtra, 141
Beings born from eggs are always troubled in mind.398
Chapter Three
But can we say that a being born from an egg enters into a womb?
Without doubt. One who is born from an egg is now entering into a
womb. Or rather we have here an anticipatory designation. ¹42 In the
same way that the Sūtra says saṁskṛtam abhisaṁskaroti, and, in the
world, one says, "to cook the rice porridge," or "to grind the flour."
What does the full consciousness and the absence of full con-
sciousness in the entering, in the abiding, and in the leaving consist of?
A being with little merit enters because he thinks, "The wind blows,
the heavens rain; it is cold; it storms; people are in an uproar,” and
because, wishing to avoid these wearinesses, he believes that he is
entering into a shelter, a thicket, a hut of roots and leaves, or rather he
takes shelter at the foot of a tree or against a wall. Then he imagines
himself resting in this thicket, in this hut, and eventually leaves it. There
is an error of ideas and resolution. The same for a being rich in merits,
who believes he is entering a park, a garden, a palace, a terrace, or a
pavilion; he believes this and he rests there and eventually leaves it.
A being who has full consciousness knows that he enters into the
womb, that he dwells there, and that he leaves it. 143
The Sūtra also teaches
17. Three garbhāvakrāntis,—the Cakravartin and the two
Svayambhūs,-by reason of their great purity of action, of
knowledge, and of action and knowledge. 144
The two Svayambhūs are the Pratyekabuddhas and the Sambuddha.
All these designations are "anticipatory": one means to speak of a being,
who, in this existence, will become a Cakravartin, etc.
The Cakravartin enters in full consciousness, but does not reside in
full consciousness and does not leave in full consciousness. The
Pratyekabuddha resides in full consciousness, but does not leave in full
consciousness. The Buddha is always in full consciousness.
The first has a great outflowing of merit and he is made resplendentThe World
through actions; the second has knowledge obtained through in-
struction, reflection and mediation; and the third has merit, instruction,
etc.: both action and knowledge.
The fourth garbhāvakrānti, that of not full consciousness, pertains
to beings without great actions and great knowledge.
The non-Buddhists, who believe in an atman, 145 say, "If you admit
that a being (sattva) goes to another world, then the atman in which I
believe is proved."
In order to refute this doctrine, the author says,
18a. The atman does not exist. 146
The atman in which you believe, an entity that abandons the
skandhas of one existence and takes up the skandhas of another
existence, an internal agent of action, a Purușa,-this ātman does not
exist. In fact the Blessed One said, "Actions exist, and results exist, but
there is no agent who abandons these skandhas here and takes up those
skandhas there, independently of the casual relationship of the dharmas.
What is this causal relationship? Namely, if this exists, then that exists;
through the arising of this, there is the arising of that; pratitya-
samutpäda." (French trans. v. p. 57, ix. p. 260).
Is there then, ask the non-Buddhists, a type of ātman that you do not
negate?
18a-d. Only the skandhas, conditioned by defilement and action,
go reincar
ating themselves by means of the series of inter-
mediate existences. As an example: the lamp.
We do not deny an atman that exists through designation, an ātman
that is only a name given to the skandhas. But far from us is the thought
that the skandhas pass into another world! They are momentary, and
incapable of transmigrating. We say that, in the absence of any at man, of
any permanent principal, the series of conditioned skandhas, “made up”
of defilements and actions (i.15a, on abhisamskrta), enters into the
mother's womb; and that this series, from death to birth, is prolongued
and displaced by a series that constitutes intermediate existence.400
Chapter Three
19a-c. In conformity with its projecting cause the series grows
gradually, and, by virtue of the defilements and actions it
again to another world.
goes
Actions the nature of which is to be retributed in life (ayusya
karman, ii. 10a) differ according to beings: all the series of skandhas are
not then projected at the same time in the existence where they have
arisen. The series continues then to increase to the extent that it was
projected. This growth is gradual, as Scripture teaches: "There is first
the kalala; the arbuda arises from the kalala; the pefin arises from the
arbuda; the ghana arises from the pesin; and from the ghana there arises
the praśakhā, hair, body-hair, the nails, etc., and the material organs with
their supports." 147 The kalala, etc., are the five stages of the embryo.
embryo.
Then, 148 when the embryo, this throne, is ripe, there arises within
the womb winds arisen from the maturity of action which causes the
embryo to turn and places it towards the portal of its birth: it is difficult
to move like a great mass of hidden impurity. Sometimes, either
through the unfavorable conditions of the mother's eating, or by reason
of actions, the embryo perishes. Then an expert woman, after having
anointed them with all sorts of drugs, puts her hands filled with a
sharpened blade into this wound hideous, bad-smelling, and wet with all
sorts of impurities which is the womb. She pulls out the embryo after
having cut it up limb by limb. And the series of the embryo, by virtue of
aparaparyayavedaniya action (iv.50b), goes somewhere else.
Or else the birth is fortunate. The mother and the servants take the
new-born baby into their hands which are like knives and acids for this
body now as sensible as an open wound. One washes the child; 149 one
nourished it with milk and fresh butter, and later with solid foods: thus
does he grow. By reason of this development, 150 the organs mature and
the defilements enter into activity, from whence actions arise. And
when the body perishes, the series passes into another existence by
reason of these defilements and actions, through the medium of the
intermediate existence, as mentioned previously.
19d. In this way the circle of existence is without beginning. 151
Arising by reason of the defilements and actions; defilements and
actions by reason of arising; arising by reason of the defilements andThe World 401
actions: the circle of existences is thus without beginning. In order for it
to begin, it would be necessary for the first item to have no cause: and if
one dharma arises without a cause, then all dharmas would arise without
causes. Now the determination of time and place show that a seed
produces a shoot, that a fire produces cooking: hence there is no arising
that does not have causes. On the other hand, the theory of a single and
permanent cause has been refuted above (ii.65): hence the cycle of
existence has no beginning.
But birth, coming from causes, would not take place if its causes are
destroyed, in the same way that a shoot would not arise if its seed is
burned.
The series of skandhas develops in three existences,
20a. Pratityasamutpada or dependent orgination has twelve
parts in three sections or time periods. 152
The twelve parts of dependent origination are ignorance (avidyā),
the saṁskāras, the consciousness, nāmarūpa, the six āyatanas, contact,
sensation, desire, attachment, existence, birth, and old age and death.
20b. Two for the first, two for the third, and eight for the middle.
Ignorance and the saṁskāras existed in a past existence, birth and
age and death will exist in a future existence, and the eight other
parts exist in the present existence.
old
Are the middle parts to be found in the present existence of all
creatures? 153
No, they are not.
Why is this?
20c. At least to consider the series that has all of its parts.
This refers to a "complete person," a paripūrin, that passes through
all of the states that constitute these parts. Such persons are not beings
who die before their time, [for example, in the course of their embryonic
life], nor are they beings of Rūpadhātu or Ārūpyadhātu. It is certain that
the Sūtra that enumerates these eight parts refers to beings in402 Chapter Three
Kāmadhātu: the Mahānidānaparyāyasūtra says, “Ānanda, if the con-
sciousness were not to descend into the mother's womb..." (Digha,
ii.63).
Pratītyasamutpāda can be divided into two parts: past existence
(1-2) and its effects (3-7); and the causes of future existence (8-10) and
future existence (11-12).
What are, in this conception of pratītyasamutpāda, its different
parts?
21a. Ignorance is, in a previous life, the state of defilement, 154
[Ignorance does not refer to an isolated state of ignorance, iii. p. 87,
90, v.12, nor merely to the totality of the defilements, "all the klesas,"]
but rather, in a previous life, the series (with its five skandhas) which is
defiled, the condition of defilement (kleśa-avasthà). All the defilements
in fact accompany ignorance, and are activated through ignorance. In the
same way, when one says that the king is coming, one understands that
his courtiers are accompanying him.
21b. The samskäāras are, in a previous life, the state of action.
The series of the previous life, which does good, bad, or neutral
actions, constitute the samskäras.
21c. The consciousness is the skandhas at conception.
The five skandhas, in the womb, at the moment of reincarnation
(pratisamdhi) or arising constitute consciousness.
21d-22a. Nāmarūpa (is the series) from this moment on, until
the production of the six āyatanas.
Nāmarūpa is made up of the five skandhas, in the womb, from
arising, as long as the six organs are not manifested. It is proper to say,
"as long as the four organs [for the mana-ayatana and the
kāya-ayatana exist from arising or conception, pratisamdhikṣaṇe]; 155 it
is now at the moment when the four organs, eye, etc., appear that these
two preexisting organs are found to be "arranged" [in a group of six]. 156
""The World 403
22b. Six āyatanas before coming together of the three or contact.
The six ayatanas are the five skandhas from the first appearance of
the organs until the moment when the coming together of the organ,
the object of consciousness, and the consciousness takes place.
22c-d. There is sparsa, or contact, until the moment when the
capacity to distinguish the cause of pleasure, of suffering, etc., is
acquired.
Contact [which begins at birth] lasts until the moment when the
infant becomes capable of distinguishing,"This is a cause of pleasure..."
23a. There is contact before sexual union.
Contact, which the Kārika terms vitti, exists for as long as desire for
sexual union is not in action. [This state is termed vedanā, sensation,
because one experiences the cause of vedanā: it is hence avasthā
vedanaprakarsini]
23b. Desire ("thirst") is the state of one who desires pleasure and
sexual union.
There is then in activity concupiscence relative to the objects of
desire (kāmaguņas, iii. p. 6), visible things, etc., and sexual union. This
state of "thirst" or desire ends when one begins, under the influence of
this desire, to search out these pleasures.
23c-d. Upādāna or attachment is the state of one who runs
around in search of the pleasures.
One runs everywhere in order to acquire these pleasures (v.40). [Or
rather upādāna is the fourfold defilement (v.38): the period during
which this fourfold defilement is active is called upādāna]. Running
around in this manner
24a-b. He does actions which will have for their result future
existence (bhava): this is bhava.
[Bhava signifies "action," for existence takes place by reason of it,
bhavaty anena.]Action done and accumulated in the search for pleasures
will produce reexistence. The period during which one does this action404 Chapter Three
constitutes bhava.
24c. Jāti is the new reincarnation.
The five skandhas at the moment when reincarnation takes place
after death is jāti. The "part" that receives the name of consciousness in a
present existence is called jāti in a future existence.
24d. Old age-and-death lasts until sensation.
From jāti until sensation, which is here termed vid—there are
four parts of the present existence, nămarūpa, the six ayatana, contact
and sensation which are, in a future existence designated by the
expression old age and death, the twelfth part of this twelvefold series.
It is also said that pratityasamutpada is fourfold: momentary or of
one moment (kṣanika); prolongued (prākarsika: extending over many
moments of many existences); serial (sāṁbandhika, through the union
of causes and effects); and static (āvasthika: embracing twelve states, or
periods, of the five skandhas). 157
How is pratityasamutpada momentary?
When a person in prey to the defilements commits murder, the
twelve parts are realized in one and the same moment: 1. his moha
(aberration) is ignorance (avidya);, 2. his "volition" (cetana) are the
samskāras; 3. his distinct consciousness of a certain object is con-
sciousness; 4. the four skandhas 158 coexisting with the consciousness is
nāmarūpa; 5. the organs in relation to nămarūpa are the six äāyatanas; 159
6. the application of the six ayatanas 160 is contact; 7. to experience
contact is sensation; 8. desire (rāga) is thirst; 9. the paryavasthānas 161
associated with thirst are attachment; 10. bodily or vocal action that
proceeds [from sensation or thirst] is bhava; 11. the emersion
(unmajjana-utpada-production) of all these dharmas is jāti; 12. their
maturity (paripäka) is old age; and their rupture is death.The World 405
It is also said that pratītyasamut pāda is both momentary and serial at
the same time. The Prakaraṇa says, “What is pratītyasamutpāda? All
the conditioned (saṁskṛta) dharmas. What are the dharmas produced
through dependence (pratityasamutpanna)? All the conditioned
dharmas." 162
Static (āvasthika) pratiyasamutpāda is made up of the twelve states
(avastha) embracing the five skandhas.
It is also prolongued (prākarṣikā), extending itself over three
consecutive existences.
Among these four, what is the type of pratityasamutpāda that the
Blessed One has here in the Sutra of the Twelve Parts-the intention
to teach?
25a. According to the School, it is static pratityasamutpāda. 163
According to the School the Blessed One distinguishes the twelve
parts only with respect to static pratūṭyasamutpāda.
But if each of the parts is a complex of the five skandhas, why use the
designations "ignorance," etc.?
Because the Sūtra expresses itself in an intentional manner, whereas
the Abhidharma teaches the characteristics of things. 164 On the one
hand pratītyasamutpāda is given as static, prolongued, and pertaining to
living beings (sattvakhya); and on the other hand, as momentary, serial,
and pertaining to both living and non-living beings (sattvāsattvākhya).
Why does the Sūtra teach pratityasamutpada as only pertaining to
living beings?
25c-d. In order to have aberration cease with regard to the past,
the future, and the interval in between.406 Chapter Three
And it is for this same reason that it teaches a pratītyasamutpāda in
three sections.
Ignorance or aberration relating to the past, as when one asks, "Did I
exist or not exist in the past? How and as what did I exist?" Relating to
the future: "Will I exist in the future? . . . " Relating to the interval in
between: "What is this? How is this? What are we? What will we
be?" 165
This threefold aberration is destroyed by the teaching of the
succession: ignorance... old age and death. For its is said in the Sūtra,
"Whoever, Oh Bhikṣus, knows, through prajñā, pratītyasamutpāda and
the dharmas produced through dependence, will not turn himself
towards the past by asking if he existed...
According to others, the last three terms of the middle section,
-thirst, attachment, and bhava,—are also taught in order to cause
aberration relating to the future to cease; for they are the causes of future
existence. 166
This twelvefold pratītyasamutpāda is also threefold, defilement
(klesa), action (karman), and foundation (vastu); it is twofold, cause and
result.
26a-b. Three parts are defilement, two are action; seven are
foundation and also result. 167
Ignorance, thirst, and attachment are, by their nature, defilements;
the saṁskāras and bhava are action; consciousness, nāmarūpa, the six
āyatana, contact, sensation, jāti, and old age and death are foundation, so
called because they are the support (aśraya-adhiṣṭhāna) of the de-
filements and action. The parts that are foundation are result: the five
that are not foundation are cause, being both defilement and action in
nature.
Why are cause and result taught at length in the section of present
existence-two parts of defilement, two parts of action, five parts of
foundation-whereas, a similar exposition is absent for the past and
future?
In the future, one has two parts for result.The World 407
26b-c. In two sections, cause and result are abbreviated, for one
can infer them from the teaching of the middle.
From the teaching of the defilements, action and foundation,
relating to present existence, one can deduce the complete exposition of
cause and result in past and future existences. All useless descriptions
should be omitted.
But if pratityasamutpāda has only twelve parts, transmigration
would have a beginning, since the cause of ignorance is not indicated;
and it would have an end, since the result of old age and death is not
indicated. Thus one must add new parts, and to infinity.
No, for the Blessed One has implicitly indicated the cause of
ignorance and result of old age and death.
27. From defilement there arises defilement and action; from
whence foundation; from whence a new foundation and
defilement: such is the manner of existence of the parts of
existence or bhavāṇgas. 168
Defilement arises from defilement, as attachment arises from
desire.
Action arises from defilement, as consciousness from attachment, or
the saṁskāras from ignorance.
A foundation arises from action, as vijñāna from the samskäras, or
birth from existence.
A foundation arises from a foundation, as nãmarüpa from con-
sciousness; the six āyatanas from nāmarūpa . . . sensation from contact,
or old age and death from birth.
Defilement arises from a foundation, as desire from sensation.
Since such is the manner of existence of the various parts of
dependent orgination it is clear that ignorance has either a defilement or
a foundation for its cause; it is clear that old age and death (=the rest of
the foundation from consciousness to sensation, above, p. 404, line 6, has
defilement for a result.
Thus the teaching is complete. That the Blessed One wanted to408 Chapter Three
illustrate this manner of existence of the parts results from the
conclusion of the Sūtra, “Thus there takes place the production of this
great mass which is nothing but suffering." 169
But there is another explanation: 170 a. It is said, in another Sūtra, 171
that ignorance has incorrect judgment (ayonifo manasikāra) for its
cause, and, in still another Sūtra, that incorrect judgment has ignorance
for its cause.
Consequently ignorance is not without a cause and one avoids the
objection of infinite regression.
b. But incorrect judgment is not named in the Sūtra in question, the
Pratītyasamutpādasūtra.
Without doubt; but it is included in attachment: thus one does not
have to separately name it here. 17.3
This explanation is without value. How is incorrect judgment
included in attachment? Indeed, it is associated (samprayukta) with
attachment, but it can as equally well be associated with ignorance or
with desire. Let us admit that it may be included in attachment, but can
one draw from this the conclusion that the Sūtra, by naming attachment,
says that incorrect judgment is the cause of ignorance? In other words, I
indeed hold that incorrect judgment is included in attachment; but it
does not follow that the Sutra could dispense with terming it a separate
part, the cause of ignorance. One could just as well omit ignorance and
desire.
Another master speaks next. 174 A Sūtra teaches that ignorance has
incorrect judgment for its cause. 175 A Sūtra teaches that incorrect
judgment has ignorance for its cause and observes that it is produced at
the moment of contact, "By reason of the eye and a visible thing there is
produced a defiled judgment which arises from error (moha-avidyā).” 176
A Sūtra explains the origin of desire, "Desire arises by reason of a
sensation which itself arose from a contact wherein there is ig-
norance." 177 Hence the ignorance that coexists with sensation proceeds
from the incorrect judgment which is produced at the moment of
contact. Hence ignorance is not without a cause; there is no reason to add
a new term: incorrect judgment, the cause of ignorance, arise itself fromThe World 409
an ignorance designated as aberration (moha). [This is circular
reasoning, cakraka.]
Well and good, says the author; but this is not explained in the
Pratītyasamut pādasūtra and it should be explained there.
There is no reason to explain it in clearer terms, for one reaches
these conclusions through reasoning. In fact, to the Arhats, sensation is
not a cause of desire: from whence we conclude that sensation is a cause
of desire only when it is defiled, associated with ignorance. Contact,
when it is not accompanied by error, is not a cause of this defiled
sensation; contact accompanied by error is not produced in an Arhat,
who is free from ignorance; thus the contact that pratītyasamutpäda
indicates as the cause of sensation, a cause of desire, is the contact that is
accompaned by ignorance. [We then have sāvidyasparsapratyayā vedanā
/ sāvidyavedanapratyayā tṛṣṇā: sensation conditioned by contact as-
sociated with ignorance, desire conditioned by sensation associated with
ignorance]. From there we again take up the reasoning indicated above:
we prove that, according to the Sūtra, incorrect judgment is produced at
the moment of contact.
But, says the author, the idea that reasoning, supported on occasion
by Sutras, permits omitting indispensable terms-in the incorrect
judgment in question, with the reciprocal causality of incorrect
judgment and ignorance-leads to absurdity. [One could just as well
omit contact, sensation, the samskāras or birth].
The true answer to this objection-that, since there is no indication
of any other parts before ignorance and beyond old age and death,
samsāra is without beginning or end-is the following: the enumera-
tion of the parts of dependent orgination is complete. In fact, doubt with
reference to the question of knowing how present existence is
conditioned by preceding existence, and how future existence is
conditioned by present existence, is the only point that the Sūtra wants
teach: thus it says, "In order to cause error relating to the past, the future,
and their interval to cease" (iii.25c, p. 68).
The Blessed One said, "I shall teach you, Oh Bhikṣus, pratītya-
samutpada and the dharmas produced in dependence (pratitya-410 Chapter Three
samutpanna)."'
"178 What difference is there between pratityasamutpäda
and these dharmas?
None, according to the Abhidharma. For, as we have seen above (p.
405), both are defined as being "all the conditioned dharmas." 179
A difficulty. "All the conditioned dharmas" means the dharmas of
the three periods. How can future dharmas which have not yet arisen, be
termed "produced in dependence," pratityasamutpanna?
We would ask you how future dharmas which are not yet "created"
(kṛta) are called "conditoned" (saṁskṛta)?
Because they are "thought" (cetita) by the volition (cetanā) which is
termed ābhisaṁskārikā, that is, “executing a retribution." 180
But if this is so, how will future pure dharmas (the dharmas of the
Path) be conditioned?
They are thought by a good mind with a view to acquiring them.
But then Nirvāṇa itself will be conditioned, for one desires to acquire
it. 181
When one calls future dharmas "produced in dependence," one uses
an inadequate expression, justified by the identity of nature of future
dharmas with past and present dharmas that are "produced," in the
same way that future rupa is called rupa by reason of the identity of its
nature with rūpa, even though one cannot qualify it as rūpyate in the
present. 182
What is the intention of the Sūtra in distinguishing pratitya-
samutpäda from the dharmas produced in dependence?
28a-b. Samutpāda is the cause, whereas samutpanna is the
result. 183
The part that is a cause is pratityasamutpāda, because, there takes
place arising from it. The part that is a result is pratītyasamutpanna,
because it arose; but it is also pratityasamutpāda, because, from it, arising
takes place. All the parts, being cause and result are at one and the sameThe World 411
time both pratityasamutpäda and pratityasamutpanna. Without this
distinction, nevertheless, there would be non-determination and con-
fusion (avyavasthāna), for a part is not pratityasamutpāda through
connection to the part through connection to which it is also
pratityasamutpanna. In the same way a father is father through
connection to his son; and a son is son through connection to his father;
in the same way cause and result, and the two banks of a river.
But the Sthavira Pūrṇāśa 184 says: What is pratityasamutpāda cannot
be pratityasamutpanna. Four causes: 1. future dharmas [which are
pratītyasamutpāda because they are a cause of future dharmas, but not
pratītyasamutpanna because they are not utpanna]; 2. the last dharmas
of the Arhat [which are solely pratityasamutpanna]; 3. past and present
dharmas, with the exception of the last dharmas of the Arhat, [which
are both pratityasamutpada and pratityasamutpanna]; and 4. the
unconditioned dharmas, [which are neither pratūtyasamutpāda nor
pratītyasamutpanna, because they have no result and they do not arise,
ii.55d].
The Sautrāntikas criticize: [All this teaching, from "Static Pratitya-
samutpada. (p.405)" to "What is pratītyasamutpāda cannot be
pratītyasamutpanna,"] 185 -are these personal theses, fantasies, or the
sense of the Sūtra? You say in vain that it is the sense of the Sūtra. You
speak of a static pratītyasamutpāda of twelve parts which are so many
states (avasthā) made up of the five skandhas: this is in contradiciton to
the Sūtra wherein we read, "What is ignorance? Non-knowledge
relating to the past . . . "186 This Sūtra is of explicit sense, clear
(nītārtha=vibhaktārtha); you cannot make it a Sūtra whose sense is yet
to be deduced (neyārtha). 187
[Answer of the Sarvästivādins:] Nothing proves that this Sūtra is of
clear sense; the fact that it expresses itself by means of a definition does
not prove anything; for the Blessed One gives definitions which solely
bear on the essential or major elements of the object to be defined. 188
For example, in the Hastipadopamasutra, to the question "What is the
internal earth element?", the Blessed One answers, “The hair, the
body-hair, etc." 189 Certainly hair, etc., are still other dharmas,—visible
things, smells, etc., but the Blessed One refers to their principal
element, which is the earth element. In the same way, the Blessed One
designates a state in which ignorance is the major element as ignorance.412 Chapter Three
[Answer of the Sautrāntikas:] This example proves nothing. In fact,
in the Hastipadopamasutra, the Blessed One does not define hair, etc.,
by the earth element; he does not say "What is hair, etc.? The earth
element," in which case the definition would be incomplete. But he
defines the earth element through the hair, etc.; and his definition is
complete, for there is no earth element in the body which is not included
in the description, hair, etc. In the same way, the definition of
pratītyasamutpāda is complete; there is nothing to add to it.
[Answer of the Sarvästivādins:] The definition given in the
Hastipadopamasutra is not complete. In fact there is earth element in
tears, mucus, etc., as one can see by another Sūtra. ¹90⁰ Yet the earth
element of tears is not indicated in the Hastipadopamasutra.
[Answer of the Sautrāntikas:] Perhaps the definition of the
Hastipadopamasutra is incomplete, seeing that you are able to show that
there is something lacking in it. It remains for you to say what is lacking
in the definitions that the Sūtra gives for ignorance, etc. Why define
ignorance as "a state with five skandhas" by introducing heterogeneous
dharmas [the five skandhas] into ignorance? One can only consider as a
part of dependent orgination a dharma the existence or nonexistence of
which governs the existence or nonexistence of another part. Thus a
state having five parts is not a "part." The five skandhas (sensation, etc.)
exist in the Arhat, but he does not possess any saṁskāras which could
produce a consciousness part of dependent orgination, that is, a
punyopaga, apunyopaga, or aninjyopapaga vijñāna. 191 And thus fol-
lowing. Hence the Sūtra (note 186) is not to be taken literally.
As for the four cases of Pūrņāśa, his first case-that the future
dharmas are not "produced by dependence"-is contradicted by the
Sūtra which gives birth and old age and death as "produced by
dependence": "What are the pratityasamutpannas? Ignorance... birth,
and old age and death." Would one say that birth and old age and death
are not future states? This is to take away the three sections from the
theory of pratityasamutpāda.
Certain schools 192 maintain that pratityasamutpäda is uncon-
ditioned (asaṁskṛta) because the Sūtra says, "Whether the TathāgatasThe World 413
appear or not, this dharma nature of the dharmas is unchanging."
etc.,
This thesis is true or false according to the manner in which one
interprets it. If one means to say that it is always by reason of ignorance,
that the saṁskāras, etc., are produced, but not by reason of any other
thing, and not without cause; that, in this sense, pratītyasamutpāda is
stable, and eternal (nitya), we approve. If one means to say that there
exists a certain eternal dharma called pratityasamutpäda, then this
opinion is inadmissible. For utpäda, production or arising, is a
characteristic of anything that is conditioned (saṁskṛtalakṣaṇa, ii.45c);
an eternal dharma, as arising or pratityasamutpada would be by
supposition, cannot be a characteristic of a transitory or conditioned
thing. Moreover arising is defined as "existence succeeding upon
nonexistence": 193 what relationship (abhisambandha) can one suppose
exists between an unconditioned arising and ignorance, etc., a re-
lationship that would permit one to say "pratityasamutpāda of
ignorance, etc.?" Finally the expression pratityasamutpāda would
become absurd: since prati-itya-samutpäda signifies "production by
having gone to the cause" (pratyayam prāpya samudbhavaḥ), how could
a dharma be both eternal and pratītyasamutpāda at one and the same
time?
What is the meaning of the word pratītyasamutpāda? 194
Prati has the sense of prāpti, "to obtain, attain": the root i signifies
gati, "to go;" but with the prefix modifying the sense of the root, prati-i
signifies "to attain", so pratitya signifies “having attained;" pad signifies
sattā, "existence;" and following are the prefixes sam-ut, "to appear,
prādubhāva." Thus pratītyasamutpāda signifies "having attained ap-
pearance."
This explanation is not admissible; the word pratityasamutpāda is
not good, [say the Grammarians]. In fact, of two actions by one and the
same agent, the previous action is shown by the verb in the gerundive:
snätvā bhunkte = "after having bathed, he ate."195 Now one cannot414 Chapter Three
imagine a dharma that, existing before having been produced, 196 goes
first towards the pratyayas, and is then produced. There is no action
(going towards) without an agent. One can put this objection in verse:
"Do you say that it goes towards the pratyayas before its production?
This is inadmissible because it does not exist. Do you say that it goes and
is produced at the same time? The gerundive is not justified, for the
gerundive indicates priority."
The objection of the Grammarians 197 is without value. 198 Let us ask
them if that which arises is present or future. "Do you say that a present
thing arises? If it has not already arisen, how can it be present? If it has
already arisen, how could it be reborn without being reborn indefinitely?
Do you say that a future thing 19⁹9 arises? How can you attribute to that
which is future, and non-existent, the quality of agent in this action of
arising? Or how can you admit an action without an agent?"
Consequently we would answer the Grammarians that the dharma goes
towards the pratyayas in the same condition in which, according to
them, the dharma arises.
In what condition, ask the Grammarians, is the dharma to be found,
in your opinion, that arises?
The dharma that arises is "the future dharma disposed to be born"
(utpādābhimukho'nāgatah). 200 So too the dharma that goes toward the
pratyayas.
Yet the theory of the Grammarians and the manner in which they
oppose an agent and action, is not tenable. For them there is an agent
(kartar) which is "he who arises" (bhavitar), and an action (kriyā) which
here is the action of arising (bhuti). Now one does not maintain that the
action of arising (bhūti) is distinct from the one who arises (bhavitar) (ii.
English trans. p.247). There is thus nothing wrong in using, of course as
conventional expressions, the words, "it arises, it is produced after
having gone to the pratyayas." The meaning of the expression
pratītyasamutpada is as indicated in the Sūtra, 201 "If that exists, then this
exists; through the arising of that, there is the arising of this." (See
below, p.415). The first phrase ("If that exists...")refers to pratitya, and
the second ("Through the arising of that ... “) to samutpāda.
Thereupon one can say in verse, "If you admit that it arises at first
nonexistent, nonexistent it also goes to the pratyayas. If you admit that it
arises at first existent, arisen, it will continue to rearise; hence there isregression ad infinitum; or rather we shall say that, for us also, it is
preexistent to its arising." 202 As for the gerundive, it also indicates
concomitance: "Darkness, having attained the lamp, perishes," or
rather: "Having bathed, he lies down." One does not speak in this
manner of anyone who bathes, closes his mouth and lies down. 203
The World 415
Some other masters avoid the objection relative to the use of the
gerundive by giving a very different explanation of the word pratitya-
samutpāda: prati has a distributive meaning; sam signifies "coming
together”; itya signifies "good at leaving,” “that which does not last;”
and the root pad preceeded by ut signifies "appearance," "arising." We
then have pratityasamutpāda which signifies "arising together, by
reason of such and such a coming together of causes, of perishable
things." 204
This explanation holds for the expression pratityasamutpāda; but it
does not take into account texts such as: a visual consciousness arises "By
reason (pratitya) of the eye and visible things." 205
Why does the Blessed One define pratītyasamutpāda in two ways,
"1. If that exists, then this exists;" and 2. "From the arising of that, this
arises?" 206
i. For many reasons: 207 1. to be more specific. In the first formula, it
results that the saṁskāras exist when ignorance exists; but it does not
result that the samskāras come into existence through the sole existence
of ignorance. The second formula specifies that it the arising of
ignorance that precedes the arising of the saṁskāras; 2. in order to
indicate the succession of the parts of dependent orgination: if that
(ignorance) exists, then they (the samskāras) exist; from the arising of
that (saṁskāras)—and not from any other thing-this (consciousness)
arises; 3. in order to indicate the succession of existences: if previous
existence existed, then there is present existence; from the arising of
present existence future existence arises; 4. in order to indicate the
nature of causality which differs according to the case: the causality of the416 Chapter Three
parts is either immediate: "if that exists, then this is," or not immediate:
"from the arising of that, this arises." For example, defiled saṁskāras
can immediately succeed ignorance; or they can be separated from it by
good saṁskāras (ii.62a). But ignorance is the immediate cause of the
saṁskāras, and a mediate cause of consciousness.
ii. According to another explanation,208 the Blessed One taught in
this manner in order to refute the theory of non-causality (ahetuvada),
the thesis that a thing exists in the absence of a cause, and the theory of
one non-arisen cause, such as Prakṛti, Purușa, etc.
This explanation is not good, for the second formula suffices to
refute these two theories.
iii. But certain non-Buddhist teachers imagine that "since the atman
exists as a support (of ignorance), then the saṁskāras, consciousness,
etc., exist, being produced; that if ignorance is produced, then the
saṁskāras are produced," and so on. In other words, they posit an ātman
which serves as a substrate to the successive causation of the dharmas. In
order to refute this opinion, the Blessed One specified, "That which
arises (the saṁskāras) through the arising of such a thing (ignorance)
exists by reason of the existence of this one thing that arises, and not by
reason of the existence of a certain substrate." The first formula would
permit us to say, "If the atman exists as a support and if ignorance, etc.,
exists, then the saṁskāāras, etc., exist." This second formula permits us
to say, "It is true that the samskäras, etc., arise by reason of the arising of
ignorance, etc.; but this is on the condition that there exists a certain
substrate." The two formulas together make these explanations
untenable: "The saṁskāras have ignorance for their cause [that is: if
ignorance alone exists. . . ]... thus the production of this large and
autonomous mass of suffering takes place."
iv. The Masters 209 think that the first formula indicates non-
abandoning, non-cutting off: "If ignorance exists, not being abandoned,
then the samskäras exist, are not abandoned;" whereas the second
formula indicates arising: "Through the production of ignorance, the
saṁskāras are produced." 210
v. According to another opinion, 211 the first formula indicates
duration, and the second indicates arising: "As long as the flux of causes
lasts, the flux of results exists; by the sole production of a cause, its result
is produced."The World 417
We observe that it is a question of arising: the Blessed One said in
fact: "I shall teach you pratityasamutpäda." Further, why would the
Blessed One first teach duration and then arising?
Another explanation (of the same master): 212 The formula: "If that
exists, then this exists," signifies: "If the result exists, then the
destruction of its cause exists." But let us not think that a result arises
without a cause: "From the arising of that, this arises."
But, in order to express this sense, the Blessed One should have said,
"If that exists, then this does not exist;" and he should have first
indicated the arising of the result. Once the result arose, he could say,
"When the result has arisen, the cause is no more." If the Sutra should be
understood as this master understands it, how does it happen that,
wishing to explain pratityasamutpäda, the Blessed One first explained
the destruction of its cause?
How do the samskāras exist by reason of ignorance? How does old
age and death exist by reason of birth? 213 Let us briefly answer this
question.
The fool or Prthagjana does not understand (aprajānan) that
pratītyasamutpāda is merely the samškāras,214 that is, conditioned
(saṁskṛta) dharmas-[this lack of prajñā is avidyā āveṇikī, only non-
wisdom, not associated with desire]-and this produces a belief in an
ātman (v.7, 12), and egotism (v.10a); it accomplishes the threefold
action,―bodily, vocal, mental,―with a view to agreeable sensation, and
to the sensation of indifference; non-meritorious action, with a view to
agreeable sensation in this life; meritorious action, with a view to
agreeable sensation in a future life in Kamadhātu; and "unmoveable"
(āniñjya) 215 action, with a view to agreeable sensation of the first three
Dhyānas and the sensation of indifference of the higher stages (iv.46a).
These actions are the saṁskāras that exist by reason of ignorance.
Given the force of the projection of action, the series of the
consciousness, due to the series of the intermediary existence, goes into
such and such a realm of rebirth, as long as it may be, in the manner in
which a flame goes, that is, in a perpetual renewing. That is the
consciousness which exists by reason of the saṁskāras: in thus418
Chapter Three
understanding the consciousness, we are in agreement with the
definition that the Pratītyasamutpādasūtra gives for the consciousness:
"What is the consciousness? The six groups of consciousnesses." 216
With the consciousness as an antecedent, nāmarūpa arises in this
realm of rebirth. This is the five skandhas, conforming to the definition
of the Vibhanga: 217 “What is nāman? The four nonmaterial skandhas.
What is rūpa? All rūpa ….. These two,—the nāman and the rūpa,—are
called nāmarupa."
Then, through the development of nāmarūpa, there arises in their
times, the six organs: these are the six ayatanas.
Then, encountering their object, a consciousness arises, and, through
the coming together of the three (consciousness, the six ayatanas and a
visaya), there is contact, which is susceptible of being experienced
agreeably, etc.
From that, the threefold sensation, agreeable, etc., arises.
From this threefold sensation, there arises a threefold desire; desire
for kāma or desire for agreeable sensation of the sphere of Kāmadhātu,
in a being tormented by suffering; desire for rūpa, or desire for agreeable
sensation of the three Dhyānas and the sensation of indifference of the
Fourth; all desire for Ārūpya.
Then, from the desire relating to sensation, there arises a fourfold
attachment (upādāna): attachment to the object of sense pleasure
(kāmopādāna), attachment to views (dṛṣṭyupāādāna), attachment to
rules and rituals (šilavratopādāna), and attachment to theories con-
cerning the soul (ātmavādopādāna). 218 The kāmas are the five objects of
pleasure (kāmaguṇa, iii.3, p. 368). The views, sixty-two in number, are
as explained in the Brahmajālasutra. Sila is rejecting immorality (dauḥsilya,
iv.122a); vrata is the vow to act like a dog, a bull, etc.; 2¹9 for example the
Nirgranthas and their nudity, the Brāhmanas with their staffs and
antelope hides, the Pāśupātas with their tuft of hair and their ashes, the
Parivrājakas with their three staffs and their nudity, and the rest: to tie
oneself down to the observation of these rules is filavratopādāna (v.7).
Atmavāda is the person himself, and ātmabhāva, is that relating to
which one says ātman. 220
According to another opinion, 221 ātmavāda is both a view of soul
(atmadṛṣṭi) and thoughts pertaining to a soul (asmimāna), for it is by
reason of these two that one says atman, that one affirms the existenceThe World
of an ātman (ātmavāda): if Scripture uses the word vāda, "affirmation,"
it is because the atman does not exist. It is said in fact, "The fool, the
ignorant, the Prthagjana, conforming to the manners of vulgar speech,
thinks 'me,' or 'mine;' but there is not any 'me' or 'mine.”” 2²2
Attachment to the kāmas, views, etc., is chanda or desire, and rāga or
craving, with regard to them. As the Blessed One said in the Sarva, 223
"What is attachment? It is chandarāga."
Because of attachment, accumulated action produces a new existence:
this is bhava. The Sūtra says, "Ananda, action that produces a new
existence is the nature of bhava." 225
By reason of bhava, and by means of the descent of the con-
sciousness, 226 future arising (janman) is birth, which is made up of the
five skandhas, being nămarūpa in nature.
Because of birth, there is old age and death as defined in the Sūtra. 227
It is in this manner that, sufficient unto itself (kevala)-that is,
without any relation to an atman-there is produced this great mass of
suffering, great because it has neither beginning nor end.
The theory that has just been taught-according to which the
twelve parts of dependent origination are twelve states made up of the
five skandhas-is a theory of the Vaibhāṣikas.
What is avidyā (ignorance)?
The non-vidyā, that which is not vidyā.
Impossible; for the eye is also non-vidyā.
It is an absence of vidya, "ignorance."
This is also impossible, for an absence is not a thing (dravya) (iv.
2b-3b) and avidyā must be a thing, since it is a cause (pratyaya). Thus
28c-d. Avidyā is a separate entity (dharma), the opposite of vidyā
or knowledge, like a non-friend, the untrue, etc. 228
The non-friend (amitra) is the opposite of a friend, not a non-friend,
that is, anyone other than a friend, not the absence of the friend. Rta or420 Chapter Three
satya is truth; non-truth (anṛta) is speech contrary to true speech; so too
non-righteousness (adharma), non-useful (anartha) and the not-to-be-
done (akārya) are the opposite of righteousness, useful, and duty. 229
Thus avidya-"non-knowledge"—is the opposite of vidyā, a real
separate dharma. The Sūtra defines it as the cause of the saṁskāras,
from whence it results that it is not a mere negation. Further,
29a. Because it is declared to be bound (samyojana), etc. 230
The Sūtra regards ignorance as a separate yoke (samyojana), a bond
(bandhana), a latent defilement (anufaya), a canker (äsrava), a torrent
or flood (ogha), and a yoke (yoga). Thus ignorance cannot be a mere
negation; it cannot be everything that is not vidyā, the eyes, etc.
Yet the prefix nan—the privative a-has a pejorative sense. One
terms a bad wife a "non-wife" (akalatra), and a bad son, a "non-son"
(aputra). Should we not think then that avidyā is bad vidyā, that is, bad
Prajna
29b. Avidyā is not bad prajñā, because this is seeing (darśana). 231
Bad prajñā (kuprajñā) or defiled prajñā would be a type of seeing
(drsți); one of the five bad views (v.3). Now avidyā or ignorance is
certainly not seeing, for ignorance and seeing are two distinct yokes
(samyojanas). 232
[The Sautrāntikas:] Avidyā would be the defiled prajñā which is not
seeing by nature, [for example prajñā associated with raga or craving].
This is impossible,
29c. Because views are associated with ignorance,
In fact moha (error or aberration), which is defined as avidyā
(ignorance) is among the mahābhūmika klesas (defilements which are
found in all defiled minds, ii.26a); now all the mahābhūmika klefas are
associated with them, thus avidyā (under the name of moha) is
associated with seeing (fivefold bad view) which is prajna in nature; thus
avidyā is not prajñā, for two items of prajñā cannot be associated.
29d. and because ignorance is defined as a defilement of prajñā.
The Sūtra says, "The mind defiled by desire is not liberated; prajñā
defiled by ignorance is not purified." 233 Now prajñā cannot be defiled byThe World
prajñā: if desire is a defilement of the mind, then desire is not the mind;
if ignorance is a defilement of prajñā, then ignorance is not prajna.
[Reply of the Sautrāntikas]. Good prajñā can be mixed with defiled
prajñā, as when moments of good and defiled prajñā succeed one
another. In the same way, when one says that a mind defiled by desire is
not liberated, one is speaking of a mind that is not necessarily associated
with craving, but which is oppressed by craving [craving is not active,
samudācaran; but its traces remain and the mind is oppressed]. When
an ascetic avoids craving, [that is, by suppressing its traces and repairing
the bad state, dauşthulya, of the mind], then the mind is liberated. In the
same way prajñā, defiled by ignorance (bad prajñā), is not pure: it is
oppressed, even when it is good, by ignorance.
What is capable 234 of arresting the imaginations of a scholar?
Ignorance is not, in its nature, prajñā. 235
The scholar who maintains that ignorance is all the defilements
(klesas) is refuted at the same time. 236 If ignorance is all the defilements,
it cannot be named separately among the yokes (samyojanas), etc.; it is
not associated with views and with the other defilements; Scripture
should not say, "The mind, defiled by desire, is not liberated," but rather,
"The mind defiled by ignorance..." Do you say that one expresses
oneself in this manner in order to be more specific, and that the Sūtra
should say,
"The mind, defiled by ignorance which consists of desire, is
not liberated?" In this hypothesis, Scripture should specify what type of
ignorance it is that hinders the purity of the prajñā: now it says, “Prajñā
defiled by ignorance is not purified."
If you hold that ignorance is a separate dharma, and not merely a
certain type of prajña, you should define it.
Ignorance is the non-samprakhyāna of the Four Truths, the Three
Jewels, of action and its result. [Samprakhyāna is the same thing as
prajñā, discernment, or jñāna, knowledge]. 237
What is non-samprakhyāna?
It is not-samprakhyāna, nor absence-of-samprakhyāna, in the same
way that avidyā is not non-vidyā or absence-of-vidyā. It is then a certain
separate dharma, the opposite of samprakhyāna.
Good enough; but as for ignorance, you have not told us the nature
of asamprakhyāna.422
Chapter Three
Definitions are often thus, that is, not definitions through self
nature or essence, but definitions through function. For example, the eye
is defined as "the pure ripa that serves as a support for the eye
consciousness" because one does not know this invisible rūpa except
hrough inference (Chap. ix, French trans. p. 231.). [In the same way the
inique nature of avidyā is known through its action (karman) or activity
(kāritra); this action is contrary to vidyāä so it is thus a dharma contrary
(vipaksa) to vidyā].
The Bhadanta Dharmatrata defines ignorance in the following
erms: asmīti sattvamayanā. 238
Does this mayanā differ from asmimāna (v.10)?
The Bhadanta answers: As the Sūtra says, 239 "I know, I see-
hrough the perfect abandoning and the perfect knowledge of desire, of
iews, mayanās, attachments and latent defilements to the idea of self
ātmagrāha), to the idea of mine (mamagrāha), to asmināna, 240_
vithout shade, 24¹ Parinirvāṇa.” [This Sūtra shows that mayanā-in the
ingular since it is a genre-is distinct from asmimāna].
So be it, there is mayanā; but from whence do you hold that it is
gnorance?
The Bhadanta answers: Because one cannot identify mayanā with
ny other defilement, since it is named separately from desire, views,
nd asmimāna.
But could it not be a māna other than asmimāna? [Māna is in fact six
r sevenfold, v.10]. However we would have to say too much in order to
omplete this examination. Let us stop here.
As for nămarūpa,242 rūpa has already been explained (i.9).
30a. Nāman are the skandhas that are not rūpa. 243
The four nonmaterial skandhas,-sensation, ideas, samskāras, and
onsciousness, are called naman, for naman signifies "that which bends,
elds," (namatīti nāma).The World
The nonmaterial skandhas bend, [that is, "are active," pravartante,
"arise," utpadyante], towards the object (artha) by reason of name
(nāman), the organs, and the object. 244
In this phrase, "by reason of name," one takes the word "name" in its
popular sense, (saṁjñākaraṇa, ii.47a, English trans. p. 250), as a
"designation," which designates and causes to be understood either a
collection, "cattle," "horses," etc., ora single thing, "rūpa,” “taste,” etc.
Why is samjñākaraṇa termed "name?"
Because the samjñākaraṇa causes the nonmaterial skandhas to bend
(namayatīti nāma) towards their object.
According to another explanation, the nonmaterial skandhas are
termed naman, because, then the body dissolves, these skandhas bend,
that is, go towards another existence. 245
We have already explained the six āyatanas (i.9).
30b. There are six contacts. They arise from encounter. 246
The first is the contact of the eye, and the sixth is contact of the
manas or mind (Dīgha, iii.243, etc.)
They arise from the coming together of three things, an organ, its
object, and a consciousness.
One can see indeed that there can be a coming together of the five
material organs, with their objects and their corresponding con-
sciousnesses, for the three are simultaneous. But the mental organ or
manas (manodhātu) is destroyed when a mental consciousness (mano-
vijñāna) arises (i.172); and the object (i.e., dharmas) of this con-
sciousness can be future: how can there be a coming together of the
three?
There is a coming together because the organ (the manas) and the
object (the dharmas) are the causal conditions of the mental con-
sciousness; or rather because the organ, the object and the consciousness
produce the same single effect, namely the contact.424 Chapter Three
What is the nature of contact?
The masters are not in agreement.
Some-[the Sautrāntikas]-say: Contact is merely the coming
together itself. According to the Sūtra, "The coming together, the
encounter, the meeting of these dharmas is contact." 247
Others-[the Sarvāstivādins]-say: Contact is a dharma associated
with the mind (ii.24, English trans. p. 190), distinct from any coming
together. 248 According to the Sutra of the Six Hexades, 249 "The six
internal sources of consciousness (ayatanas, eye, etc.), the six external
sources of consciousness (visible things, etc.), the six consciousness, the
six contacts, the six sensations, and the six desires." The Sūtra thus
knows of the six contacts, together with the six categories of internal
ayatanas, external ayatanas, and the consciousnesses: [thus the contacts
are separate dharmas, for the Sūtra does not contain any repetition or
double usages].
[The Sautrāntikas explain this Sūtra:] If the Sūtra does not contain
any repetition, it follows that sensations and desires exist apart from the
dharmāyatana which is the sixth internal source of consciousness (the
object of the manas), since you can hold only that the first two categories
(six organs and six objects) refer to the organs and their objects without
any relation to the consciousness.
[Reply of the Sautrāntika, the Bhadanta Śrīlābha:] Every eye and
visible thing is not the cause of a visual consciousness, as all visual
consciousness is not the result of the eye and a visible thing. 250 Thus
what is defined as contact in the Sūtra, "Six collections of contacts," is the
eye, a visible thing and the consciousnesses which are cause and effect.
(See p. 428, line 13a).
But how do the Sarvästivadins, who maintain that contact exists
apart from the coming together of any eye, a visible thing and a
consciousness, explain the Sūtra, "The coming together (samgati), the
encounter, the meeting of these dharmas is contact?"
They do not read the Sūtra in this form; 251 or rather they say that the
expression is metaphorical: 252 when the text says "the coming
together," it means "the result of the coming together."
But this discussion is taking us too far afield. 253The World 425
The Abhidhärmnikas think that contact is a dharma, a separate
entity.
30c-d. Five are contact through (actual) contact; the sixth is
so-called through denomination. 254
The contact of the eye, the ear, etc., have sapratigha organs (1.29b)
for their support (āfraya); thus they are termed pratigha sparsa taking
their name from their support. 255
The sixth, the contact of the mental organ, is called adhivaca-
nasamsparsa. 256
What is the meaning of the term adhivacana?
Adhivacana is a name. 257
Now name is the object (alambana) par excellence of contact
associated with the mental consciousness. In fact it is said, "Through the
visual consciousness, he knows blue; but he does not know, 'It is blue;'
through the mental consciousness, he knows blue and he knows, 'It is
blue."¹258
Thus the contact of the mental organ takes its name-a contact of
denomination from its characteristic object.
According to another opinion, 259 one takes into account the fact that
only the mental consciousness is activated (pravartate) with regard to its
objects (color, etc.), or applies itself to its object, by reason of expression
or speech (adhikṛtya vacanam = vacanam avadhārya): 260 mental
consciousness is thus adhivacana. The contact (sparsa) that is associated
with it is thus called adhivacanasamsparsa.
The sixth contact is of three types:
31a-b. Contact of knowledge, non-knowledge, other: which are
respectively pure, defiled, other. 261
These are the contacts associated with vidyā, that is, with pure
prajñā; with avidyā, that is, with defiled non-knowledge; and with
naivavidyā-nāvidyā, that is, with good, but impure prajñā.426
Chapter Three
In considering the contact of non-knowledge which is associated
with all the defilements and which is always active, 262 one distinguishes
the two:
31c. Contacts of antipathy and sympathy
which are associated with hatred and with desire.
Contact in its totality, is threefold.
31d. Three contacts, leading to pleasure (sukhavedya), etc. 263
These are contacts that lead to the acquisition of pleasure, of
suffering, and of neither pleasure nor suffering. These contacts are so
called because they are beneficial to pleasure, to suffering, and to neither
pleasure nor suffering [that is: propitious to the sensation of pleasure,
etc., = sukhavedaniya, etc.] (Pāṇini, 5, 1.1); or rather because "that" is
felt or can be felt (vedyate tad vedayituṁ vā śakyam) (Pāṇini, 3, 1.169).
"That" is sensation, vedanā. The contact where a pleasure should be
felt (sukham vedyam), is a contact that is called sukhavedya. There is in
fact an agreeable (sukha) sensation there.
We have defined the sixfold contact, contact of the eye, etc.
32a. Six sensations arise from contact.264
That is: sensation arisen from contact with the eye, etc.
32a-b. Five are bodily sensations and one is mental.
The five sensations that arise from the contact of the eye and from
the other bodily organs, having for support (aśraya) the bodily organs,
are bodily. The sixth sensation arises from contact with the manas: its
support is the mind (manas) so it is mental or caitasī.***
The World
[The Sautrāntikas] ask if the sensation is later than, or simultaneous
to contact.
The Vaibhāṣikas maintain that sensation and contact are simul-
taneous, being sahabhūhetu, "reciprocal causes" (ii.50a).
[The Sautrāntikas:] How can two things arisen together be "that
which produces" (janaka) and "that which is produced" (janya)?
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] Why would they not be?
[The Sauträntikas:] When two things arise together, how could the
dharma "which produces" have any efficacy with regard to the dharma
"to be produced," which has already arisen?
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] This argument (sadhana) only repeats the thesis
(pratijñā) that two things arisen together cannot be "that which
produces" and "that which is produced."
[The Sautrāntikas:] We would say then that, in your hypothesis,
there would be reciprocal causality of two dharmas arisen together.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] But this is not a fault, for we admit this
consequence. We define sahabhūhetu as ye mithaḥphalaḥ, "The
dharmas that are results of one other are a sahabhū cause” (ii.50c).
[The Sautrāntikas:] So be it, that is your system. But the Sūtra
condemns this system. It says, "By reason of the contact of the eye, there
arises a sensation which arises from the contact of the eye;" it does not
say, "By reason of the sensation which arises from the contact of the eye,
the contact of the eye arises." And again the thesis that "Two things
arisen together can be cause and result" is in contradiction to the
characteristics of a cause. It is taken for granted that the dharma which
produces another dharma is not simultaneous to this other dharma: a
seed precedes its shoot; milk precedes dadhi; a blow precedes the noise;
and the manas (the mental organ) precedes the mental consciousness
(manovijñāna) (i.17).
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] We do not deny that a cause is sometimes earlier
than its result; but we affirm that a cause and its result can be
simultaneous: for example, the visual organ and color, and the visual
consciousness; or the primary elements (mahābhūtas) and “secondary
(bhautika) matter."428 Chapter Three
[The Sautrāntikas:] We do not admit your examples: the visual
organ and color precede the visual consciousness; but the primary
elements and derived matter, which are simultaneous, arise together
from a complex of earlier causes.
The Vaibhāṣikas: Contact and sensation are simultaneous, like the
shoot and its shade. 265
According to another opinion, [the Bhadanta Śrīlābha]: Sensation is
later than contact. There is first the organ and the object (first moment),
then the consciousness (second moment); contact is the "coming
together," that is, the quality of cause and result of these three: organ and
object, and consciousness; finally (third moment) there arises sensation
which has contact for its cause.
The Vaibhāṣikas: In this theory, there is no sensation wherever
there is consciousness: for there is consciousness in the second and third
moment, but sensation only in the third. And all consciousness is not
contact, for there is contact only in the first two moments.
[Śrīlābha:] No. One sensation, having for its cause an earlier contact,
exists at the moment of a later contact: thus all contact is accompanied
by sensation.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] According to you, there would thus be simul-
taneous contact and a sensation of different objects: a sensation
produced by earlier contact of color would exist at the moment of a
second contact of sound. Now a sensation produced by a contact of color
should have this color for its object, for a sensation cannot have an object
different from the object of the consciousness with which it is associated
[and this consciousness, produced by color, should have color for its
object]. Thus you are forced to an inadmissible conclusion.
[Śrīlābha:] Let us say then that consciousness is not always contact,
and that it is not always accompanied by sensation. The consciousness of
color, contemporaneous with the contact of sound, is not contact, but is
accompanied by sensation. The consciousness of the sound is contact,
but it is not accompaned by sensation.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] This theory is incompatible with the rule of the
universal (sarvatraga) or mahābhūmika dharmas (ii.23c-d). This ruleThe World
establishes that ten dharmas,-sensation, contact, idea, etc.-are
associated with every mental state.
[Śrīlābha:] Upon what authority does this rule rest?
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] On the Sastra or Abhidharma. 266
[Śrīlābha:] We recognize Sūtra and not Šāstra as authority. For the
Blessed One said that recourse is to the Sūtra. 267 Or rather we propose
for the doctrine of the mahābhumikas an interpretation different from
yours.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] What then is the meaning of the expression
mahābhūmika? 268
[The Sautrāntikas:] There are three bhūmis or spheres, 1. savitarka-
savicāra: Kāmadhātu and the First Dhyāna, 2. avitarka-savicāra: the
intermediate dhyāna, and 3. avitarka-avicāra: the Second Dhyāna, etc.
(viii.23c); three other bhūmis, good, bad, and neutral [that is, the good,
bad, and neutral dharmas]; and three other bhūmis, of Śaikṣas, Aśaikṣas,
and neither-Śaikṣa-nor-Aśaikṣa [that is, the pure dharmas of the Saikṣa
and Aśaikṣa, and the impure dharmas, ii.70c]. 269 The mental dharmas
which are found in all these bhūmis 270 are called mahābhūmika [these
are sensation, volition, as ii.24]; those which are found only in a good
bhūmi are called kusalamahābhūmika [these are faith, etc., as ii.25];
those which are found only in a defiled bhūmi are called kleśamaḥā-
bhūmika [these are ignorance, etc., as ii.26]. But all these dharmas are
called mahābhūmika, kuśalamahābhūmika, and kleśamahābhūmika,
because they can be found in the bhūmi proper to them: but it is false
that they are necessarily found all at once. Sensation, for example, exists
in all the bhūmis, as too ideas, volition, etc.: but this does not mean that
every mental state includes all these dharmas, sensation, etc. 271
Certain masters observe that the category of the akuśalamahā-
bhūmikas, at first unknown, has been added later;272 and the Sūtras
would suggest this idea. 273
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] If sensation is later than contact, you have to take
into account the Sūtra, “By reason of the eye and visible things there
arises visual consciousness; the coming together of the three is contact;
together there arises (sahajāta) sensation, ideas, volition.” 274
[The Sautrāntikas:] This Sūtra say that sensation, ideas and volition
arise together; it does not say that they arise together with contact: we
say that they arise together among themselves. 275 Let us observe also430 Chapter Three
that the word "together" (saha) is used, not only to indicate simultaneity,
but also to indicate immediate succession. The Sutra, for example, says,
"He cultivates the part of Bodhi called mindfulness together (sahagata)
with compassion." 276 Now compassion, which is always "worldly,"
evidently cannot be simultaneous to a part of Bodhi: for the parts of
Bodhi are always transworldly. Thus the Sūtra not only does not prove
that sensation is simultaneous to contact; it does not even prove that
sensation, ideas and volition are associated with, and simultaneous to
consciousness (visual consciousness, etc.).
[The Sarvāstivadins:] But the Sūtra says, "The dharmas of
sensation, ideas, volition, and consciousness are mixed; they are not
separate." 277 "Mixed" signifies "arisen together." From this Sūtra we
conclude that there are no consciousnesses, sensations, ideas or volitions
which are not simultaneous.
[The Sautrantikas:] But what is the meaning of the word "mixed",
samsṛṣṭa? We read in the Sūtra that you have just quoted, 278 "That which
he feels (vedayata), he thinks of (cetayate); that about which he thinks,
he grasps an idea of (samjānāti); that about which he grasps an idea of,
he discerns (vijānāti).” 279 In other words, the same thing is the object
(ālambana) of sensation, volition, and consciousness. The question is
thus posed whether sensation, volition and ideas are called mixed
because they have the same object-which is our opinion-or because
they are simultaneous, as you say.
[The Vaibhasikas: 280] The word samsṛṣṭa refers to simultaneous
things. It is said in fact that life (äyus) and warmth (uşmaka) are
samsṛṣṭa. 281 They cannot be samsrsta except through simultaneity, not
by the fact that they would have a common object, since they do not have
any object. Furthermore the Sūtra says, "The coming together of the
three is contact." How could. there be a consciousness without there
being a coming together of the three? How could there be encounter of
the three without there being contact? Thus all consciousness is
accompanied by contact and all contact is accompanied by sensation, etc.
But this discussion is carrying us too far afield. Let us return to our
subject.
***The World
We have explained, in summary, mental (caitasi) sensation.
32c-d. This same sensation is of eighteen types by reason of the
objects of the mind (manopavicāras). 282
Mental sensation is made up of eighteen types, because there are six
upavicāras of satisfaction (samanasya), six of dissatisfaction (daurma-
nasya), and six of indifference (upekṣā) (ii.7): these are the upavicāras of
satisfaction relating to visible things, sounds, color, tastes, tangible
things, and the dharmas; the same for the upavicāras of dissatisfaction
and indifference.
How does one distinguish these eighteen?
In considering their nature, their quality of being sensation, the
upavicāras are three: of satisfaction, dissatisfaction, and indifference;
considering their quality of associates, they are one, all being associated
with the mental consciousness; and considering their objects, they are
six: having visible things, sounds, etc., for their objects. We answer then
that one must take into account, at one and the same time, these three
qualities, 283
There is no variety in the object of the first fifteen upavicāras: the
object of manopavicāra relating to visible things is only these visible
things... But, as for the three dharmopavicāras-the three upavicāras
(satisfaction, etc.) relating to the dharmas—one would distinguish: they
can arise relating to the distinct dharmas of the five sense objects; in this
case, their object presents no variety, and is not mixed; they can bear on
one, two, three,... six categories of dharmas (visible things, sounds, ...
dharmas); in this case, their object is mixed. 284
What is the meaning of the expression manopavicāra?
Why are the different types of mental sensation (satisfaction, etc.)
called manopavicāra?
The Vaibhāṣikas say wrongly, "Because satisfaction, dissatisfaction,
and indifference are supported by the manas in order to grasp visible
things, etc., as an object (upavicaranti = ālambante).” 285
According to another opinion, "Because satisfaction, dissatisfaction,
and indifference cause the manas to reconsider (upavicārayanti) visible
things, etc." 286 For it is by reason of sensation (sensation of satisfaction,
etc.) that the manas repeatedly considers visible things, etc.432
Chapter Three
Objections or difficulties. 1. Why not define bodily (kāyikī) sensation
as manopavicāra.
Without doubt bodily sensation has the manas for its support, but it
also has the material organs (eye, etc.) for its support. It is free from
vikalpa (like the visual consciousness, etc., to which it is associated, i.33,
trans. p. 97); and it is no longer upavicārikā, [that is, susceptible of
"consideration," saṁtīrikā]. 287
2. But why is the sukha of the Third Dhyāna (viii.9b), which is of the
sphere of a single manas, not placed among the manopavicāra?
[The Vaibhāṣikas say (wrongly), 288] "Because, initially, that is, in
Kāmadhātu, there is no sukha which is of the sphere of the manas. [In
Kāmadhātu, sukha is solely bodily sensation]; and because there does
not exist any duḥkha-upavicāra which would oppose the sukha-
upavicāra that you imagine."
3. But, if the upavicaras are only of the sphere of the manas, you have
to take into account the Sūtra which says, “Having seen visible things
through the eye, he considers (upavicārati) the visible things which
satisfy (saumanasyasthānīya).” 289The relationship is characterized, in
the Sūtra, by the visual organ and by upavicara.
[The Sarvāstivādins answer:] 1. The Blessed One expresses himself
in this manner because he takes into consideration the fact that the
upavicāras can be produced by the five sense consciousnesses. The
upavicāras are no less that the sphere of the single manas: in the same
way, for example, that the aśubhās (meditation on a cadaver turning
blue, etc., vi.9), which are produced by the visual consciousness, are of the
sphere of the manas: these meditations, in fact, suppose absorption; 2.
on the other hand, the Süütra says, "Having seen visible things...," it
does not say, "Seeing visible things . . . ," which would justify your
objection; 3. there is upavicara of the visible things, etc., without having
seen them, etc. (For example one can "consider" the visible things that
one intends to speak of, with satisfaction). If it were otherwise, a being
in Kāmadhātu could not "consider” the visible things, sounds and
tangible things of Rūpadhātu [which he does not perceive], and a being
of Rūpadhātu would not be able to consider the smells and tastes of
Kāmadhātu; 4. the Sūtra says, "Having seen visible things . . . heThe World 433
considers visible things," because his "consideration" is "clearer" when it
bears on an object which is "experienced." It is not doubtful that, having
seen a visible thing, one cannot consider the sound [which accompaned
the visible thing]; there is here "consideration" or upavicara, of a sound
not experienced: but the text, in order to avoid any confusion, makes a
correspondence between the organs and the objects which correspond
to them.
The objects are given, in the Sūtra, as saumanasyasthānīya, etc.,
"which produce satisfaction, dissatisfaction, or indifference." Are they
such by their natures?
No. The same object can be saumanasthaniya for one person, but
daurmanasyasthānīya for another. It all depends on the "series," on the
dispositions of the mind itself.
Among the manopavicāras, how many are in Kāmadhātu? Which
Dhātu takes the manopavicāras of Kāmadhātu for its object? The same
questions for the other two Dhātus.
33a. In Kāmadhatu all of the manopavicāras have their own
Dhātu for their object.
The eighteen manopavicāras are produced among beings in
Kāmadhātu, but all can have Kāmadhātu for their object.
33b. Rūpadhātu is the object of twelve.
Twelve of them can have Rūpadhātu for their object, with the
exception of the three manopavicãras (of satisfaction, dissatisfaction,
and indifference) relative to odor and the three relative to taste, since
odors and tastes do not exist in Rūpadhātu (i.30b).
33c. The highest Dhātu (=Ārūpyadhātu) is the object of three.
Three, namely the dharmanopavicāras, can have Ārūpyadhātu for
their object, but not the fifteen others, since visible things, etc., do not434 Chapter Three
exist in Ārūpyadhātu (viii.3c).
In Rūpadhātu, one must distinguish the first two Dhyānas and the
last two.
33d. In two Dhyānas, twelve.
In Rūpadhātu the upavicāras of dissatisfaction (daurmanasya) are
completely absent. [In the first two Dhyānas there exists six upavicāras
of satisfaction and six of indifference].
34a. All have Kāmadhātu for their object.
These twelve can have Kāmadhātu for their object.
34b. Eight have their own Dhātu for their object.
Eight of them can have Rūpadhātu for their object, with the
exception of the upavicaras of odor and taste.
34c. Two have Ārūpyadhātu for their object. 2⁹0
Two can have Ārūpyadhātu for their object, namely the dharmo-
pavicāras of satisfaction and indifference.
34d. But, in the other two Dhyānas, six.
The upavicāras of dissatisfaction and satisfaction are absent in the
last two Dhyānas.
34e. Kāmadhātu is the object of six.
There remains then the six upavicaras of indifference which have
the visible things, sounds, odors, tastes, tangible things, and dharmas of
Kāmadhātu for their object.
34f. Of their own Dhātu, four.
The visible things, sounds, tangible things, and dharmas of
Rūpadhātu.
34g. The highest Dhātu (=Ārūpyadhātu) is the object of one.The dharmas of Ārūpyadhāātu.
The World 435
In Ārūpyadhātu, one must distinguish the preliminary absorption of
Ākāśānantyāyatana and the absorption which follows it:
35a. In the preliminary stage of Arūpyadhātu
In the Karikā, the word "aripisamanta" signifies Ākāśānantyāyata-
nasāmantaka (viii.22). Four upavicāras: the upavicāras of indifference
(upekṣa) with regard to visible things, sounds, tangible things and
dharmas of the Fourth Dhyāna are produced in this absorption.
35b. four have Rūpadhātu for their object.
This is the opinion of the masters who think that the mind of this
absorption is vyavacchinnālambana, that is, that it considers visible
things, sounds, etc., separately.
According to other masters, this mind is paripinditālambana: it
considers the five skandhas of the Fourth Dhyāna without any
distinction; for these masters, this absorption is thus made up of only
one upavicāra which has for its object the Fourth Dhyāna, namely the
dharmopavicāra of mixed objects.
35c. One has the highest sphere for its object.
In this same absorption, in Ārūpyadhātu, there is only the
dharmopavicāra.
35d. In Ārūpyadhātu itself, one,
In the principle (maula) 29¹ Dhātu, or Ārūpyadhātu itself, there is
only one upavicāra, dharmopavicāra
35e. which has its own Dhātu for its object.
which has Ārūpyadhātu for its object. As we shall see, the mind, in the
principle absorption of Ārūpyadhātu, does not grasp lower Dhātus for
its object (viii.21).
35f. All of these eighteen are impure.436
Chapter Three
There is no upavicāra which is pure.
A being born in Kāmadhātu who has not taken possession of a good
mind of Rūpadhātu [by penetration into Anāgamya, viii.22; who is all
the more not detached from Kāmadhātu and who has not entered into
the Dhyānas], is in possession of (samanvāgata; ii.36b): 1. the eighteen
upavicāras of Kāmadhātu; 2. the eight upavicaras of the First and Second
Dhyana (four of satisfaction and four of indifference, having visible
things, sounds, tangible things and dharmas for their objects). The
upavicāras of satisfaction and indifference, having for their object the
odors and tastes of Kāmadhātu, which are produced in the Dhyānas, are
not defiled [since the possessor of the Dhyānas is in Kāmadhātu]: hence
the being in question is not filled with these upavicāras [for a being in an
lower sphere is filled with the defiled dharmas of the superior spheres];
3. the four upavicāras (of indifference) of the last two Dhyānas [same
remark as for 2]; and 4. an upavicāra (dharmopavicāra) of the sphere of
Ārūpyadhātu, also defiled.
When this being has obtained a good mind of Rūpadhātu [by
penetrating into Anāgamya], but is not detached from Kāmadhātu, he is
filled with: 1. the eighteen upavicāras of Kāmadhātu; 2. the ten
upavicāras of the First Dhyana: four upavicaras, defiled, of satisfaction,
by omitting the upavicāras of odor and taste, and the six upavicāras of
indifference of the sphere of Anāgamya; 3. as above for the other
Dhyānas and Ārūpyadhātu.
One can decide any other case on the basis of these principles.
A being in one sphere of Dhyāna is in possession of a single
upavicāra of Kāmadhātu, the dharmopavicāra of indifference associated
with a mind capable of creating fictive beings (nirmāṇacitta, vii.49c).
Another master: 292 It is in this way that the Vaibhāṣikas understand
the upavicāras; but we understand the Sūtra in a different way. One
cannot say of one who is detached (vitarāga) from an object, a visible
thing, etc., that he produces upavicāras with regard to this object. All the
satisfactions, etc. (saumanasya, etc.), are not upavicāras, though they are
impure. They are upavicāras when they are "defiling" (sāmklesika),
following the expression of the Sūtra, “when one has sympathy,The World
antipathy, or indifference not proceeding from exact consciousness."
And it is in order to combat these upavicāras that the six "manners of
being, or perpetual methods” (satatavihāra) are taught, 29⁹3 "Having seen
a visible thing with the eye, there is no sympathy and no antipathy: he
remains indifferent in full mindfulness and conscious... "294 We can
show that our interpretation is correct by observing that the Arhat is not
without experiencing a satisfaction of a worldly order (and consequently
impure), but good, having a dharma for its object 295 (that is, the
dharmayātana, i.24, or the adhigama or āgama, viii.39a). What he
arrests is the satisfaction which, being defiled, is upavicāra. 296
By distinguishing those states of satisfaction, dissatisfaction, and
indifference on the basis of those which have craving for their principle
component and those which have "leaving" (the desire for liberation)
for their principal component, we have the thirty-six "points of the
Master" (fästṛpada), so called because this distinction has been taught by
the Master. 297
The divisions of the parts of existence (bhavanga) called sensation,
and which we have just described, are still very numerous.
The other parts of existence will not be explained here.
36a. The others have been explained or will be explained later.
The consciousness and the six ayatanas have been explained in the
First Chapter (i.16,9); the saṁskāras and existence will be explained in
Chapter Four; desire and attachment, in Chapter Five.
We have said (iii.26) that pratītyasamutpada is defilement (klesa),
action (karman) and a “substantial entity" (vastu).
36b-d. It is explained that defilement is like a seed, a Nāga, a root,
a tree, a husk of grain. 298438 Chapter Three
As a stalk, leaves, etc., arise from a seed, so too defilement arises
from defilement, action, and a real, substantial entity.
A pond where Nāgas live does not dry up; in the same way the ocean
of births where this Näga which is defilement remains does not dry up.
The tree whose root is not cut off continues to grow even through
one cuts and re-cuts its greenery; in the same way, as long as this root,
defilement, is not cut off, the realms of rebirth continue to grow.
A tree gives forth flowers and fruits at different times; in the same
way
it is not at one and the same time that this tree, the defilement, gives
forth a defilement, action and a substantial entity.
Grain, even though intact, does not germinate when it is stripped of
its husk; in the same way action must be associated with this husk which
is defilement in order to bear fruit in a new existence.
37a-b. Action is like grain with its husk, grass, flower.
Action is like grain with its husk. It is like grass that dies when the
fruit is ripe: in the same way, when the action has matured, it no longer
matures any more. It is like a flower, the immediate cause of the arising
of the fruit: in the same way it is the immediate cause of retribution.
37c. The substantial entity (vastu) is like food and drink. 299
Food and drink are not reproduced in food and drink: they are not
good except by being consumed: so too the "entity" which is retribution.
A new retribution does not preceed from retribution, for, in this
hypothesis, deliverance would then be impossible.
The series (samtāna) of the skandhas, in its continual process, is
only a succession of the four existences (bhava) that we have defined
(iii.10 and foll.), namely intermediate existence (antarābhava), existence
as arising (upapattibhava), existence in and of itself (pūrvakālabhava),
and existence at death (naraṇabhava).
37d-38b. Among the four existences, existence as arising is
always defiled, and by all the defilements of the sphere to which
it belongs.It is always defiled, never good or neutral. When arising takes place
in a certain sphere (bhūmi: Kāmadhātu, First Dhyāna, etc.), all the
defilements (klesa) 300 of this sphere defile it. The Abhidhārmikas say,
"Among the defilements, there is not a single one that does not defile
the mind at rebirth (pratisamdhibandha); but rebirth takes place solely
through defilements, not by the wrappings (paryavasthānas) called
svatantra [, through jealousy, egoism, anger, or hypocrisy, which are
only associated with ignorance] (v.47).
Although this state-the state of death-is bodily and mentally
"weak" (mandikā), 301 when a person has habitually practiced a certain
defilement, 302 this defilement, thus "projected," becomes active at the
moment of death.
The World 439
38c. The other existences are of three types. 303
Intermediate existence (antarābhava), existence in and of itself
(pūrvakālabhava), and existence at death (maraṇabhava) can be good,
bad, or neutral.
Are the four existences produced in all the Dhātus?
38c. Three in the Ārūpyas, 304
With the exception of intermediate existence. All four existences
exist in Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu.
We have finished the exposition of pratityasamutpada.
Now how do beings, once they are born, last?
38d. Everyone lasts through food. 305
A Sūtra says, "A dharma has been proclaimed by the Blessed One
who knows and sees, that all beings last through food."
There are four foods, food by the mouthful (kavaḍīkāra āhāra),440 Chapter Three
contact (sparsa), mental volition (manaḥsaṁcetanā), and consciousness
(vijñāna). 306
Food by the mouthful is coarse or subtle. Food by the mouthful of
intermediate beings (who nourish themselves on odors, from whence
their name of Gandharva, iii.30c), the food of the gods, and the food of
humans at the beginning of the cosmic age (prāāthamakālpika, iii.97c) is
subtle, because this food, like oil poured out into the sand, completely
penetrates into the body and does not give forth any excrement
(nişyandāābhāvāt). 307 Or rather the food of subtle beings is subtle, for
example a being born from moisture (yüka, etc.), one newly-born
(bālaka), [the embryonic being,] etc.
39a-b. Food by the mouthfuls exists in Kāmadhātu; it consists of
three ayatanas.
Only beings free from desire with regard to this food arise in the two
higher Dhātus; thus this food exists only in Kamadhātu.
It consists of odors, tastes, and tangible things. In fact, odors, tastes
and tangible things are put in the mouth-that is, in pindas or small
balls and then swallowed. This twofold operation is made by the
mouth and the nose which separate the morsels.
But how does one attribute the quality of food to odors, etc., which
are also found in shade (chāyā) and warm light (ātapa, i.10a), in flames
(jvālā), and in the light [of gems, etc.] (prabhā)? 308
But such odors, etc., are not put in the mouth and swallowed.
According to the School, the definition, "Food consists of three
ayatanas," refers to the generality of the cases. [The odors which are
found in the shade, etc., are not food; but, in the majority of cases, odor
pertains to food].
But 309 we think that, even though they are not swallowed, like the
others, since they contribute to the duration of a being, these odors are
included in the category of subtle food; as for example bathing and
unguents (snānābhyangavat; see i. trans. p. 103).
But why is rūpāyatana, a visible thing (color and figure) not a food?
In fact, one swallows it by the mouthfuls.The World 441
39c-d. Rūpāyatana is not food, for it comforts neither its organ
nor those delivered, 310
Food is that which comforts the organs and the primary elements
(the mahābhūtas) which are the support of the organs. Now a visible
thing, at the moment when it is swallowed-when this food, introduced
into the mouth, is eaten-does not comfort either its organ (the eye), or
the primary elements which are the support of the eye. Nor does it
comfort the other organs, since it is not their object. Without doubt, as
long as one sees it, it causes pleasure and satisfaction, it comforts: but,
what is comfort and food in this case is not the visible thing, but the
agreeable contact which has the visible thing for its object. The
explanation that we formulate here is confirmed by the fact that an
agreeable visible thing does not comfort those liberated beings who see
it. [If a visible thing were to perform the function of food when one sees
it, it would comfort persons delivered from the desire for mouthfuls of
food, namely the Anāgāmins and Arhats, as odors, tastes, etc. comfort
these same liberated beings when they partake of them.]
40a-b. In the three Dhātus, contact, volition, and consciousness,
when they are impure, are food. 311
Contact is what arises from the cooperation of the three (iii. p. 97);
mental volition is mental action (manasa karman, iv.lc); and con-
sciousness is the consciousness skandha, 312
Why are they not food when they are pure?
The Vaibhāṣikas say, "Food signifies that which makes existence
(bhava) grow; now if it were pure, it have the destruction of existence
for its result." It is a doctrine conforming to that of the Sūtra, that food
has for a result causing to endure (sthiti), causing to go (yapana) "those
that exist" (bhūta), of favoring (anugraha) "those desiring re-existence
(sambhavaişin).”313 Now contact, volition, and consciousness, when
they are pure, do not produce any of these two results.
"Those that exist" signifies beings who have been born; but what is
the meaning of the expression "desiring re-existence?" 314
It refers to antarabhava, intermediate existence or being, which the
Blessed One designated by five names:
40c-41a. Mind created (manomaya), desiring re-existence (sam-442
Chapter Three
bhavaisin), Gandharva (an eater of odors), intermediate ex-
istence (antarābhava), and arising (nirvṛtti).
An intermediate being is called manomaya,315 because he is
produced by the manas alone, and because he exists without being
supported by any exterior element, semen, blood, flower, etc.
He is called abhinirvṛtti, because his nirvṛtti or arising is with a view
(abhi-mukhī) to arising proper (upapattibhava, existence of arising). 317
That abhinirvṛtti signifies an intermediate being results from the Sūtra
"After having realized (abhinirvartya) a painful body, he will be reborn
in a painful world;" 318 and also from the Sūtra that says, "Such a person
has abandoned the bonds which cause abhinirvṛtti, without having
abandoned the bonds which cause upapatti or existence." 319
in a painful world;" 318 and also from the Sūtra that says, "Such a person
has abandoned the bonds which cause abhinirvṛtti, without having
abandoned the bonds which cause upapatti or existence."319
There are four cases: 1. An ascetic detached from Kāmadhātu and
Rūpadhātu, when he is an Anāgāmin: 320 he has abandoned the bonds
which cause abhinirvṛtti or intermediate existence, since he will no
longer be reborn in the Dhātus where existence itself is preceeded by an
intermediate existence; but he has not abandoned the bonds which cause
upapatti, existence proper, for he will be reborn in Ārūpyadhātu; 2. an
Anāgāmin destined to obtain Nirvāṇa in an intermediate existence (an
antaräparinirvāyin, iii. p. 387): he is bound with the bonds of
abhinirvṛtti, but freed from upapatti, 3. an Arhat, who has abandoned
the two types of bonds; and 4. all other persons who are not included in
the preceeding categories, who have not abandoned any of the two types
of bonds.
According to another explanation, the bhūtas (p. 441, line 31) are
the Arhats: the word sambhavaisin designates all beings who desire
(satṛṣṇā), and who are as a consequence reborn.
What are the foods that fulfill these two functions of causing to last
and "favoring [re-existence]?" 321
According to the Vaibhāṣikas, 322 the four foods perform these two
functions. 323 Food by the mouthful has for its result the re-existence ofThe World 443
those who are attached to it. This is proved by the Sūtra. The Blessed
One said, "The four foods are the root of sickness, abcesses, and thorns.
[Sickness, abcesses, and thorns signifies the five upādānaskandhas of a
new existence]; and are the condition (pratyaya) of old age and death.
[And old age and death is the old age and death of a future existence, see
above, p. 404]." 324
[It is evident that food by the mouthful causes living beings to
last.]But how does mental intentional action, or volition (manaḥsam-
cetană), possess this power? 325
Once upon a time there was a man, who in a time of poverty desired
to go to another land. But he was exhausted by his hunger and his two
sons were young. Feeling that he was going to die, he filled a sack with
ashes, placed this sack on a wall, and encouraged his sons by telling them
that this sack contained grain. The two children, through hope, lived a
long time. But another man came and took the sack and opened it. The
children saw that it was ashes, and their hope being crushed, they died.
So too once upon a time some merchants travelled by ship on the
open sea; tormented by hunger and thirst, they saw in the distance a
mass of foam and believed that it was a river; hope gave them the force
to go to that place and prolong their life; but, arriving, they found out
what it was, and their hopes being crushed, they died. 326
We also read in the Samgitiparyaya, 327 “Large marine animals reach
firm ground, lay their eggs on the beach, bury them in the sand, and go
back to the ocean. If the mother forgets the eggs, they will perish."
This edition cannot be correct, 328 for it is impossible that the mind
of another would be food. Thus we should read, "If the eggs think of
their mother, they will not perish; but if they forget their mother, they
will perish."
Yet one cannot doubt that all the impure dharmas increase bhava or
existence. Why did the Blessed One teach that the foods are four in
number?
Because he refers to the essentials:
41. Among the foods, two have for their result the growth of the444
Chapter Three
aśraya (the body) and the afrita (the mind), and two have for
their result the projection and the production of a new
existence. 329
The aśraya is the body with its organs, which is the support (āśraya)
of what is supported (afrita) by it: namely the mind and its mental
states. Food by the mouthful makes the body grow, while contact makes
the mind grow. 330 These two foods which cause that which is born to
live, and which are similar to a wet-nurse, are the major items for the
duration of a being who is born.
Mental volitional action (manaḥsamcetana) which is active, projects
a new existence; this new existence, thus projected, is produced
(nirvṛtta) from the seed which is the consciousness "informed" through
action. 331 Mental volitional action and the consciousness are thus the
two foods which cause birth, which are similar to a mother, and which
are the major items for the production of the existence of a being who
has not yet been born.
Is everything which is "by the mouthful” (kavadīkāra) food? 332
There are "mouthfuls" which are not food. Four cases: 1. kavaḍīkāra
which is not food: that which, being taken in the mouth, has for its result
the diminution of the organs and the destruction of the primary
elements which support them; 2. food without being kavaḍīkāra:
namely contact, mental volitional action, and the consciousness; 3.
kavadīkāra which is food: that which, being taken in the mouth, has for
its result the growth of the organs and the increase of the primary
elements; and 4. neither kavaḍīkāra nor food: sound, etc.
The same, by changing the terms, for the other foods.
Is there contact, mental volitional action, and consciousness, which
has for its result the growth of the organs and the increase of the
elements, without this contact, etc., being food?
Yes: those which belong to a sphere different from the sphere in
which the being in question is born, and, in all the spheres, those which
are pure. 333***
That which consumed (paribhukta) is harmful to one who has
consumed it (praibhoktar) nevertheless receives the name of food.
According to the Vaibhāṣikas, in fact, it is for two moments that the
thing consumed performs the function of food: 1. as soon as it is
consumed, it dispels hunger and thirst; and 2. digested, it increases the
organs and the primary elements (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 676c25), 334
The World 445
This leads to another question.
How many foods are there is the different realms of rebirth, and in
the different wombs?
All are in all.
How can you say that there is, in the hells, food by the mouthful?
The red balls of fire and molten copper are food. 335
If this is the case, if that which is harmful is food, then the theory of
the four cases [of the Samgītiparyāya, note 332] is rejected, as well as the
definitions of the Prakaraṇagrantha (7.5; see also Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
674a1, 676a26, and 779c4) which says, "What is food by the mouthful?
Mouthful by reason of which there is increase of the organs, and the
increase and maintainance of the primary elements," and the rest.
The doctrine of the existence of food by the mouthful in the hells is
not in contradiction with the definitions that you appeal to. These
definitions, in fact, are applied to food insofar as it increases. 336 But the
objects of consummation which have for their result to diminish,
nevertheless possess, in the hells, the characteristics of food: 337 they
dispel, at least for a time, hunger and thirst. Further, in the prādesika
hells (iii.59c), food by the mouthful exists as among humans. Hence
food by the mouthful exists in the five realms of rebirth.
With respect to food by the mouthful, let us examine the Sūtra:
There is one who feeds one hundred non-Buddhist Rṣis detached from446
Chapter Three
Kāmadhātu, and there is one who feeds a single jambuşandagata
prthagjana: but this last gift is much more fruitful that the first." What
does the expression "jambuşandagata pṛthagjana” mean?
[Three opinions in the Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 678a26] 1. According to
the first opinion, jambuşanda signifying Jambudvīpa, 338 so this signifies,
"All beings inhabiting Jambudvīpa who have a stomach." 339
This explanation is inadmissable; for the expression “a Pṛthag-
jana..." cannot designate "all beings..." Were it to have such a value,
we do not see why the Sūtra would teach that a gift made to an infinite
number of Prthagjanas is more meritorious that one made to a smaller
number, to one hundred Rsis: for such would stand of itself, and there
would be nothing surprising about it. 340
2. According to the second opinion, the Prthagjana in question is the
Bodhisattva close to Bodhi.
3. According to followers of the third opinion, the second opinion is
unsustainable: in fact a gift made to such a Bodhisattva is of incalculable
merit, and is of a merit superior to a gift made to one hundred kotis of
Arhats. The terms of the comparison would be much too low. Thus, say
the Vaibhāṣikas, this Pṛthagjana is the person who has obtained the
so-called nirvedhabhāgiya roots of good. 341
In our opinion, the expression jambuşandagata does not ety-
mologically signify "possessor of the nirvedhabhāgiyas;" the usage does
not give that sense to this expression; neither the Sūtra nor the Šāstra
uses it in this sense: the word jambuşandagata, "seated under the Jambu
tree," refers to but one Bodhisattva, [as it is said, "The Bodhisattva
Sarvārthasiddha, having left in order to go see Kṛṣigrāmaka, sat at the
foot of a jambu tree, and entered into the First Dhyāna."] 342 The
Bodhisattva is a Pṛthagjana, detached from Kāmadhātu: one can thus
compare him with the non-Buddhist Rṣis detached from Kāmadhātu
and say that a gift made to him is more meritorious that a gift made to
Rṣis.
Without doubt, a gift made to this Bodhisattva is more meritorious
than a gift made to an infinite number of Rṣis: and if the Sūtra says that
it is more meritorious than a gift made to one hundred Rṣis, it is because
the Sūtra explains the gradation of merit by multiples of one hundred:
"to feed one hundred animals, to feed one immoral person, to feed one
hundred immoral persons..." we observe that, to proceed with theseThe World 447
comparisons, the Sūtra does not further speak of a jambuṣaṇḍagata. It
does not say, "A gift made to a candidate for the results of Srotaāpanna is
incomparable greater than a gift made to a jambuşandagata"-which it
would say if jambuşandagata were to signify "a possessor of the
nirvedhabhāgīyas”—but rather, taking up again the Rṣis as the term of
comparison, "A gift made to a candidate for the results of Srotaäpanna is
incomparably greater than a gift made to one hundred non-Buddhist
Rṣis.
We have seen what the pratītyasamutpāda of beings is, and how
beings last. We have seen also how death results from the exhaustion of
life (ayus), etc. (ii.45a, trans. p. 269). It remains for us to say which
consciousness is present at the moments of death and birth.
42a-c. Breaking, taking up again, detachment, loss of detach-
ment, death and birth are regarded as proper to the mind
consciousness. 343
It is through a single mental consciousness that the breaking and the
taking up again of the roots of good take place; the detachment either
from a Dhātu, or from a bhūmi (First Dhyāna, etc.), and the loss of this
detachment; and death and birth. What is true of birth is evidently true
of the beginning of the intermediate existence: it is useless to speak of
it. 344
42d. Death and birth, with the sensation of indifference.
The term cyuta is the equivalent of cyuti or death; the term udbhava
is the equivalent of upapatti, arising.
The mind consciousness, at death and at birth, is associated with the
sensation of indifference, upekṣā, that is, with the sensation that is
neither agreeable nor disagreeable. This sensation is not active; the
other sensations are active and, as a consequence, an arising and a dying
consciousness cannot be associated with them, for, in this hypothesis, it
would itself be active.
43a. Neither the one nor the other in "absorption," nor for "one
without thought." 345448
Chapter Three
Death and birth take place in the mind consciousness (mano-
vijñāna), [for and by the manovijñāna]. But death cannot take place in a
person whose mind (citta = manovijñāna) is absorbed. 346 An absorbed
mind is found in a sphere-First Dhyāna, etc.—dissimilar to Kāma-
dhātu where we suppose the one dying and the one being born is found.
On the other hand, if we consider a being who dies or who is born in a
sphere of absorption, then his mind is certainly not absorbed, for an
absorbed mind is only absorbed through effort; it is ābhisaṁskārika:
thus it is always active (patu). Finally, an absorbed mind is anugrāhaka:
that is to say, by its nature, it tends to last, to cause to last; hence it is not
suitable to a cutting off of the series.
There is no longer any death or birth for "one without thought,” [a
person who has entered into nirodhasamāpatti and asaṁjñisamāpatti,
ii.41d]. One who is without thought cannot be killed: when his body
(aśraya = the sense apparatus, iii.41) begins to decay-either by the
action of the sword or of fire, or by the exhaustion of retribution of the
absorptions-then, of necessity, the mind bound to the body [and
exisiting as a seed in the body] becomes present and dies. 347
The state of non-thought is also incompatible with birth, for it is
lacking any cause for the cutting off of the mind, and because there
cannot be a birth without defilement. 348
Existence at death (maraṇabhava) can be good, bad, or neutral.
Concerning the death of the Arhat,
43b. He obtains Nirvāṇa in two neutral minds. 349
Namely, in an airyapathika mind or in a vipäkaja mind. At least
according to the masters who believe that, in Kāmadhātu, a vipākaja
mind can be indifferent (upekṣā,iv.48); but, for the masters of an
opposing opinion (iv.47), one cannot obtain Nirvāṇa in an airyāpathika
mind.
Why is the last mind of the Arhat necessarily neutral?
Because this type of mind, being very weak, is suitable to the cutting
off of the mind, that is, to the definitive cutting off of the mind. 350
The World 449
In which part of the body does the consciousness perish at death?
When death or "falling" (cyuti) takes place at once, the käyendriya
(organ of the body or of touch) perishes at the same time as does the
manas.
43c-44a. When death is gradual, the manas dies in the feet, at the
navel, in the heart, accordingly as the being goes below, among
humans, among the Suras, or is not reborn, 351
Adhoga, "who goes below," is one who should be reborn in the
painful
should be reborn in the human realms of rebirth; suraga, "who goes
among the gods," is one who should be reborn in a heavenly realm of
rebirth. The consciousness of these beings dies respectively, in the feet,
the navel, or in the heart.
Aja, "who is not reborn," is the Arhat: his consciousness also dies in
the heart; but according to another opinion, in the head. 352
How does the consciousness die in a certain part of the body?
Because it is in such a part that the destruction of the organ of touch
takes place. 353 [The activity of the consciousness which is nonmaterial
and outside of space, is bound to this organ-which alone remains as its
support or aśraya, iii.44]. The consciousness dies through the de-
struction of the organ of touch, which takes place in a certain place.
Towards the end of life, the organ of touch perishes bit by bit; at the end
it remains only in a certain part of the body where it finishes by
disappearing; in the same way water placed on a hot rock diminishes
gradually and finishes by disappearing in a certain place.
It is thus that gradual death takes place; in general, the dying person
is afflicted by some sensations which break the vital parts.
44b. The vital parts are split by water, etc. 354
Marmāṇi, 355 or vital parts, are those parts of the body which cannot
be damaged without death ensuing.450
Chapter Three
When one of the elements, water, fire or wind,-is extremely
troubled, the vital parts are as if they were split by terrible sensations
which are like sharp knives. By saying that the vital parts are split, we do
not mean to say that they are split like wood. Rather one should
understand that they are henceforth incapable of activity quite as if they
were split.
Why are the vital parts not split by trouble of the earth element?
Because there are only three dosas, namely bile, phlegm, and wind,
which are in order the elements of water, fire, and wind.
According to another opinion, since the world perishes by these
three elements (iii.100a), death also takes place by these three
elements. 356
The vital parts of the gods are not split. But five premonitory signs
appear to a god being approached by death: 1. some of his clothes and
some of his ornaments give off unpleasant sounds; 2. the light of his
body diminishes; 3. some drops of water remain attached to his body
after his bath; 4. in spite of his natural mobility, his mind is fixed on an
object; and 5. his eyes, naturally fixed, are troubled, opening and closing.
And there are five signs of death: 1. his clothes become dirty; 2. his aura
fades; 3. sweat appears in his armpits; 4. his body emits a bad odor; and
5. the god no longer enjoys his seat.
The Blessed One classified beings who arise, last, and die, 358 into
three categories: those predestined to health, predestined to loss, and
not predestined.
44c-d. An Āryan and one guilty of anantarya transgressions are
predestined, the first to health, the second to loss. 359
What is "health," samyaktva? 360
According to the Sūtra, the complete abandoning of affection,
hatred, error, and all of the defilements, [that is, Nirvāṇa].
What is an Aryan?
One in whom the Path arises, that is, the Pure Path. He is an Aryan
because he "has gone far” (ārād yātaḥ) from evil,361 since he possesses
disconnection (visamyoga, ii.55d, p.) from the defilements.The World
How is the Aryan predestined to health?
Because he will certainly obtain Nirvāṇa.
But a person who acquires the mokṣabhāgiyas (vi.24c) will also
certainly obtain Nirvāṇa. Why not consider him predestined to health?
Because he can commit transgressions which make him "pre-
destined to loss;" or rather because, if he is in fact predestined for
Nirvāṇa, the moment of his arrival at Nirvāṇa is not fixed, as is the case
for the Āryans beginning with "he who, at a maximum, will be reborn
seven times" (saptakṛtvaḥparama, vi.34a).
What is loss, mithyātva?
The hellish, animal, and Preta realms of rebirth. A person who
commits anantarya transgressions (iv.96) will cerainly be reborn in hell;
he is thus predestined to loss.
One who is not predestined (aniyata) is one who is not predestined
to health or loss. Whether he becomes predestined to one or the other,
or whether he continues to not be predestined, depends in fact on his
future actions.
We have described the world of human beings; let us pass to a
description of the receptacle or physical world (bhājanaloka), 362
45. Here is how it is thought that the receptable world is
arranged: at the bottom there is a circle of wind, immeasurable,
with a height of sixteen hundred thousand leagues. 363
The great chiliocosm (iii.73) is arranged as we shall explain. At its
bottom there arises, through the force of the predominent actions of
beings (adhipatiphala, ii.58, iv.85), a circle of wind which rests on
space. 364 It is sixteen thousand yojanas (iii.88) thick; it is immeasurable
in circumference; and it is solid: a mahānagna ³65 could strike at it with
his vajra and his vajra would break without the circle of wind being
scratched.
46a-b. The circle of water, eleven hundred twenty thousand
high.
By the predominate actions of beings, there falls from massed452 Chapter Three
clouds, upon the circle of wind, a rain the drops of which are like the
shafts of a carriage. 366 This water forms a circle of water, with a
thickness of eleven hundred twenty thousand yojanas.
How do these waters not flow over the edge? 367
Some say
that the waters are sustained by the force of the actions of
beings, as food and drink which do not fall in the intestines before being
digested.
According to another opinion, the waters are sustained by the wind,
like grain in a basket.
Then the water, agitated by a wind which the force of actions gives
rise to, becomes gold in its upper part, as churned milk becomes
cream:
46c-d. Then, the circle of waters is no more than eight hundred
thousand leagues in height; the rest becomes gold. 369
Then there is above the circle of water now reduced to eight hundred
thousand yojanas, a sphere of gold, three hundred twenty thousand
yojanas thick.
47a-48a. The circle of water and gold have a diameter of twelve
hundred three thousand four hundred and fifty leagues; triple for
its perimeter. 370
These two circles have the same dimensions.
On the circular sphere of gold which thus rests on the water,
48b-49c. There are Meru, Yugandhara, Īṣādhara, Khadiraka,
Mount Sudarśana, Aśvakarṇa, Vinataka, and Mount Nimin-
dhara; beyond are the continents; on the edge is Cakravāḍa. 371
Nine great mountains rest on the sphere of gold. In the center there
is Meru; concentrically, the other seven are arranged around Meru;
Nimindhara forms the exterior rim that envelops Meru and the six
inner wall-mountains 372-whence its name. Beyond [Nimindhara] lie
the four continents. Enveloping all is Cakravāḍa, thus named because it
encircles the universe with its four continent and also because it has the
form of a wheel.
49d-50a. Seven mountains are made of gold; the last is made of
iron; and Meru is made of four jewels.
The World
Yugandhara and the six mountains that surround it are made of
gold; Cakravāḍa is made of iron; Meru has four faces which are
respectively, from north to west, made of gold, silver, lapis and cristal.
Each of these substances gives its own color to the part of space which
faces it. 373 Since the face of Meru which is turned towards Jambudvipa is
made of lapis, our heaven is thus similar in color to lapis.
Meru?
What is the origin of the different substances that make up
The waters which have fallen on the sphere of gold are rich in
different potentialities; 374 under the action of the winds which possess
different efficacies, they disappear and make room for different jewels. It
is thus that the waters are transformed into jewels: the water is the
cause, the jewels are a result different from the cause, and there is no
simultaneity. This is quite different from the concept of transformation
(pariņāma) 375 that the Sāṁkhyas imagine.
What do the Sāṁkhyas understand by pariņāma?
They admit that dharmas arise and disappear within a permanent
substance (a dharmin or dravya).
How is this incorrect?
One cannot admit the simultaneous existence of a permanent
dharmin, and of dharmas arising and disappearing. 376
But the Samkhyas do not hold that there is a dharmin separate from
the dharmas; they say that a dharma, when it is transformed (pariņam),
becomes the support of different characteristics: this dharma they call
dharmin. In other words, transformation (pariņāma) is only the
modification (anyathābhāvamātra) of a substance (dravya).
This thesis is not correct.
Why is it not correct?
Because there is a contradiction in terms: you admit that that (the
cause) is identical to this (the result), but that this is not like that. 377
The gold, silver, jewels and the land thus formed are brought
together and piled in heaps by the winds which are produced by the force
of actions. They make up the mountains and the continents.
50b.-51b. Meru is immersed in the water to a depth of twenty-
four thousand leagues and rises above the water some eighty
thousand leagues. The immersion of the eight other mountains
diminishes each by a half. The mountains have equal width and
height. 378454 Chapter Three
The mountains rest on the sphere of gold and are in the water to a
depth of eighty thousand yojanas. Meru rises out of the water for the
same number of yojanas, and is thus, both in and out of the water, one
hundred sixty thousand yojanas in height. Yugandhara rises out of the
water for forty thousand yojanas, Īṣādhara for twenty thousand yojanas
and thus following until Cakravāḍa which rises out of the water for three
hundred twelve yojanas and a half. 379 The mountains are as wide as they
extend out of the water. [For example, if a mountain extends out of the
water to a height of twenty thousand yojanas, it is then twenty thousand
yojanas wide]. [The word dhana, in the Kārikā, has the sense of "wide".]
51c-52c. The seven Sītās, of which the first is of eighty thousand
leagues, form the interval between the mountains. This is the
inner ocean, triple in circumference. The other Sitäs diminish by
a half. The rest is the great outer sea, of three hundred twenty-
two thousand leagues. 380
The Sītās 381 are located between the mountains, from Meru to
Nimindhara: the Sītās are full of water endowed with the eight qualities:
cold, clear, light, tasty, sweet, not fetid, and harming neither the throat
nor the stomach, 382
The first, between Meru and Yugandhara, is eighty thousand leagues
in width. In exterior circumferance, to the shore of Yugandhara, it is
triple this, thus two hundred forty thousand yojanas.
The size of the other Sītās diminishes by a half: the second Sītā,
between Yugandhara and Īṣādhara, is forty thousand yojanas in width,
and so on to the seventh, between Vinataka and Nimindhara, which is
twelve hundred fifty yojanas wide. The calculation of the circumferences
presents no difficulty. The seven Sītās are the inner ocean. The rest, that
is, the water between Nimindhara and Cakravāḍa, is the great outer sea;
it is full of salt water, and is three hundred twenty-two thousand yojanas
wide. 383
***The World 455
53b-55d. There is Jambudvīpa, three sides of two thousand, in
the form of a carriage, and one side of three and a half; eastern
Videha, like a half-moon, three sides like Jambu, and one side of
three hundred fifty; Godānīya, of seven thousand five hundred,
round, with a diameter of two thousand five hundred; and Kuru,
of eight thousand, square, parallel.
In the outer sea, corresponding to the four sides of Meru, there are
four continents (dvipas):
1. Jambudvipa has three sides of two thousand yojanas in length, one
side of three yojanas and a half: it thus has the shape of a carriage. 384In
its center, resting on the sphere of gold, is the "diamond throne" 385
where the Bodhisattva sits to attain vajropamasamādhi (vi.44d) and
so to become an Arhat and a Buddha: no other place, and no other
person can support the vajropamasamadhi of the Bodhisattva.
2. Eastern Videha or Pūrvavideha has the shape of a half-moon; it
has three sides of two thousand yojanas, thus of the same dimension as
the long side of Jambu, and one side of three hundred fifty yojanas.
3. Godānīya, which faces the western side of Meru, is round like the
moon; it is seven thousand five hundred yojanas [in circumference], and
two thousand five hundred through the center. 386
4. Facing the northern side of Meru is Kuru or Uttarakuru which has
the shape of a seat; it is square: its sides, of two thousand yojanas each,
form a circumferance of eight thousand yojanas. To say that Kuru is
"parallel" means that its four sides are of the same dimension, 387
Such is the shape of the continents, and such is the shape of the faces
of the persons who reside in them. 388
56. There are eight intermediate continents: Dehas, Videhas,
Kurus, Kauravas, Cāmaras, and Avaracāmaras, Śāṭhas and
Uttaramantrins. 389
These continents are designated by the name of their inhabitants.
Dehas and Videhas are located on both sides of Pūrvavideha; Kurus and
Kauravas on the sides of Uttarakuru; Câmaras and Avaracâmaras on the
sides of Jambudvīpa; and Śāṭhas and Uttaramantrins on the sides of
Godānīya.
All of these continents are inhabited by human beings. Never-456 Chapter Three
theless, according to one opinion, 390 one of them [namely Camara] is
reserved for Raksasas.
57. Here, to the north of the nine ant-Mountains, lie the
Himavat; beyond it, but on this side of the Mountain of Perfume,
is a lake deep and wide by fifty leagues. 391
By going toward the north in this Jambudvipa, one encounters three
ant-Mountains, [so called because they have the shape of an ant]; 392
then three other ant-Mountains; then three other again; and finally the
Himavat (= the Himalayas).
Beyond that, this side of the Gandhamādana ("the Mountain of
Perfume"), lies Lake Anavatapta from whence there flows out four great
rivers, the Gangā, the Sindhu, the Vakṣu and the Sītā. 393 This lake, fifty
yojanas wide and deep, is full of a water endowed with the eight
qualities. Only persons who possess magical powers can go there. 394 The
Jambu tree is located near this lake. Our continent receives its name of
Jambudvipa, either from the tree, or from the fruit of the tree which is
also called Jambu.
Where are the hells 395, and what are their dimensions?
58. At the bottom, at twenty thousand leagues, is Avici, of this
same dimension; above, the seven hells; all eight have sixteen
utsadas.
Beneath Jambudvipa, at a distance of twenty thousand yojanas, lies
the great hell Avici. It is twenty thousand yojanas high and wide; its sun
is thus found forty thousand yojanas below the sun of Jambudvīpa. 3⁹6
Why is this hell named Avici? 397
Two explanations: 1. because there is not, in this hell, any
interruption (vici) of suffering. Suffering is interrupted in the other
hells. In Saṁjīva, for example, bodies are first crushed and reduced to
dust; then a cold wind revives them and gives them feeling: from
28whence the name of Samjiva; 2. because there is no agreeable (vīci) state
there. 398 In the other hells all agreeable sensation which arises from
retribution is absent; but here there is some agreeable sensations which
are "an outflowing" (nisyanda, ii.56c).
Above Avici are seven hells one above the other: Pratāpana, Tapana,
Mahāraurava, Raurava, Saṁghāta, Kālasūtra, and Samjiva. According to
another opinion, these seven hells are placed at the same level as Avici.
Each of the eight hells has sixteen utsadas (See p. 458, line 15). This
results from a declaration of the Blessed One, ... There are eight hells
there that I have revealed, difficult to get out of, full of cruel beings, each
having sixteen utsadas; they have four walls and four gates; they are as
high as they are wide; they are encircled by walls of fire; their ceiling is
fire; their sun is burning, sparkling fire; and they are filled with flames
hundreds of yojanas high." 399
The World 457
Ce
What are the sixteen utsadas?
59a-c. Kukūla, Kuṇapa, Kṣuramārga, etc., and the River are
located at the four cardinal points of these hells. 400
At each gate of these hells there is found:
1. The Kuküla, a fire where one is pushed down to ones knees.
When beings put their feet in there, they lose their skin, flesh and blood,
which rearises when they take their feet out. 401
2. The Kunapa, a mire of excrements, where there are water beasts
called Sharp-mouthes, whose bodies are white and heads black, which
can bite the damned through to their bones. 402
3. The Kṣuramārga, or Kṣuradhārāmārga, the great road of razor
blades; here beings lose their skin, flesh, and blood when they put their
feet on it. 403
Asipattravana, the forest whose leaves are swords; when these
swords fall, they cut off major and minor parts of the body, which are
then devoured by the Syāmaśabala dogs. 404
Ayaḥśalmalīvana, 405 the forests of thorns, thorns sixteen digits in
length. When beings climb these trees, the thorns turn downwards, but
they turn upward when they descend the tree.458
Chapter Three
Birds, Iron-beaks, tear out and eat the eyes of the damned.
These three places of suffering constitute a single utsada because
they have in common punishment through injury.
4. The fourth utsada is the river Vaitaraṇī,406 of boiling water loaded
with burning ashes. On both sides there are persons (purusa) armed
with swords, lances and javelins, who push back the damned who would
get out. Whether they plunge into the water or emerge, whether they go
up or down the current, whether they travers in the two directions or are
tossed about, the damned are boiled and cooked, as the grains of sesame
or corn poured into a cauldron placed over the fire.
The river encircles the great hell like a moat.
The four utsadas are sixteen in number by reason of their difference
of place, since they are located at the four gates to the great hell.
What is the meaning of the word utsada? 407
They are called utsadas because they are places of supplementary
torment: in the hells the damned are tormented, but they are
additionally so in the utsadas.
According to Manoratha (above, note 170), after having been shut
up in the hells, the damned then fall into the utsadas. 408
One question leads to another. We have just spoken of the "persons"
who stand on the banks of the Vaitaraṇī. Are the "guardians of hell"
(narakapāla) beings? 409
They are not beings.
Then how do they move?
Through the actions of beings, like the wind of creation. 410
Then how do you explain what the Venerable Dharmasubhūti said,
"Those who are angry, who take pleasure in cruel actions and
transgressions, who rejoice in the sufferings of others, are reborn as
Yamarākṣasas?"411
The demons who torment the beings in hell are not termed
Yamarākṣasas, the "guardians of hell" as you think; but rather the
servants of Yama who, on the order of Yama, throw the damned intohell.
According to another opinion, the "guardians of hell" are beings.
Where does the retribution of the cruel acts take place that these
guardians commit in the hells?
In the same hells. Since the retribution of anantarya transgressions
(iv.97) takes place in these hells, why would the retribution of the
actions of the guardians not be possible here?
But why are not the guardians, who are found in the midst of fire,
burned?
The World 459
Because the force of action marks a boundary to the fire and prevents
it from reaching the guardians, or rather because this same force causes
the bodies of the guardians to be made up of primary elements of a
special nature. 412
59c-d. There are eight other hells, the cold hells, Arbuda, etc. 4¹3
These hells are called Arbuda, Nirarbuda, Aṭaṭa, Hahava, Huhuva,
Utpala, Padma, and Mahāpadma. Among these names, some (Arbuda,
Nirarbuda, Utpala, Padma, and Mahāpadma) indicate the form that the
beings in hell take: they take the form of an arbuda, a lotus...; the others
indicate the noise that the damned make under the bite of the cold: atata
These cold hells are located under Jambudvīpa, on a level with the
great hells.
How is there place, under a single Jambudvipa, for the hells which
are indeed wider than Jambudvīpa? 414
The continents, like piles of grain, are wider at their bases. The great
ocean does not sink into a deep, steep cavity around the continents.
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 866a21; Cullavagga, 9, 1.3).
The sixteen hells are created through the force of the actions of
beings (ii.56b, iii.90c, 101c, iv.85a); there are hells,—the prādesika
hells, created through the force of individual actions, the actions of one460 Chapter Three
being, of two beings, of many beings. Their variety is great; their place is
not determined: river, mountain, desert, and elsewhere. 415
The principal place of the hells is below. As for the animals, they
have three places, the land, the water, and the air. Their principal place
is the Great Ocean; the animals that are elsewhere are the surplus of the
animals. 416
The king of the Pretas is called Yama; his residence, which is the
principal dwelling of the Pretas, is located five hundred leagues under
Jambudvīpa; it is five hundred leagues deep and wide. The Pretas that
are found elsewhere are the surplus of the Pretas. The Pretas differ
much one from another; certain of them possess supernatural powers
and enjoy a glory similar to that of the gods; see the Avadānas of the
Pretas. 417
Upon what do the sun and the moon rest?
Upon the wind. The collective force of the actions of beings
produces the winds which create (nirmã) the moon, the sun and the
stars in heaven.4¹8 All these astral bodies revolve around Meru as if
transported by a whirlpool.
What is the distance from here to the moon and the sun?
60a. At mid-Meru lie the moon and the sun.
The moon and the sun move at a level with the summit of
Yugandhara.
What are their dimensions? Respectively.
60b. Fifty and fifty and one leagues. 419
The disk of the moon is of fifty yojanas; the disk of the sun is of
fifty-one yojanas.
The smallest among the "houses" (vimāna) of the stars is of one
krośa (iii.87c); [the largest is of sixteen yojanas]. 420
The force of the actions of beings forms, smaller than and externalThe World
to the house of the sun, 42¹ a disk of fire-stone, 422 hot and luminous; and,
for the house of the moon, a disk of water-stone, cold and luminous.
Their function, according to circumstances, is to cause to arise and last
the eye, the body, fruits, flowers, crops, and herbs; and to destroy them.
In a universe with its four continents (iii.73) there is a single sun and
a single moon. Yet the sun does not fulfill its function at the same time in
the four continents.
61a-b. Midnight it sets, midday it rises at the same moment.
When it is midnight in Uttarakuru, the sun sets in Pūrvavideha, it is
midday in Jambudvīpa, and it rises in Godānīya, and so on. (Dirgha, TD
1, p. 147c6-14).
By reason of the variety of the progress of the sun, the days and
nights grow longer and shorter.
61c-62b. The nights grow longer after the ninth day of the
second quarter of the second month of the rains, and they grow
shorter after the ninth day of the second quarter of the fourth
month of winter. Reverse for the days. The days and the nights
grow longer little by little accordingly as the sun goes towards
the south or towards the north.
The nights grow longer from the ninth day of the clear quarter of
Bhadrapada on, and grow shorter from the ninth day of the clear quarter
of Phālguna on. Reverse for the days: when the nights become longer,
the days become shorter, and vice versa. The days and the nights grow
longer and shorter gradually, in proportion to the sun going towards the
south or towards the north of Jambudvipa. 423
Why does the disk of the moon not appear completely full at the
beginning of the bright quarter?
62c-d. The moon is covered by its shadow by reason of its
proximity to the sun, and one sees it incompletely.
This is the teaching of the Prajñāpti, “When the house of the moon
moves in the vicinity of the house of the sun, then the light of the sun462 Chapter Three
falls on the house of the moon. Consequently, the shadow falls on the
opposite side, and the disk appears incomplete." 424
But, according to the ancient masters, the Yogācārins, the manner of
its moving is such that the moon appears sometimes complete,
sometimes incomplete. 425
To what class of beings do the inhabitants of the houses of the sun,
the moon and the stars belong?
These are the Câturmahārājakāyikas, 426 and the only ones among
these gods who inhabit houses; but there is a great number of
Cāturmahārājakāyikas who inhabit the earth, in the pariṣaṇḍās—the
stages or terraces-of Meru and elsewhere.
63-64. There are four terraces, the distance between them being
ten thousand leagues, extending out sixteen, eight, four and two
thousand leagues. They are the Karoţapāņis, the Mālādharas,
the Sadāmattas and the two Mahārājikas; and also on the seven
mountains. 427
The first terrace is ten thousand leagues above the water, the second
ten thousand leagues above the first and so on. They thus reach up to the
middle of Meru. The first terrace extends out from Meru sixteen
thousand leagues; the others, in their order extend out eight, four, two
thousand leagues. 428 On the first terrace reside the Yakşas “Pitcher in
their Hand": 429 on the second, the "Wearers of Crowns;" on the third
the "Always Intoxicated" (sadāmatta, which the Kārikā calls sadā-
mada): 430 all these gods belong to the Cāturmahārājakāyikas. At the
fourth terrace are the Four Kings 431 in person with their attendants:
these gods are called the Cāturmahārājakāyikas, the Four Great Kings.
As the Cāturmāharājakāyikas inhabit Meru, so too they have villages
and towns on the seven mountains of gold, Yugandhara, etc. Also the
gods of this class are the most numerous of the gods.The World
65-68. The Thirty-three Gods are at the summit of Meru, the
sides of which are eighty thousand (leagues). At the corners, four
peaks which the Vajrapāņis inhabit. In the middle, with sides of
two thousand five hundred, with a height of one and a half, is a
village called Sudarśana, of gold, with a varigated and smooth
sun. There is Vaijayanta, with sides of two hundred fifty. On the
outside, this village is adorned with Caitraratha, Pāruşya, Miśra
and Nandana (Parks); at a distance of twenty thousand leagues
from these Parks, at the four sides, there are excellent fields. At
the northeast Pārijāta, in the southwest Sudharmā.
1. The Trayastrimśas or Thirty-three Gods 432 inhabit the summit of
Meru; the sides of this summit are of eighty thousand yojanas.
According to other masters, the sides of each are twenty thousand, and
the circumference is eighty thousand.433
2. At the corners, there are peaks (kūṭa), five hundred yojanas high
and wide, where the Yakṣas called Vajrapāņis reside.
3. In the middle of the plateau of Meru there is the royal city of Sakra,
the chief of the gods, a city called "Beautiful to Look At" (Sudar-
śana). 434Its sides are two thousand five hundred yojanas; its cir-
cumference is ten thousand; its height one yojana and a half; 435 it is of
gold; it is adorned with one hundred and one types of colors; and the
same for its sun. This sun is soft to the touch, like the leaf of the cotton
tree; it rises and falls to facilitate its progress.
4. In the middle of this city there is the palace of Sakra, the chief of
the gods, called Vaijayanta: it makes all the other residences blush by its
richness and its gems. Its sides are two hundred fifty yojanas.
Such are the adornments of the city itself.
5. Ornaments outside of the city are the four Parks: 436 Caitraratha,
Pāruşyaka, Miśraka, and Nandana, fields of play for the gods.
6. At the four sides 437 of these Parks, from a distance of twenty
yojanas on, there are four fields of play with a marvellous sun, 438
delightful and which appears to rival them.
7. The magnolia tree called Pārijātaka 439 is, for the Thirty-three
Gods, the place par excellence for pleasure and for love; its roots go464 Chapter Three
down fifty yojanas; 440 it is one hundred yojanas high; with its branches,
leaves and petals, it covers fifty yojanas.
The fragrance of its flowers spreads one hundred yojanas away with
the wind, fifty against the wind.
So be it, it can spread to one hundred yojanas with the wind, but how
can it go against the wind?
According to one opinion, one says that it spreads to fifty yojanas
against the wind, because it does not go beyond the tree [which covers in
fact fifty yojanas].
[But this explanation does not hold: for] the text says that it goes
against the wind.
We say then that the fragrance does not go against the wind, that it
perishes where it arises: but such is the quality of this fragrance that,
even though it would be arrested by the lightest divine wind, it gives
birth to a new "series" of identical fragrances. Nevertheless, the
fragrances become weak, weaker, entirely weak and are completely
arrested, incapable of going as far as it does when the wind is favorable.
Does the series of this fragrance have for its support only its own
primary elements which constitute the fragrance? Or rather should one
suppose that the wind becomes perfumed? [In the same way as, when
the grains of sesame are perfumed by flowers, there arises a new odor
which is no longer the fragrance of the flowers.]
The opinion of the masters is not fixed on this.
Yet the Blessed One said, 441 "The fragrance of flowers does not go
against the wind, neither does the fragrance of good go against the wind;
but the satpuruşa goes in all directions." How do you reconcile this
statement with the theory that fragrance "goes against the wind?"
This statement refers to odors of the world of humans, which, it is
quite evident, does not go against the wind.
The Mahiśāsakas read, 442 "The fragrance [of the flowers of the
Pārijātaka tree] go with the wind for a hundred yojanas; in the absence
of wind, to fifty."
8. In the southeast lies Sudharmã,443 the room where the gods come
together (devasabha) in order to examine the good and the evil deeds
committed by human beings.
Such is the arrangement of the receptacle or physical world of the
Thirty-three Gods.69a-b. Above, the gods reside in "houses."444
The gods higher that the Thirty-three Gods reside in vimānas or
aerial abodes. These gods are the Yāmas, the Tuṣitas, the Nirmāṇaratis,
and the Paranirmitavaśavartins, plus the gods of Rūpadhātu, namely
sixteen categories of gods beginning with the Brahmakāyikas. In all,
twenty-two types of gods live in the physical world and occupy set
residences. [There are many other gods, 445 the Krīḍāpramoșakas, 446 the
Prahāsakas, etc., which a summary treatise like this does not take into
account].
The World 465
69b-d. There are six gods who taste pleasure; they unite through
coupling, an embrace, the touch of hands, a smile, and a look.
The Cāturmahārājakāyikas, Trāyastrimśas, Yāmas, Tuṣitas, Nirmā-
naratis and Paranirmitavaśavartins are the gods of Kāmadhātu. The
higher gods are not in Kāmadhātu.
The Cāturmahārājakāyikas and the Trayastrimśas live on the
ground; thus they unite by coupling, like humans; but they appease the
fire of their desire through the emission of wind, since they do not have
any semen. The Yāmas appease the fire of their desire by embracing, the
Tuşitas by the touch of hands, the Nirmāṇaratis by smiling, and the
Paranirmitavaśavartins by looking at each other. Such is the doctrine of
the Prajnapti. 447
According to the Vaibhāṣikas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 585b27), these
expressions of the Prajñapti, "embracing," "touching of the hands," etc.,
do not indicate the mode of union-for all the gods couple-but the
duration of the act. 448 The more ardent the desire by reason of the more
pleasurable object, so much shorter is the duration of the union.
A small god or goddess appears on the knees, or from out of the
knees of a god or goddess; this small god or goddess is their son or466 Chapter Three
daughter: all the gods are "apparitional" (iii.8c).
70a-c. Among these gods, their newborn are similar to infants of
five to ten years.
From five to ten years according to the category of the gods. Young
gods grow up quickly.
70c-d. The gods of Rūpadhātu are complete and clothed. 449
The gods of Rūpadhātu, from their birth, are complete in their
development; they are born fully clothed.
All the gods speak the Aryan language. 450
In Kāmadhātu,
71a-b. There are three “arisings" of the objects of desire: the
gods of Kāmadhātu together with humans. 451
1. There are beings whose objects of desire (kāmaguna) are placed
(by outside factors) at their disposition; but they are able to dispose of
these objects. These are humans and certain gods-namely the first four
classes of gods.
2. There are beings whose objects of desire are created by
themselves; and they dispose of these objects which they create. These
are the Nirmāṇaratis.
3. There are beings whose objects of desire are created by others but
who themselves dispose of these objects created by others. These are the
Paranirmitavaśavartins. 452
The first enjoy the objects of desire which are presented to them; the
second enjoy objects of desire which they create at their will; and the
third enjoy objects of desire that they create or have others create at their
will. These are the three arisings of the objects of desire (kāmopapattis).
In Rūpadhātu,
71c-d. There are three "arisings of pleasure": the nine spheres of
three Dhyānas.
The nine spheres of the first three Dhyānas are the three "arisings
of pleasure." The gods of the first three Dhyānas, for long periods, pass
their time pleasantly through pleasure born from separation from the
defilements, through pleasure consisting of joy arisen from absorption(samādhija: seeing the disappearance of vicāra and vitarka) and through
pleasure free from joy (niḥprītikasukha, seeing the disapparance of
satisfaction or saumanasya). By reason of their absence of suffering, and
by reason of their duration, these arisings are indeed "arisings of
pleasure" (sukhopapatti).
In dhyānāntara there is no pleasure consisting of joy. Is this an
"arising of pleasure?"
This is to be discussed, 454
The World 467
At what height are the twenty-two heavenly residences situated,
starting from the Cāturmahārājikas to the highest gods of Rūpadhātu?
It is not easy to calculate this height in yojanas, but
72a-b. To the extent that there is descent from one residence, to
this extent there is ascent towards a higher residence. 455
In other words, to the extent that a residence is above Jambudvipa,
to that extent it is below its next higher residence. For example, the
fourth house of the Cāturmahārājikas, the dwelling of the Caturmahā-
rājikas themselves is forty thousand yojanas above here; to the extent
that this residence descends to here, to that extent this residence ascends
to the residence of the Trayatrimśas, [on the summit of Meru, eighty
thousand yojanas from here]. As many yojanas as there are from
Trayastrimśas to here, that many are there from Trayastrimśas to the
Yāmas. And thus following: the Akaniṣṭhas are above the Sudarśanas
the same number of yojanas that the Sudarśanas are above Jambudvipa.
Above the Akaniṣṭhas, there are no more residences (sthāna). This
is because this residence is higher than the others, no residence is
superior to it, and so it is called a-kaniṣṭha.456 According to another
opinion, this residence is called agha-niştha, because agha signifies
"assembled matter", and this residence is the limit (niṣṭha) of this
matter.
Can a being born in an inferior residence go to a higher house and
see its superior beings?468
Chapter Three
72c-d. The gods do not see their superiors without magic or the
assistence of another.
When they possess magical powers, or when they are assisted by a
being possessing magical powers or by a Yama god, the Trayastrimśas
can go to the Yămas; and thus following. 458
A being born in an lower residence can see a being born in a higher
residence who makes a visit to an inferior residence, but not if this being
belongs to a higher Dhātu, or to a higher bhūmi; 459 in the same way that
one cannot feel a tangible things [higher in Dhatu or bhumi], because it
is not of the sphere [of a lower organ].460 This is why beings higher
through their Dhātu or bhūmi do not descend with their own bodies, but
with a magic body of the sphere of the bhūmi to where they wish to
descend (Digha, ii.210).
According to another school,461 if a being of a higher bhūmi so
desires, lower beings can see him in the same way as they see a being of
their own bhūmi.
What are the dimensions of the houses of the Yāmas and the other
gods?
According to one opinion, the houses of the four types of higher
gods of Yama have the dimension of the summit of Meru.
According to others, the dimension of the First Dhyāna is the
dimension of the universe with its four continents; that of the Second,
the Third, and the Fourth Dhyana is, respectively, the dimension of a
small, medium and great chiliocosm.
According to anothers, the first three Dhyānas have, respectively,
the dimension of a small, medium and great chiliocosm; the Fourth
Dhyana is without measure. 462
What is a small, a second, and a third chiliocosm?
73-74. One thousand four-continents, moons, suns, Merus,
dwellings of the Kāma gods, and world of Brahmã, make up aThe World 469
small chiliocosm; one thousand small chiliocosms make a
dichiliocosm, the middle universe; and one thousand dichilio-
cosms make a trichiliocosm. The destruction and the creation of
the universes lasts the same time.463
A sahasra cūḍika lokadhātu, or small chiliocosm is made up of one
thousand Jambudvīpas, Pūrvavidehas, Avaragodānīyas, Uttarakurus,
moons, suns, Merus, dwellings of the Cāturmahārājakāyikas and the
other gods of Kāmadhātu, and worlds of Brahmã. One thousand
universes of this type make a dichiliocosm, a middle universe
(dvisāhasro madhyamo lokadhātuḥ). One thousand universes of this
type make a trichiliomegachiliocosm (trisahasramahāsāhasro loka-
dhātuḥ).
The periods of destruction and creation are equal in length. 464 The
stanza uses the word sambhava in the sense of vivarta.
In the same way that the dimensions of the physical worlds differ, in
that same way the dimensions of the beings inhabitating them differ:
75-77. The inhabitants of Jambudvipa have a height of four, or of
three elbows and a half; those called Pūrva, Goda and Uttara, by
doubling each time. The bodies of the gods of Kāmadhātu
increase, by quarters of krośa, until a krośa and a half. The bodies
of the gods of Rūpadhātu are at first a half yojana; then increase
by a half; beyond the Parīttābhas, the bodies double, and reduce
three yojanas from the Anabhrakas on.
Humans of Jambudvīpa generally are three elbows and a half,
sometimes four elbows in height; the Purvavidehakas, the Avara-
godānīyakas, and the Auttarakauravas are respectively eight, sixteen,
and thirty-two elbows in height.
The Cāturmahārājakāyikas are a quarter of a krośa (iii.88a) in
height; the height of the other gods of Kāmadhātu increases successively
by this same quarter: the Trayastrimśas, by half a krośa; the Yāmas, by
three quarters of a krofa; the Tuşitas, by one krofa; the Nirmāṇaratis, by
a krośa and a quarter; and the Parinirmitavaśavartins, by a krośa and a470
Chapter Three
half.
The Brahmakāyikas, who are the first gods of Rūpadhātu, are a
half-yojana in height; the Brahmapurohitas, one yojana in height; the
Mahābrahmans, one yojana and a half in height; and the Parīttābhas,
two yojanas in height.
Beyond the Parīttābhas, the dimensions double: Apramāṇābhas are
four, Abhāsvaras, eight, and the same until the Subhakṛtsans, who are
sixty-four yojanas in height. For the Anabhrakas, one doubles this
number but subtracts three: they are then one hundred twenty-five
yojanas in height. One continues doubling, from the Punyaprasavas on
who are two hundred fifty yojanas in height, to the Akaniṣṭhas, who are
sixteen thousand yojanas in height.
The length of life of these beings also differs. With regard to
humans:
78. Life, among Kurus, is one thousand years in length; in the
two continents, it diminishes twice by half; here, it is in-
determinate: nevertheless it is ten years at the end and
incalculable at the beginning. 465
The lifespan of beings in Godānaiya is half the lifespan of beings in
Uttarakuru, thus five hundred years in length; the life of beings in
Pūrvavideha is two hundred and fifty years in length.
In Jambudvipa, length of life is not determined, sometimes it is long,
sometimes short. 466 At the end of the cosmic age or kalpa (iii.98c), at its
minimum, it is ten years; whereas the lifespan of humans at the
beginning of the cosmic age (prathamakalpika, iii91a) is incalculable:
one cannot measure it by counting in thousands, etc.
The lifespan of the gods of Kāmadhātu is an integral of the length of
a day:
79a-80b. Fifty human years make a day-and-night for the lowest
gods of Kāmadhātu, and these gods live a life of five hundredThe World
years. For the higher gods, double the day and the life. 467
Fifty human days make a day in the life of the Caturmahārājakāyikas,
whose lifespan is of five hundred years of twelve month of thirty days. 468
For the Trayastrimśas, one day equals one hundred human years, and
their lifespan is one thousand years in length; for the Yāmas, one day
equals two hundred human years and their lifespan is two thousand
years in length; and so on.
But there is no sun or moon above Yugandhara; how is a day of the
gods determined, and how are the gods illumined?
Day and night are marked by the flowers which open or close, like
the kumuda and the padma in the world of humans; by the birds that
sing or that are silent; and by sleep which ends or begins.469
Furthermore the gods themselves are luminous.
As for the gods of Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu:
80b-81d. There is no day and night for the gods of Rūpadhātu;
their lifespans are calculated in kalpas whose number is fixed by
the dimensions of their bodies. In Ārūpyadhātu, a lifespan of a
thousand kalpas which increases as much. These kalpas are,
from the Parīttābhas on, mahākalpas; below, halves. 470
The gods of Rūpadhātu whose bodies are half a yojana in height-
the Brahmakāyikas-live a half kalpa; and thus following to the
Akanişthas, whose bodies are sixteen thousand yojanas in height, and
whose lifespan is thus sixteen thousand kalpas in length.
In Ākāśānantyāyatana, a lifespan is twenty thousand kalpas in
length; fifty thousand kalpas in length in Vijñānānantyāyatana, sixty
thousand kalpas in length in Äkimcanyāyatana, and eighty thousand in
Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjññāyatana or Bhavagra.
But to which kalpas does this refer: to intermediate kalpas
(antarakalpas), to kalpas of destruction (samvarta), to kalpas of creation
(vivarta), or to great kalpas (mahākalpas, iii.89d)?
From the Parīttābhas (lower gods of the Second Dhyāna) on, they
refer to the great kalpas; below (Brahmapāriṣadyas, Brahmapurohitas,472
Chapter Three
Mahābrahmans) they refer to half great kalpas. In fact, there are twenty
antarakalpas during which the world is created[: Mahābrahmā appears
from the beginning]; then twenty antarakalpas during which the world
lasts; and then twenty antarakalpas during which the world is
destroyed[: Mahābrahmā disappears at the end]. Thus the life of
Mahabrahma lasts sixty intermediate antarakalpas: these sixty make a
kalpa and a half; half a great kalpa (or forty intermediate kalpas) is
considered to be a kalpa.
What is the length of a lifespan in the painful realms of rebirth?
Let us examine in order the first six hot hells, the last two hot hells,
animals, Pretas, and the cold hells.
82. In six hells, Saṁjīva, etc., a day and night has the length of the
life of the gods of Kāmadhātu; with such days, life as for the gods
of Kāmadhātu.
A day in the six hells,-Saṁjīva, Kālasūtra, Saṁghāta, Raurava,
Mahāraurava, and Tapana,-is equal in this order to the life of the gods
of Kāmadhātu, the Cāturmahārājakāyikas, etc.
The damned in Samjiva have, like the Cāturmahārājakāyikas, a life
of five hundred years of twelve months of thirty days; but each of these
days has the length of the total lifespan of the Căturmahārājakāyikas.
Same relationship between the damned of Kālasūtra and the Traya-
strimśas, and between the damned of Tapana and the Paranirmitava-
śavartins.
83a-b. In Pratāpana, a lifespan of a half antaḥkalpa; in Avici, a
likespan of one antaḥkalpa.
In Pratapana, a lifespan lasts one half of an antarakalpa; in Avici,
one antarakalpa.471
83b-d. The life of animals is one kalpa in length at most; the life
of the Pretas is five hundred years with its days the duration of a
month.
The animals that live the longest time live one antarakalpa; theseThe World 473
are the great Näga Kings, Nanda, Upananda, Aśvatara, etc. The Blessed
One said, "There are, Oh Bhikşus, eight great Nāga Kings who live a
kalpa and who sustain the earth..."472
The days of the Pretas have a length of one human month; they live
five hundred years made up of days of this length.
84. Life in the Arbudas is the time of the exhaustion of a váha, by
taking a grain of sesame every one hundred years; the others by
multiplying each time by twenty. 473
The Blessed One has indicated the length of a lifespan in the cold
hells only through comparisons, "If, Oh Bhikṣus, a Magadhan väha of
sesame of eighty khāris 474 were full 475 of sesame seeds; if one were to
take one grain each one hundred years, this vāha would be empty before
a lifespan of beings born in the Arbuda hell would end: this is what I say.
And, Oh Bhikṣus, twenty Arbudas make, Oh Bhikṣus, one Nirar-
buda..." (See above, note 413).
Do all beings, whose length of lifespan has just been indicated, live
the full length of this lifespan?
85a. With the exception of Kuru, there is death before their
time. 476
The life of beings in Uttarakuru is fixed; they necessarily live one
thousand years: their length of life is complete. 477 Everywhere else there
is antarāmṛtyu, "death in the course of, in the middle of, a complete life,"
or premature death. Nevertheless certain persons are sheltered from
premature death, namely the Bodhisattva who, in Tușita, is no longer
bound to birth; a being in his last existence [who will not die before
having obtained the state of Arhat]; 478 one who has been the object of a
prediction by the Blessed One; one who is sent by the Blessed One; 479 a
Sraddhānusārin and a Dharmānusārin (vi.29a-b) [who will not die
before having become a Sraddhädhimuktika and a Dṛṣṭiprāpta]; a
woman pregnant with the Bodhisattva or with a Cakravartin, etc. 480
Chapter Three
We have explained the residences and the bodies by measuring them
in terms of yojanas, and lifespans by measuring them in terms of years;
but we have not explained yojanas and years.
These can be explained only through the means of words (naman);
one must then say that it is the limit (paryanta) of words, etc.
85b-c. An atom (paramaṇu), a syllable (akşara), and an instant
(kṣaṇa) is the limit of matter, of words, and of time. 481
A paramāņu is the limit of physical matter (rūpa); so too a syllable is
the limit of words, for example, go; and an instant, 482 the limit of time
(advan).
What is the dimension of an instant?
If the right conditions (pratyaya) are present, the time that it takes
for a dharma to arise; or rather the time that it takes for a dharma in
progress to go from one paramāṇu to another paramāṇu. 483
According to the Ābhidhārmikas, there are sixty-five instants in the
time that it takes a healthy man to snap his fingers. 484
85d-88a. Paramāņu, aṇu, loharajas, abrajas, śaśarajas, avirajas,
gorajas, chidrarajas, likṣā, that which comes out of the likṣā, yava,
and anguliparvan, by multiplying each time by seven; twenty-
four angulis make one hasta; four hastas make one dhanus; five
hundred dhanus make one krośa, the distance a hermitage
should be located; and eight krośas make what is called one
yojana.485
[Thus seven paramāņus make one anu, and eight anus make a
loharajas.
Avirajas signifies edakrajas, and chidrarajas signifies vātāyana-
cchidrarajas.
"That which come out of the liksā” is the yūka.
The author does not say that three anguliparvans make one anguli,
for that is well known. 486]
A hermitage, aranya, should be located one krofa from a village. 487The World
88b-89c. One hundred and twenty ksanas make one tatkṣaṇa,
sixteen tatkṣaṇas make one lava; we obtain a muhurta or hour,
an ahorāta or one day and night, and a māsa or month, by
multiplying the preceeding term by thirty; a samvatsara or year,
is of twelve months by adding the ūnaratras. 488
One muhurta equals thirty lavas. Thirty muhurtas make one day and
night; a night is sometimes longer, sometimes shorter, and sometimes
equal to a day.
There are four months of winter, of heat, and of rain; 489 twelve
months which, with the days called unaratras, make a year. The
ūnarātras are the six days which, in the course of the year, one should
omit (for the calculation of the lunar months). There is a stanza about
this: "When one month and a half of the cold, hot, rainy season has
elapsed, the learned omit one ünaratra in the half-month that
remains." 490
We have explained the year; we must explain the kalpa or cosmic
period.
89d. There are different types of kalpa:491
There is a distinction between a small kalpa (antarakalpa) 492, a
kalpa of disappearance (samvarta), 493 a kalpa of creation (vivarta), and a
great kalpa.
90a-b. A kalpa of disappearance lasts from the non-production
of the damned to destruction of the receptacle world.
The period that extends from the moment when beings cease being
reborn in hell until the moment when the world is destroyed is called a
saṁvartakalpa, a kalpa of destruction.
"Destruction" is of two types: destruction of the realms of rebirth,
and destruction of the Dhātu.
It is again of two types: destuction of living beings, and destruction476 Chapter Three
of the physical world.
1. When no being is reborn in hell-even though beings in hell
continue to die-the period of twenty small kalpas during which the
world lasts is terminated; and the period of destruction begins.
When not a single being remains in the hells, the destruction of
beings in hell is achieved, and the world has been destroyed to that
extent: if a being of this universe has committed any actions which
should be retributed in hell, the force of these actions causes him to be
reborn in the hell of another universe not in the process of
destruction. 494
2. So too is the destruction of animals and Pretas. The animals that
reside in the great ocean disappear first; those that live with humans will
disappear at the same time as do humans. 495
3. Among humans of Jambudvīpa, a person enters by himself,
without a teacher, by reason of dharmată,496 into the First Dhyana.
Coming out of this Dhyāna, he exclaims, "Happy is the pleasure and the
joy that arise from detachment! Calm is the pleasure and joy that arise
from detachment!" Understanding these words, other persons also
enter into absorption and, after their death, pass into the world of
Brahmā. When, by this continual process, there does not remain a single
person in Jambudvīpa, the destruction of the persons of Jambudvīpa is
finished.
The same for the inhabitants of Pūrvavideha and Avaragodānīya.
The inhabitants of Uttarakuru are incapable of detaching themselves
from Kāmadhātu and, as a consequence, of entering into dhyana: they
are also reborn, not in the world of Brahmã, but among the gods of
Kāmadhātu.
When a single human being no longer remains, the destruction of
humans is finished, and the world has been destroyed to this extent.
4. The same then holds for the gods of Kāmadhātu, from the
Cāturmahārājakäyikas to the Paranirmitavaśavartins, who enter into
dhyāna and are reborn in the world of Brahmã, and who successively
disappear. When a single god no longer remains in Kāmadhātu, the
destuction of Kāmadhātu is finished.
5. It then happens, by reason of dharmatā, that a god of the world of
Brahmä enters into the Second Dhyana. Coming out of this Dhyana, he
excaims, "Happy is the pleasure and joy that arise from absorption!The World
Calm is the pleasure and joy that arise from absorption!" Understanding
these words, other gods of the world of Brahmã enter into the Second
Dhyana and after their death, are reborn in the heaven of the
Abhāsvaras. When a single being no longer remains in the world of
Brahma, the destruction of beings (sattvasamvartanī) is finished and the
world has been destroyed to that extent.
6. Then, by reason of the exhaustion of the collective action which
has created the physical world, and by reason of the emptiness of the
world, seven suns successively appear,497 and the world is entirely
consumed from this sphere with its continents to Meru. From this world
thus inflamed, the flame, conducted by the wind, burns the houses of the
world of Brahmã. 498 Even though it is well understood that the flame
that burns these houses is a flame of Rūpadhātu, the destruction of
Kāmadhātu has not yet taken hold of Rūpadhātu. But it is said that the
flame goes from this world and burns the world of Brahmā, because a
new flame arises in relation to the first one.
So too, mutatis mutandis, is the destruction through water and
through wind, which are similar to destruction through fire but which
extend higher. 49⁹9
The period that extends from the moment when beings cease to be
born in the hells until the moment when the physical world has been
destroyed is what is called a samvartakalpa, a kalpa of disappearance.
90c-d. The kalpa of creation lasts from the primordial wind until
the production of hellish beings.
From the primordial wind (prāgvāyu) until the moment when
beings arise in hells.
The world, which has been destroyed as we have seen, stays
destroyed for a long time-during twenty small kalpas. There is only
space where the world once was.
1. When, by reason of the collective action of beings, there appears
the first signs of a future physical world; when some very light winds
arise in space, then this period of twenty small kalpas during which the
world remained destroyed is finished; and the period, also of twenty
small kalpas, during which the world is created, begins.500
The winds come gradually and, finally, constitute a circle of wind;
then there arises all of the receptacles as we have just described: a circle478 Chapter Three
of water, a sphere of gold, Meru, etc. The mansion of Brahmā appears
first and then all the mansions until those of the Yāmas. But this is only
after the circle of wind arises. 501
The physical world is thus created, and the world is now created to
this extent.
2. Then a being, dying in Ābhāsvara, is born in the mansion of
Brahmā which is empty; other beings, dying one after the other in
Ābhāsvara, are born in the heaven of the Brahmapurohitas, the
Brahmakāyikas, the Paranirmitavaśavartins and the other gods of
Kämadhātu; in Uttarakuru, Godānīya, Videha, and Jambudvipa; among
the Pretas and animals; and in the hells. The rule is that the beings who
disappear last reappear first.
When a being is born in the hells, the period of creation, of twenty
small kalpas, is finished, and the period of duration begins.
[The first small kalpa of the period of creation is used for the
creation of the physical world, the mansion of Brahmã, etc.] During the
nineteen small kalpas that complete this period, until the appearance of
the beings in hell, the lifespan of humans is infinite in length.
91a-b. A small kalpa, in the course of which a lifespan, from
infinite, becomes a lifespan ten years in length.
Humans, at the end of the period of creation, have an infinitely long
lifespan; their lifespan diminishes when creation is achieved, until it is
not more then ten years in length (iii.98c-d). The period in which this
diminution takes place constitutes the first small kalpa of the period of
destruction.
91c-d. The eighteen kalpas which are of augmentation and of
diminution.
A lifespan, which is now ten years in length, increases until it is
eighty thousand years in length; then it decreases and is reduced to a
length of ten years. The period in the course of which this increase and
this decrease takes place is the second small kalpa.
This kalpa is followed by seventeen similar ones.
92a. One, of augmentation.
The twentieth small kalpa is only of increase, not of decrease. The
lifespan of humans increases from ten years to eighty thousand years inlength.
How high, by increase, do these increases go?
The World
92b. They go to a lifespan of eighty thousand, 502
But not beyond. The time required for the increase and the decrease
of the eighteen kalpas is equal to the time that the decrease of the first
kalpa and the increase of the last take. 503
92c-d. In this way then the world stays created for twenty kalpas.
The world remains created for twenty small kalpas thus calculated.
As long as this period of duration lasts,
93a-b. During the same length of time, the world is in the
process of creation, in the process of disappearance, and in a
state of disappearance.
The creation, the disappearance, and the period when the world
disappears lasts a total of twenty small kalpas. There are not, during
these three periods, any phases of increase and decrease of lifespan, but
these periods are equal in length to the period during which the world
remains created.
Of what does a kalpa consist?
The kalpa is by nature the five skandhas. 504
The physical world is created in one small kalpa; it is filled during
nineteen; it is emptied during nineteen; and it perishes in one small
kalpa.
Four times twenty small kalpas make eighty:
93c. These eighty make a great kalpa.
This is the extent of a great kalpa.
It is said that the quality of Buddhahood is acquired through
cultivation that last three asamkhyeya kalpas. To which among the four
types of kalpas does this refer?
93d-94a. The quality of Buddhahood results from three of these480
Chapter Three
[kalpas].505
Of these great kalpas that we have just defined.
But the word asamkhya (=asaṁkhyaya) signifies "incalculable;" how
can one speak of three "incalculables?"
One should not understand it in this manner, for, in an isolated
(muktaka) Sūtra, 506 it is said that numeration is to the sixteenth place.
What are these sixteen places? 507
One, not two, is the first place; ten times one is the second place; ten
times ten (or one hundred) is the third; ten times one hundred (or one
thousand) is the fourth... and so on, each term being worth ten times
the preceeding: prabheda (10,000), lakṣa (1000,000), atilakṣa, koți,
madhya, ayuta, mahāyuta, nayuta, mahānayuta, prayuta, mahāprayuta,
kaṁkara, mahākaṁkara, bimbara, mahābimbara, akṣobhya, mahākṣo-
bhya, vivāha, mahāvivāha, utsaṁga, mahotsañga, vāhana, mahāvāhana,
tiṭibha, mahāṭṭṭibha, hetu, mahāhetu, karabha, māhākarabha, indra,
mahendra, samāpta (or samāptam), mahāsamāpta (or mahāsamāp-
tam), gati, mahāgati, nimbarajas, mahānimbarajas, mudrā, mahāmudrā,
bala, mahābala, saṁjña, mahāsaṁjñā, vibhūta, mahāvibhūta, balakṣa,
mahābalakṣa, and asamkhya.
In this list eight numbers have been lost. 508
A great kalpa successively numbered (=multiplied) to the sixteenth
place is called an asaṁkhyeya; 50⁹ if one begins again, one has a second,
and a third asamkhyeya. An asaṁkhyeya [kalpa] does not receive its
name from the fact that it is incalculable.
But why do the Bodhisattvas, once they have undertaken the
resolution to obtain supreme Bodhi, take such a long time to obtain it?
Because supreme Bodhi is very difficult to obtain: one needs a great
accumulation of knowledge and merit, and of innumerable heroic works
in the course of three asamkhyeya kalpas.
One would understand that the Bodhisattva searches out this Bodhi
so difficult to obtain, if this Bodhi were the sole means of arriving at
deliverance; but such is not the case. Why then do they undertake this
infinite labor?The World
For the good of others, because they want to become capable of
pulling others out of the great flood of suffering.
But what personal good do they find in the good of others?
The good of others is their own good, because they desire it.
Who believes this?
In truth, persons devoid of pity and who think only of themselves
believe with difficulty in the altruism of the Bodhisattvas; but
compassionate persons believe in it easily. Don't we see that certain
persons, confirmed in the absence of pity, find pleasure in the suffering
of others even when it is not to their benefit? In the same way one must
admit that the Bodhisattvas, confirmed in pity, find pleasure in doing
good to others without any egoistic concerns. Don't we see that certain
persons, ignorant of the true nature of the conditioned dharmas (i.e., the
saṁskāras) that constitute their pretended "self," are attached to these
dharmas through the force of habit, as completely devoid of personality
as these dharmas are, and suffer a thousand pains by reason of this
attachment? In the same way one must admit that the Bodhisattvas,
through the force of habit, detach themselves from the dharmas that
constitute the pretended “self,” no longer consider these dharmas as
“me” and “mine,” increase compassionate solicitude for others, and are
ready to suffer a thousand pains because of this solicitude.
In a few words, there is a certain category of persons, who,
indifferent to what concerns them personally, are happy through the
well-being of others, and are unhappy through the suffering of
others. 510 For them, to be useful to others is to be useful to themselves. A
stanza says,
"An inferior person searches out, by all means, his personal
well-being; a mediocre person searches out the destruction of suffering,
not well-being, because well-being is the cause of suffering; an excellent
person, through his personal suffering, searches out the well-being and
the definitive destruction of the suffering of others, for he suffers from
the suffering of others."511
During what periods do the Buddhas appear, during a period of
increase or during a period of decrease?
94a-b. They appear during the decrease to one hundred, 512482 Chapter Three
The Buddhas appear during the period of the decrease of lifespan,
when the length of life decreases from eighty thousand years to one
hundred years in length.
Why do they not appear when life decreases from one hundred to
ten years?
Because the five corruptions (ayuḥkaṣāya, kalpakaṣāya, kleśakaṣāya,
dṛṣṭikaṣāya, and sattvakaṣāya) 513 then become very strong, 514
In the final period of the decrease of lifespan, the length of life (or
ayus) becomes bad, base; being corrupted, it is called a kaşaya or
"corruption;" the same for the other corruptions.
The first two corruptions deteriorate the vitality and the means of
subsistance.515 The next two corruptions deteriorate the good; the
corruption of defilements deteriorate beings through laxity (kāmasuka-
hallikā); the corruption of views through the practice of painful
asceticism; or rather the corruption of defilement and the corruption of
views deteriorate respectively the spiritual good of householders and of
wanderers. 516 The corruption of beings deteriorates beings from the
physical and the mental point of view; it deteriorates their height,
beauty, health, force, intelligence, memory, energy, and firmness.
During what periods do the Pratyekabuddhas appear?
94c. The Pratyekabuddhas appear in the course of two
periods. 517
They appear during the period of increase and during the period of
decrease of lifespan. One distinguishes in fact two types of Pratye-
kabuddhas: those that live in a group (vargacārin), [and who also appear
during the period of increase], and those who live like a rhinoceros. 518
a. The first are the ancient Śrāvakas [who will obtain the first or
second result of the Śrāvakas under the reign of a Buddha].
According to another opinion, there are also Pṛthagjanas who have
realized, in the vehicle of the Śrävakas, 519 the nirvedhabhāgīyas (vi.20);
in the course of a subsequent existence, by themselves, they will realize
the Way. The masters who follow this opinion find an argument in theThe World 483
Pūrvakathā520 where they read, "Five hundred ascetics cultivated painful
austerities on a mountain. A monkey who had lived in the company of
Pratyekabuddhas imitated the attitudes of the Pratyekabuddhas in front
of them. These ascetics then imitated the monkey and, they say, obtained
the Bodhi of the Pratyekabuddhas." It is clear, say these masters, that
these ascetics were not Āryans, Śrāvakas; for, if they had previously
obtained the result of the Śrāvakas, namely liberation from rules and
rituals (filavrataparāmarśa, v. French trans. p. 18), they would not have
given themselves up later to painful austerities.
b. The Pratyekabuddhas who are "like a rhinoceros" live alone.
94d. The Rhinoceros by reason of one hundred kalpas. 521
The Rhinoceros has cultivated for one hundred great kalpas in his
preparation for Bodhi, [that is, he has cultivated morality, absorption,
and prajñā]. He obtains Bodhi (vi.67) without the help of the teaching
or āgama, but alone.He is a Pratyekabuddha because he himself brings
about his salvation without converting others.
Why does he not apply himself to the conversion of others? He is
certainly capable of teaching the Law: he possesses the comprehensions
(pratisamvids, vii.37b): [and even if he does not possess them,] he can
[through his praṇidhijñāna, vii.37a] remember the teachings of the
ancient Buddhas. He is no longer deprived of pity, for he manifests his
supernormal power with a view to being of service to beings. 522 He can
no longer say that beings are "unconvertible" in the period in which he
lives, for, in this period-the period of decrease of life-beings can
detach themselves from Kāmadhātu by the worldly path. 523 Why then
does he not teach the Law?
By reason of his previous habit [of solitude], he finds pleasure in,
and aspires to absence of turmoil; he does not have the courage to apply
himself to making others understand the profound Dharma: he would
have to make disciples; he would have to conduct the multitude who
follow the current against the current, and this is a difficult thing. Now
he fears being distracted from his absorption and of entering into
contact (saṁsarga, vi.6a) with humans. 524
Chapter Three
95-96. The Cakravartin Kings do not appear when lifespan is
under eighty thousand years in length; they have a wheel of gold,
a wheel of silver, a wheel of cooper, and a wheel of iron; in
inverse order, he reigns over one, two, three, or four continents;
but never two at once, like the Buddhas; they triumph through
spontaneous default, personal influence, fighting, or the sword,
but always without doing evil. 525
1. The Cakravartin Kings appear from the period when the lifespan
of humans is infinite to the period when their lifespan is eighty
thousand years in length; not when life is shorter, for then the world is
no longer a suitable receptacle for their glorious prosperity.
They are called Cakravartins, because their nature is to reign (rājyaṁ
cakreņa vartayitum), 526
2. There are four types of Cakravartin Kings, 527 Suvarncakravartin,
Rūpyacakravartin, Tāmracakravartin, and Ayaścakravartin, accordingly
as their wheel (cakra) is of gold, silver, copper, or iron: the first is the
best, the second is almost best, the third is mediocre, and the fourth is
inferior. The Cakravartin whose wheel is iron reigns over one continent,
the Cakravartin whose wheel is copper reigns over two continents, and
so on.
This is the doctrine of the Prajñāpti. 528 A Sūtra, in fact, speaks only
of a Cakravartin King having a wheel of gold, by reason of his greater
importance, "When, to a king of royal and consecrated race-who, even
in the days of his youth, on the fifteenth day, having washed his head,
having undertaken the obligations of youth, ascends accompanied by
this ministers to the terrace of his palace-there appears in the east the
jewel of a wheel having a thousand rays, a wheel having a rim, having a
hub, complete in all ways, beautiful, not made by the hand of an artisan,
all in gold 529-this king is a Cakravartin King."530
3. Two Cakravartins, the same as two Buddhas, do not appear at the
same time. The Sūtra says, "It is impossible in the present, or in the
future, for two Tathāgatas, Arhats, perfect Buddhas to appear in the
world without one preceding and the other following. It is impossible. It
is the rule that there is only one. And this holds for the Cakravartins as
for the Tathāgatas." 531
Here a question is raised. What is the meaning of the expression "inThe World 485
the world?" Does this mean "in a great Trisahasra universe” (iii.74), or
"in all the universes?" 532
According to one opinion, the Buddhas do not appear elsewhere
[that is: in two great universes at once] 533 because the coexistence of two
Buddhas would create an obstacle to the power of the Blessed Ones. A
single Blessed One applies himself wheresoever: where a Blessed One
does not apply himself to the converting of beings, other Blessed Ones
do not apply themselves either. Further, we read in the Sūtra,
"Śāriputra, if someone comes and asks you if there now exists someone,
a Bhikṣu or a Brāhmin, who is equal 534 to the ascetic Gautama with
regard to Samyaksambodhi, what would you answer him?'
"If someone were to interrogate me thus, Oh Venerable One, I
would answer him that there does not exist now anyone, Bhikṣu or
Brāhmin, who is the equal of the Blessed One. And why would I respond
in this manner? Because I have heard and understood of the Blessed
One, that it is impossible, both in the present and in the future, for two
Blessed Ones, Arhats, perfect Buddhas to appear in the world without
one preceding and the other following.'
Objection: How then are we to understand what the Blessed One
said in the Brahmasutra,536 "I exercise my power even over a great
Trisahasra universe?"
This text should not be taken literally: it means that without making
an effort (without making a special act of attention), the Buddha sees as
far as this limit. When he desires it, his seeing goes wherever he wills it
without limit. 537
According to other schools, the Buddhas appear at the same time,
but in many universes. Here are their arguments. One sees that many
persons apply themselves at the same time to the preparations [for
Bodhi]. Certainly, it is not proper that many Buddhas should appear at
the same time in the same spot (=in the same universe); but, on the
other hand, nothing prevents many Buddhas from appearing at the
same time: thus they appear in different universes. 538 The universes are
infinite in number, so even if the Blessed One lives an entire kalpa, he
cannot go about in the infinity of the universe as he does here; all the
more so if he only lives a human lifetime.
What is this activity of the Blessed One?
He wills that a person's faculty (faith, etc.)-by reason of such a486 Chapter Three
person, of such a place and of such conditions of time, due to the
disappearance of such a defect and to the realization of such a cause, and
in such a manner-if not arisen should arise, and if not perfected should
be perfected.
Objection:But we have quoted the Sūtra, "It is impossible for two
Tathāgatas to appear in the world without one preceding and the other
following."
Answer: There is reason to examine if this text refers to one
universe a universe with its four continents, a great Trisahasra
universe or to all universes. Let us observe that the rule which
concerns the appearance of the Cakravartin Kings is formulated in the
same terms as those that concern the appearance of the Tathāgatas.
Would you deny that Cakravartin Kings could appear at the same time?
If you do not deny this, why not also admit that the Buddhas, which are
the foundation of merit, appear at the same time in different
universes? 539 What is wrong with numerous Buddhas appearing in
numerous universes? Innumerable beings would thus obtain both
temporal well-being and supreme happiness.
Objection: But in this same spirit, you should also admit that two
Tathāgatas can appear at the same time in one universe.
Answer:No. In fact, 1. their simultaneous appearance in a universe
would be without utility; 2. the vow of the Bodhisattva is to "become a
Buddha, a protector of the unprotected, in a world blind and without a
protector;" 3. respect with regard to a single Buddha is greater; 4. greater
also is the haste to conform to his Law: persons know that a Buddha is
rare, and that they will be without a protector once the Buddha is in
Nirvāṇa or when he goes elsewhere. 540
4. It is by their wheel of gold, silver, etc., that Cakravartin Kings
conquer the earth. Their conquest differs according to the nature of their
wheel, 541
A Cakravartin King with a golden wheel triumphs through
pratyudyana. Lesser kings 542 come towards him, saying, "Rich districts,
flourishing, abundant in living things, full of men and sage men 543-
may Your Majesty deign to govern them! We ourselves are at your
orders."
A Cakravartin King with a silver wheel goes towards them himself,
and then they submit to him.
A Cakravartin King with a copper wheel goes to them; they makeThe World
preparations for resistance, but they submit to him..
A Cakravartin King with an iron wheel goes to them; they brandish
their arms, but then they submit to him.
In no case does a Cakravartin King kill.
5. Cakravartin Kings cause beings to enter the path of the ten good
actions (karmapatha, iv.66b). 544 Also, after their death, they are reborn
among the gods.
6. The Sūtra says, “When Cakravartin Kings appear in the world,
the seven jewels also appear: a wheel, an elephant, a horse, a treasure,
women, a treasurer, and a military advisor."545 Do these jewels which
are living beings,-the jewel of elephants, etc.,-arise through the
actions of others?
No. A being accumulates actions which should be retributed by a
birth related to a Cakravartin King, by a birth as a jewel of an elephant,
etc.: when a Cakravartin King appears, his own actions make this being
arise.
7. There are many differance between the Cakravartin Kings and
other men, notably that these Kings possess, like the Buddha, the
thirty-two marks of the Mahāpuruṣa. 546
97a. But the marks of the Muni are better placed, more brilliant,
and complete.
But the marks of the Buddha outweigh those of the Kings in that
they are better placed, 547 more brilliant, and complete.
Did humans have kings at the beginning of the kalpa?
No.
98. In the beginning, beings were similar to the gods of
Rūpadhātu; then, little by little, through attachment to taste, and
through laziness, they made provisions and attributed parts to
themselves; a protector of the fields was, by them, retributed. 548
Humans at the beginning of the cosmic age 549 were similar to the
beings of Rūpadhātu. The Sūtra says, "There are visible beings, born of
the mind, having all their members, with complete and intact organs, of
fine figure, of beautiful color, shining by themselves, travelling through
the air, having joy for ther food, and living a long time." 550488 Chapter Three
Yet there appeared the "juice of the earth," the taste of which had
the sweetness of honey. One being, of greedy temperament, having
perceived the smell of this juice, took pleasure in it and ate it; the other
beings then did the same. This was the beginning of eating by mouthfuls
(kavaḍīkāra, iii.39). This eating made their bodies become coarse and
heavy and their luminosity come to an end: and then darkness appeared.
And then there appeared the sun and the moon.
Because of the attachment of beings to taste, the juice of the earth
gradually disappeared. Then prthiviparpaṭaka55¹ appeared, and beings
attached themselves to it. Prthiviparpaṭaka disappeared and a forest
creeper appeared and beings then became attached to it. This creeper
disappeared and then rice grew, unworked and unseeded: this rice, a
coarse food, gave forth waste: beings then developed organs of excretion
and sexual organs; they then took different forms. Beings with sexual
differences, by reason of ther previous habits, were seized by this
crocodile which is wrong judgment; they conceived an active desire for
pleasure and so had sexual intercourse. It is from this moment on that
the beings of Kāmadhātu were possessed by the demon which is
craving.
One cut rice in the morning for the morning meal, and in the
evening for the evening meal. One being, of lazy temperament, made
provisions. The others imitated him. With provisions arose the idea of
"mine," the idea of property: then the rice, cut and recut, stopped
growing.
Then they distributed the fields. One was the owner of one field; one
seized the goods of another. This was the beginning of robbery.
In order to prevent robbery, they came together and gave a sixth
part to an excellent man in order that he protect the fields: this man was
given the name kşetrapa or guardian of the fields, and, as he was a
kşetrapa, he received the name of kṣatriya. Because he was very
esteemed (sammata) by the multitude (mahājana), and because he
charmed (rang) his subjects, he became the Raja Mahāsaṁmata. 552 This
was the beginning of dynasties. 553
Those who abandoned the householder's life received the name of
Brahmins.
Then, under a certain king, there were many bandits and thieves.
The king punished them by the sword. Others said, “We have not
committed such actions," and this was the beginning of lying.98c-d. Then, through the development of the courses of action,
life shortened to a length of ten years. 554
The World 489
From this moment on, the bad courses of action, murder, etc.,
increased and the lifespan of humans became shorter and shorter. It was
reduced, finally, to a length of ten years.
There are thus two dharmas: attachment to taste and laziness which
are the beginning of this long degeneration.
A small kalpa terminates when a lifespan is ten years in length.
What happens then?
99. The kalpa terminates through iron, sickness, hunger, which
last respectively seven days, seven months, and seven years. 555
The end of the kalpa is marked by three calamities.556
1. In the period when the kalpa draws to its end, their lifespans
being reduced to ten years in length, persons, full of forbidden craving
and slaves of unjust greed, profess false doctrines. The spirit of
wickedness arises in them: they conceive thoughts of hatred; as soon as
they see one another, as a hunter who sees game, everything that falls
into their hand,-a piece of wood, aconite plants, becomes a sharp
weapon, and they massacre one another.
2. In the period when the kalpa draws to its end, their lifespans
being reduced to ten years, persons, full of forbidden craving and slaves
to unjust greed, profess false doctrines. Non-human beings (Piśācas,
etc.) emit deadly vapors, from whence incurable sicknesses arise by
which humans die.
3. In the period when the kalpa draws to its end... the heavens cease
to rain, from whence three famines arise, the famine of the boxes
(cañcu), the famine of the white bones, and the famine when one lives
by tokens. 557
The famine of the boxes is called this for two reasons. What is today
a samudgaka, was in this period called cañca; and cañcu is the same as
canca. 558 Persons, overwhelmed with hunger and weakness, die all in a
group; and, with a view to being useful to persons of the future, they
place seeds in a cañcu. This is why this famine is called cancu.490 Chapter Three
The famine of the white bones is called this for two reasons. Bodies
become dry and hard, and when they die, their bones soon become
white. Persons gather up these white bones, boil them and drink
them. 559
The famine of tokens is called this for two reasons. Beings, in
houses, eat according to the indication of tokens, “Today it is the turn of
the master of the house to eat; tomorrow it is the turn of the mistress of
the house..." And, with the tokens, persons search out grains in the
empty earth; they are boiled in much water, and drunk. 560
Scripture teaches that person who have, for a single day and night,
undertaken abstention from murder, or have given one myrobalan fruit
or a mouthful of food to the Sangha, will not be reborn here in this world
during the period of knives, sickness, or famine.
4. How long a time do these periods last?
Killing lasts seven days, sickness lasts seven months and seven days,
and famine last seven years, seven months and seven days. The
conjunction ca ("and") in the stanza shows that one must add the
different lengths of time.
The continents of Videha and Godānīya do not know the three
calamities: yet wickedness, bad color and weakness, and hunger and
thirst reign therein when Jambudvipa is overwhelmed by knives,
sickness, and famine.
We have described destruction by fire, and have said that the other
destructions are accomplished in a similar manner.
100a-b. There are three destructions: through fire, water, and
wind, 561
When all beings have disappeared from the lower physical worlds,
having come together in a dhyana heaven, the destructions take place:
through fire, by reason of the seven suns; through water, by reason of
the rain; and through wind, by reason of the disorder of the windThe World 491
element. The effect of these destructions is that not one atom of the
destroyed physical world remains.
[Here arises the problem of a whole and its part (avayavin,
avayava), of a substance and its qualities (guṇin, guṇa), iii.49d].
Certain non-Buddhist masters-[Kaṇabhuj, etc.]-say that the
atoms are eternal, and that, as a consequence, they remain when the
universe is dissolved. In fact, say these masters, if it were otherwise,
coarse bodies would arise without cause (ahetuka).
[The Buddhists:] But we have explained (iii.50a) that the seed of a
new universe is wind, a wind endowed with special powers which have
their beginning in the actions of creatures. And the instrumental cause
(nimitta) of this wind is the wind of Rūpadhātu 562 which is not
destroyed. Further, a Sūtra of the Mahiśāsakas says that the wind brings
the seeds 563 in from another universe.
[The Vaiseșikas:] But even if the seeds were so brought in, we do not
admit that gross bodies,-shoots, stalk, etc.,-arise from a seed, from a
stalk, etc.[: for seeds, shoots, etc., are merely nimittakāraṇa, instru-
mental causes, not samavāyikaraṇa, material cause]; 564 we say rather,
that the shoot, etc., arises from its parts, and that these parts arise in turn
from their parts, and so on to the most minute parts which arise from
the atoms.
[The Buddhists:] What then is the efficacy (sāmarthya: use,
purpose) of a seed with regard to its shoot?
[The Vaiśeşikas:] The seed has no efficacy with regard to the
reneration (janana) of the shoot, except that it provokes the aggrega-
on of the atoms of the shoot. It is impossible in fact for a certain thing
to arise from a thing having another nature: if such generation were
possible, there would be no rule in generation. [One could then make
mats out of cotton threads].
[The Buddhists:] No. Different does come from different, but
according to certain rules, as sound arises, or the products of cooking, etc.
[Sound arises from striking, which is different in nature from sound, but
not different from everthing that is different from sound.] The
potentiality (śakti) of all things is determined.492 Chapter Three
[The Vaiseşikas:] Your examples are not valid. We admit that
gunadharmas or attributes (sound, etc.) arise either from that which is
similar or from that which is different (samyoga, etc.); but this does not
hold in the same way for dravyadharmas (or substances) which arise
from the similar things. 565 It is thus that virana threads, and not other
threads-give rise to a mat, and that only cotton threads give rise to
cotton cloth.
[The Buddhists:] Your example does not prove this, for it is not,
itself, proven. You say that a thing arises from a similar thing, since a
mat arises from vīraṇa threads: but, a mat is the vīraṇa threads
themselves disposed in a certain manner and which take the name of
mat; cloth is threads disposed in a certain manner. In the same way a
row of ants is only ants.
[The Vaiseşikas:] How do you prove that cloth is not a thing distinct
from threads?
[The Buddhists:] When an organ (of sight or touch) is in relation
with a thread, the cloth is not perceived. Now, if the cloth exists [created
by each thread,] why would it not be perceived? You say that the cloth
does not exist, integrally, in each thread: this is to acknowledge that the
cloth is only the collection of its parts which are each constituted by a
thread: for how would you prove that the parts of a cloth are a thing
other than the threads? You say that the cloth exists integrally in each
thread, but that one does not perceive it in each thread because the
perception of the cloth supposes a union of the organ and the cloth in
such a way that the numerous creative elements of the cloth are
perceived: in this hypothesis, it would suffice to see the fringe in order to
see the cloth. You say that, if one does not see the cloth when one sees
the fringe, it is because the central parts, etc., are not in relation with the
organ:
this is to admit then that one would never see the cloth, for the
central parts and the extremes which are supposed to create the cloth are
not perceived together. You say that they are perceived successively: this
is to acknowledge that the whole (the entity cloth, avayavin) is not
perceived; and this is to acknowledge too that the idea of cloth or of mat
has for its sole object the parts of the cloth or the mat. How do we have,
from all evidence, the idea of a circle from the circle formed from the
circular trajectory of a brand? Further, cloth cannot be a thing other than
thread, for, in the hypothesis where it would be otherwise, when theThe World 493
threads are different in color, different in nature, and different in
disposition, one could not attribute either color, or nature, or disposition
to the cloth. You say that the cloth is different in color: this is to
acknowledge that different creates different; further, to suppose that
one of the sides is not variegated, in looking at it one would not see the
cloth, but rather would see it "variegated." But do you dare say that the
cloth, made of threads of different dispositions, is of different
dispositions? It would be truly too diverse to be an entity! Consider again
the entity which is the light of fire: its heating and illuminating power
varies from beginning to end; one cannot recognize in it either color or
tangible qualites.
[The Vaiseşikas: But if the "all," cloth, is not distinct from its "parts,"
and if the atoms, not perceptible to the organs, do not create a coarse
body perceptible to the organs-a body distinct from the atoms-then
the world is invisible: but one can see a cow.]
[The Buddhists:] For us, the atoms, although suprasensible, become
sensible when they come together: the Vaiseșikas also attribute the
power to create coarse bodies to the united atoms; the factors of visual
consciousness should be united in order to produce a consciousness; and
persons who suffer from ophthalmia see masses of hair, not hairs one by
one.
[The author having refuted the doctrine of a whole, avayavin,
distinct from its parts, avayava, now refutes the doctrine of substances,
gunin, distinct from their attributes, guna].
[The Buddhists:] What one understands by atom (paramāņu) is
physical matter (rūpa), etc.; it is thus certain that atoms perish at the
destruction of the universe.
[The Vaišeşikas:] An atom is a thing in and of itself (dravya); a thing
in and of itself is distinct from physical matter, etc.; 566 and physical
matter can perish without an atom perishing.
[The Buddhists:] The distinction between a thing and its attributes
is inadmissible: for no one distinguishes, "This is earth, water, fire: these
are the attributes of earth, namely, its color, its taste, etc." And yet you
affirm that a thing, earth, etc., is perceptible to the eye, etc. [Thus you
cannot say that one does not perceive it because it is suprasensible].
Further, when wool, cotton, opium juice, or incense is burned, one no
longer has the idea of wool, cotton, etc., with regard to its ashes: thus the494 Chapter Three
idea has for its object, not a thing in and of itself whose color would be an
attribute, but its color, its taste, etc. 567 You say that, when an unfired clay
jug has been submitted to the action of fire, we say that it has always
been the same jug; and that, as a consequence, the jug is a thing other
than its color, that it stays the same even though its color changes. But, in
fact, if we were to recognize the unfired jug in the fired jug, it is because
its figure remains similar: as one recognizes a row of ants. In fact, who
would recognize the jug if one does not see in it certain characteristics
observed initially?
Let us here stop this discussion of these infantile theories.
What is the upper limit of the destructions?
100c-101d. Three Dhyānas, beginning with the second, are, in
order, the top of the destructions; by reason of the community of
the nature of destructions and the vices of the first three
Dhyānas. As for the Fourth Dhyana, no destruction, by reason of
its non-agitation: this is not that it is eternal, for its mansions are
produced and perish along with the beings who live therein.
1. The Second Dhyana is the limit of the destruction by fire:
everything below it is burned; the Third Dhyana is the limit of the
destruction by water: everything below it is dissolved; the Fourth
Dhyāna is the limit of the destruction by wind: everything below it is
dispersed. "The top of the destruction" is the name of that which
remains when the destruction is finished.
The heaven of the First Dhyana then perishes by fire: in fact, the
vice or imperfection of the First Dhyāna is vitarka-vicāra; these burn the
mind and are thus similar to fire. The Second Dhyana perishes by water:
in fact, it has joy for its vice. This, being associated with physical
well-being, rends the body soft and flabby: it is similar to water. This is
why the Sūtra teaches that the sensation of suffering is destroyed by the
suppression of all solidity of the body. 568 The Third Dhyāna perishes by
wind: in fact, it has inbreathing and outbreathing, which are wind, for its
vice.ANGKA AT KA
The external vices of a Dhyana (that is, the calamities which destroy
a Dhyana heaven) are of the same order as the internal vices which
affect the person who has entered into this Dhyāna. (See viii. French
trans. p. 126). 569
The World 495
2. Why is there no destruction by the earth element as by the fire
element, etc.?
What one calls the physical world is earth, and as a consequence can
be opposed by fire, water, and wind, but not by earth itself.
3. The Fourth Dhyāna is not subject to destruction, because it is free
from agitation. The Buddha said in fact that this Dhyāna, being free
from internal vices, is non-movable (ānejya). 570 The external vices have
thus no hold on it and, as a consequence, it is not subject to destruction.
According to another opinion, the non-destruction of the Fourth
Dhyāna is explained by the force of the Suddhāvāsakāyika gods whose
abode it is. These gods are incapable of entering into Arūpyadhātu, and
are also incapable of going elsewhere [to a lower sphere].571
The receptacle world of the Fourth Dhyāna is not eternal, but by this
fact, it does not constitute a "sphere;" like the stars, it is divided into
diverse residences; these different mansions, the abodes of beings, arise
and perish with these beings. (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 692b19).
What is the order of succession of these three destructions?
102. Seven by fire, one by water; and when seven destructions by
water have thus taken place, seven by fire followed by the
destruction by wind. 572
After seven series of seven successive destructions by fire, de-
struction is then done seven times by water; the eighth series of seven
destructions by fire is followed by one destruction by wind. The physical
worlds, in fact, last by reason of the duration of the gods who are reborn
therein by the force of their absorptions. There are fifty-six destructions
by fire, seven by water, and one by wind: this is what justifies the
declaration of the Prajñāpti 573 that the Subhakṛtsṇa gods live sixty-four
kalpas. (iii.80d).
Om. Homage to the Buddha
Who created the variety of the world of living beings and the
receptacle-world which we have described in the preceding chapter?
It was not a god (ii.64d) who intelligently created it.
la. The variety of the world arises from action.
The variety of the world arises from the actions of living beings.
But, in this hypothesis, how does it happen that actions produce at
one and the same time, pleasing things,-saffron, sandalwood, etc.-on
the one hand, and bodies of quite opposite qualities on the other?
The actions of beings whose conduct is a mixture of good and bad
actions (vyāmiśrakārin, iv. 60) produce bodies resembling abscesses
whose impurities flow out through the nine gates, and, in order to serve
as a remedy to these bodies, they also produce objects of pleasing
enjoyment, colors and shapes, odors, tastes and tangibles.
But the gods have accomplished only good actions: their bodies and
their objects of enjoyment are equally pleasing.
What is action?
lb. It is volition and that which is produced through volition.
The sutra says that there are two types of action, volition (cetanā)
and the action after having been willed.¹ Action after having been552 Chapter Four
willed (cetayitva) is what the kārikā designates by the words "that which
is produced through volition."
These two actions form three actions: bodily action, vocal action,
and mental action.
How do you establish this division, according to the support of its
action, according to its nature, or according to its original cause?
To what does this question tend? If one were to regard its support,
there is nothing but an action, for all actions are supported on a physical
support, a body. If one were to regard its nature, there is only vocal
action, for, of these three, body, speech and manas, only the voice is
ultimately action by its nature. 2 If one were to regard its origional cause,
we have only mental action, for all actions have their origin in the mind.
The Vaibhāṣikas say that the three types of action are established by
reason of all of these three causes, support, nature and original cause, in
this order.
lc-d. Volition is mental action: it gives rise to two actions, bodily
and vocal action.
Volition is called mental action; that which arises from volition,³
namely action which has been willed,4 is made up of the two other
actions, bodily and vocal action.
2a. These two actions are informative and non-informative.
Bodily action and vocal action are informative (vijñapti) and non-
informative (avijñapti, i. 11, iv.4); we then have bodily informative
action, vocal informative action,³ bodily non-informative action, and
vocal non-informative action.
What action is "bodily informative action?"
2b-3b. Bodily vijñapti is shape. It is not movement because all
conditioned things are momentary, since they perish: on the
other hand, nothing does not perish without a cause and the
creative cause would be at the same time destructive.
Bodily vijñapti is such and such a shape (saṁsthāna, i.10a) of theKarma 553
body by reason of a volition
According to others, (the Vatsiputrīyas,)6 bodily vijñapti is dis-
placement,' for it takes place when there is movement, and not when
there is no movement. 8
The author answers: This is not so, because all conditioned things
are momentary.
What is understood by "momentary" (kṣanika)?
Kṣaṇa means to perish immediately after having acquired its being;
kṣaṇika is a dharma that has kṣaṇa, as a daṇḍika is one who has a staff
(danda).⁹
A conditioned thing does not exist beyond the acquisition of its
being: it perishes on the spot where it arises; it cannot go from this
spot
to another. Consequently bodily vijñapti is not movement.
The Vatsiputriyas: If conditioned things are momentary, we would
admit that they are not susceptible of displacement.
It is proven that they are momentary, "since they necessarily
perish;" 10 for the destruction of conditioned things is spontaneous; it
does not come from anything; it does not depend on a cause.
1. That which depends on a cause is an effect, something "done,"
"created." Destruction is a negation: how can a negation “be done” or
"created?" Therefore destruction does not depend on a cause.
2. Destruction does not depend on a cause: hence a conditioned
thing perishes as soon as it arises; if it did not perish immediately, it
would not perish later, since it would then remain the same. Since you
admit that it perishes, you must admit that it immediately perishes. ¹¹
3. Would you say that a conditioned thing changes and that,
consequently, it is later subject to destruction? It is absurd to say that a
certain thing changes, becoming another thing, staying the same thing
that
you say shows its modified characteristics (ii.46a, p. 245).
4. Would you say that there is no means of correct knowledge more
decisive than direct perception; would you say that everyone holds that
kindling perishes through its relationship with fire; and that, con-
sequently, it is false that all things perish without a cause? There are
many
remarks to make with respect to this.
In fact, people do not directly perceive the destruction of kindling by
reason of fire. If you think that kindling perishes through its
relationship to fire because we no longer see the kindling when this554 Chapter Four
relationship has taken place, then your thesis rests on an inference, and
not on direct perception, and your reasoning is not conclusive.
The fact that we no longer see kindling after its relationship with
fire is open to two interpretations: either the kindling perishes by
reason of this relationship, or it unceasingly perishes in and of itself, and
under normal conditions is unceasingly reborn in and of itself, but stops
renewing itself by virtue of its relationship with the fire.
You admit that the destruction of the flame is spontaneous. When,
after a relationship with wind, the flame is no longer visible, you admit
that this relationship is not the cause of the destruction of the flame; but
you admit that the flame, by virtue of this relationship, stops renewing
itself. The same for the sound of the bell: a hand, laid on the bell,
prevents a renewing of its sound; but it does not destroy the sound that
you admit is momentary.
Therefore it is inference that should determine this question.
5. The Vatsiputriyas: What reasons do you bring to bear in favor of
the thesis of spontaneous destruction?
We have already said that destruction, being a negative state, cannot
be caused. We would further say that if destruction is the effect of a
cause, nothing would not perish without a cause.
If, like arising, destruction proceeds from a cause, it would never
take place without a cause. Now we hold that intelligence, a flame, or a
sound, which are momentary, perish without their destruction de-
pending on a cause. Hence the destruction of the kindling, etc., is
spontaneous.
The Vaibhāṣikas maintain that an earlier thought perishes by
reason of a later thought, that earlier sound perishes by reason of later
sound.
But the two thoughts in question are not simultaneous. Some
contradictory thoughts,-doubt and certainty, pleasure and suffering,
love and hate, do not displace one another; and the same holds for
non-contradictory thoughts. And if you suppose that they do contradict
one another, then how can weak dharmas destroy strong dharmas of
the same type-as when weak thoughts or sounds immediately follow
strong thoughts or sounds?
6. Some [the Sthavira Vasubandhu]¹² think that a flame perishes
through the absence of a cause of duration. But an absence cannot be acause.
Karma 555
According to the Vaiseșikas, a flame perishes by reason of dharma
and adharma, merit and demerit.
This explanation is inadmissible. Dharma and adharma would both
be causes of arising and of destruction: dharma would cause the flame to
arise and cause it to perish, accordingly as the flame is favorable or
unfavorable; adharma, accordingly as it is unfavorable or favorable.
Now we cannot admit that dharma and adharma enter into activity and
cease being active from moment to moment. 13
Furthermore since this manner of explaining destruction would
hold for all conditioned things, it is useless to pursue the discussion. You
do not have the right to say that kindling perishes through its
relationship with the flame. 14
7. If one holds that the destruction of the kindling, etc., has for its
cause the relationship of this kindling with fire, one would then be
forced to acknowledge that a cause that engenders is at the same time a
cause that destroys.
Cooking (paka), or a relationship with fire, produces different
products (pakaja), of deeper and deeper color. The same cause that
produces the first color destroys this first color, or, at least-if you object
that it refers to a new relationship with fire, since the fire is
momentary-the cause that destroys the first color is similar to the
cause that produces it. Now it is impossible that a certain cause would
produce a certain effect and that later this same cause, or a parallel cause,
would destroy this same effect. (Compare Tarka-samgraha, xxiii).
Would you say that, if the successive flames are different,-long,
short, large and small, our conclusion does not become indispensable?
Let us use another example. By the prolonged action of ashes, snow,
caustics, sun, water, or earth, there arises and disappears in turn
different "products of cooking." But you do not attribute the character-
istic of momentariness to these diverse factors of cooking.
8. Some ¹5 ask why water diminishes when it is heated if a
relationship with fire is not destruction of the water?
By reason of its relationship with fire, through the force of the fire,
the heat element which is present in water (ii.22, p. 186)—increases
and, increasing, causes the mass of water to be reborn in quantities more
and more reduced, until being totally reduced, the water ceases renewing
itself. This is what a relationship with fire does to water. 16556 Chapter Four
itself. This is what a relationship with fire does to water. 16
9. Let us conclude. The destruction of things is spontaneous. Things
perish in and of themselves, because it is their nature to perish. As they
perish in and of themselves, they perish upon arising. As they perish
upon arising, they are momentary. Thus there is no movement, no
displacement; there is only arising in another place of the second
moment of the series: this is the case, even in the opinion of our
opponent,
for the fire which consumes firewood. The idea of movement
is a false conception.
Hence bodily vijnapti is not displacement, movement; rather bodily
vijñapti is shape.
The Sautrāntikas say that shape is not a distinct thing, a thing in and
of itself. [For the Vaibhāṣikas, rūpāyatana, visible physical matter is both
varnarūpa or color: blue, etc., and saṁsthānarūpa or shape: long, etc.
(i.10a). For the Sautrāntikas, shape does not exist as a substance, but only
as a designation.]
When there arises, in one direction, a large mass of color, this mass
is called "long." When, by comparison, a mass of color is small, it is
called "short." When a color arises in a great quantity in the four
directions, it is called "square." When it arises equally in all directions, it
is called "circular." The other figures,-high, low, etc.,-are explained
in the same manner; when a color arises in a great quantity in the
direction of the zenith, it is called "high," etc. Shape is thus not a thing in
and of itself, a rūpa.
1. First argument. If shape were a thing in and of itself,
3c. It would be perceived by two organs.
In fact, seeing through the organ of sight, one has the idea of length,
etc.; touching through the tactile organ, one has the idea of length. Thus
if length, or any other shape, were a thing in and of itself, it would be
perceived by two organs. Now, according to the scriptural definition,
rūpāyatana, the visible physical matter, is perceived by only the eye.
The Vaibhāṣikas answer that touch does not perceive length relative
to softness or hardness, arranged in a certain manner, without lengthKarma 557
forming part of the tangible.
This is quite right: but exactly the same holds for the visible. Length
is not visible: one calls a visible (color) or a tangible (softness, etc.)
arranged in a certain manner "long."
The Vaibhāṣikas: When we have the idea of length after having
touched something, we are not perceiving shape through touch; we
remember the shape, because it is associated with a tangible. It is the
same when we see the color (visible) of fire, for we then remember heat
(tangible); and when we smell the odor of flower, we then remember its
color.
In the two cases that you allege, one imagines that a color recalls a
tangible, or that an odor recalls a color, because the dharmas as cause are
closely associated: all fire is hot, and certain odors belong to certain
flowers. But a tangible (softness, etc.) is not invariably associated with a
certain shape: how then does the perception of a tangible provoke the
rememberance of a certain shape? If a similar remembrance is produced
without there having been an invariable association between a tangible
and its shape, one would in this same manner remember color after
having touched something. But such is not the case. Hence, one must
not say that the perception of a tangible provokes the remembrance of
its shape.
2. Second argument. One sees many shapes in a multicolored piece
of cloth. Thus, there would be, according to you, many rūpas, in the
category of shape in one and the same piece: this is impossible, as it was
for color. If shape were a real thing, that which, in the cloth, forms part
of a long line cannot at the same time form a part of a short line.
3. Third argument. All "real" rūpa, susceptible of being struck
(sapratigha, i.29b),—blue, etc.,—is made up of real atoms of a certain
nature: color rūpa (blue, etc.) necessarily exists in the octuple atom, etc.
(ii. 22, trans. p. 185). Now
3c. Shape does not exist in an atom.
There is no atom of length. In fact, when a long mass diminishes,
we arrive at the moment when we no longer have the idea of long with
regard to it, but rather the idea of short: hence this idea does not proceed
from a rūpa "shape" existing in the thing. Therefore what we designate
as long is a number of real things,-atoms of color,—arranged in a558 Chapter Four
certain manner.
If you maintain that the expressions, "long," etc. refer to some
atoms of shape arranged in a certain manner, and that some atoms that
would not be "shape” by nature could not be designated as “long,”
etc. this is merely repeating your affirmation without the support of
any argument. In fact, if the existence of special atoms of shape were
proved, you would be able to maintain that united, arranged in a certain
fashion, they constitute length: but since the existence of these atoms
has not been proved, as the existence of the atoms of color has been
proved, how could they be united and arranged? ¹7
[4. Objection of the Sarvästivādins:] If a shape is not distinct in
color, if a shape is nothing other than a certain color, then shapes would
not differ when their color is the same: now some jugs of the same color
have different shapes.
Have we not said that one designates a number of real things
arranged in a certain manner as "long?" Some ants, all similar, arrange
themselves in a straight line or in a circle, and so present different
shapes. In the same way the shapes of jugs differ without their color
differing.
[5. Objection of the Sarvāstivādins:] But, in darkness or at a
distance, one sees the shape of an object,-a column, a person, etc.,—
without seeing its color. Hence shape exists separate from color.
In fact, one first sees color in an indistinct manner; one then
forms-through the mental consciousness-the idea of shape, in the
same way that one forms the idea of a line, or the idea of an army
accordingly as one has seen, indistinctly, some birds, some ants, some
elephants, etc.: "This army is arranged in a circle." 18 Or rather it
happens that one does not clearly distinguish either color or shape; one
only knows-through the mental consciousness-a mass.
[6. The Sarvāstivādins criticize the Sautrāntikas,] You Sautrāntikas
negate both movement and shape. Then what is designated by the term
"bodily vijnapti?"
We say that bodily vijñapti is shape [thus separating ourselves from
the Vatsīputrīyas-Sāṁmitīyas] but we do not say that shape is a thing in
and of itself [thus separating ourselves from the Sarvāstivādins.]
[The Sarvästivādins:] If you maintain that bodily vijñapti is not a
real thing, but solely a shape that exists as designation, what then is theKarma 559
real dharma that constitutes bodily action?
Bodily action is the action which has for its object the body: that is to
say, the volition that puts a body into motion in diverse ways: it proceeds
by being supported on this gate which is the body, and is thus called
bodily action. Other actions should be defined according to their natures:
[i.e., vocal action is the action which has the voice for its object; mental
action is the action of the manas or action associated with the manas
(see iv.78c-d).]
[The Sarvästivādins:] A scripture says that "action is volition and
willed action." If bodily action and vocal action are volition, what
difference is there between the two types of action defined in this
scripture?
There are two types of volition. First, ¹9 the initial or preparatory
stage, wherein one produces a volition which is pure volition, "I must do
such and such an action": this is what the Scripture calls cetanākarman,
action which is volition. Then, after this stage of pure volition, one
produces a volition of action, the volition of doing an action in
conformity with what has been previously willed, to move the body or
to emit a voice: this is what the Scripture calls cetayitvā karman, action
after having been willed, or willed action.
[The Sarvāstivādins:] If this is the case, then informative (vijñapti)
action does not exist: bodily-vocal action, according to you, is only
volition; there is no place for the vijñapti which is matter (rūpa) by its
nature. And if vijñapti does not exist, then avijñapti, “non-information"
of the sphere of Kāmadhātu, does not exist. 20 From whence there would
be a great number of difficulties which will be enumerated later (i.e.,
samvarāsaṁvarābhāva, etc., see below 4a-b).
These difficulties can be refuted. Avijñapti is explained very well in
our system. We admit two types of volition bearing on bodily actions
and vocal sounds which are the bodily and vocal vijñaptis. These two
types of volitions which bear the names of bodily action and vocal
action-are capable of producing a volition sui generis which is the
avijñapti. Where is the difficulty in this?
[The Sarvāstivādins:] This sui generis volition is subordinate to the
mind (cittanuparivartin, ii. 31), like the avijñapti which in our system
arises from dhyana, for the avijñapti of Kāmadhātu develops during
sleep, etc. (i. 11)560 Chapter Four
No, for this sui generis volition is projected by a certain volition of
decision (pure cetanā), its distant cause, and by a certain volition of
action and voice, its near cause. Now however you would have it that the
vijñapti, if it exists, would depend, like the projection of the avijñapti, on
the force of the thought: for it is itself nonintelligent.
The Vaibhāṣikas say that shape exists in and of itself, and that bodily
vijñapti is shape.
3d. Vocal vijñapti is vocal sound.
Sound which is discourse by nature-that is, articulated sound (ii.
47)-is vocal vijñapti.
Avijñapti has already been defined (i. 11; above n. 5).
The Sautrāntikas say that the avijñapti does not really exist as a
substance: (1) because it solely consists of not doing an action after
having undertaken not to do it; (2) because one designates a thing which
would exist by reason of past primary elements (i.11) as avijñapti; now
past dharmas no longer exist (v.25); and (3) because avijñapti does not
have the nature of rupa: the nature of rupa is rūpyate and since the
avijñapti is not "susceptible of destruction" (apratigha), it cannot be
rupa (i. 13).
[The Vaibhāṣşikas prove the existence of avijñapti:]
4a-b. Scripture says that rupa is of three types and that there is a
pure rupa; there is increase of merit; and there is a course of
action for him who is not concerned with himself, etc.
[By the word et cetera, the Kārikā refers to reasons 5 to 8 below.]
1. A scripture says that there are three types of rupa: “Rūpa is
embraced within a threefold rūpa: there is visible rūpa susceptible of
destruction (visible physical matter); there is an invisible rūpa
susceptible of destruction (the eye, etc.); and there is an invisible rūpa,
free from destruction," and this latter can only be the avijnapti. 21Karma 561
2. The Blessed One said in a scripture that there is pure rūpa: “What
are the pure dharmas? All rüpa of the past, the future and the present...
all consciousness of the past, future, present, concerning which there
arises neither affection nor antipathy: these are the pure dharmas."
." (see
Ekottaragama, TD 2, p. 13b-c).
Now, apart from avijñapti, there exists no rūpa which can be
invisible and free from destruction, and no rupa which is pure. [For
bodily and vocal action does not pertain to one who has entered into the
Truth of the Way, mārgasatyasamāpanna.]
3. A scripture says that there is an increase of merit, "... There are
seven material meritorious works, (aupadhika punyakriyāvastu, iv. 113)
when a believer, son or daughter of good family, who is endowed,
walks, stands still, sleeps or is awake, his merit increases with intensity,
without ceasing;merit continues adding to itself. What are these seven
material works? . . . In this same way there are seven non-material
meritorious works..." 22
By reason of what dharma, other than the avijñapti, could merit
increase even when the mind is not good, or when one is without
thought?
4. If avijñapti does not exist, he who does not himself act, who gives
orders to others, will not be endowed with a course of action (iv. 66). For
a vocal action that consists of giving an order cannnot constitute a course
of action, killing etc.; this action in fact does not actually accomplish the
action to be accomplished.
Would one say that when the action is accomplished the action that
consists of giving the order becomes a course of action?
But it is evident that the nature of this action is not modified by the
execution of the order.
5. The Blessed One said, "Monks, the dharmas, the external sources
of consciousness not included within the eleven ayatanas, are invisible,
and are free from destruction" (Samyukta, TD 2, p. 91c19). He did not
say that the dharmayatana is non-rupa.
If the Blessed One did not intend to refer to the avijñapti, which is
rūpa and so included in the dharmayatana [and not in rūpāyatana], then
what is the rūpa that is included in the dharmayatana?
6. If avijnapti does not exist, the Way no longer has eight parts, for
the parts, samyagvāc, samyakkarmanta, and samyagājīva (correct562 Chapter Four
speech, correct action, and correct livelihood, iv. 86), are incompatible
with absorption (samadhi). (If the ascetic, in a state of absorption,
possesses these three, it is because these three are by nature avijñapti vi.
But, one would answer, a scripture says, "When he knows thus,
when he sees thus, samyagdṛsti, samyaksamkalpa, samyagvyāyāma,
samyaksmṛti, and samyaksamādhi are cultivated and achieved; sam-
yagvāc, samyakkarmānta and samyagājīva have been previously puri-
fied." Thus the last three are considered as vijñapti and as previous to
absorption.
This text, the Vaibhāṣikas say, does not refer to the last three parts of
the Way, but rather to speech, action, and livelihood in a state of
detachment which have been obtained through the worldly path. This
does not prevent speech, etc., from not forming part of the Way under
the aspect of avijñapti.
7. If the avijnapti does not exist, the Prātimokṣa discipline (samvara,
iv.14a) would disappear. 23 For a person who has assumed the vows of
religion is still a Bhikṣu or Bhikṣuṇī, when his mind is bad or neutral.
8. A scripture teaches that the renouncing of sin is a dike which
arrests immorality. 24 An "absence" cannot be a dike: virati is thus a real
dharma (the avijñapti), and not the mere fact of no longer accomplish-
ing an action which one has renounced, as the Sautrāntikas maintain (p.
[The Sautrāntikas answer:] These arguments are numerous and
diverse, but are not conclusive. Let us examine them one by one.
1. The Sūtra teaches that rupa is of three types. The Yogācārins 25 say
that in the Dhyānas, through the force of absorption, a rūpa arises which
is the object of the absorption, that is, which is perceived by the person
in the absorption, [for example a skeleton in the aſubhabhāvanā, (vi.9).]
This rūpa is not seen by the eye; it is thus invisible. It does not "cover," it
does not occupy a place: it is thus "free from destruction." If you ask how
this object of absorption can be rūpa [since it does not possess the usual
characteristics of rūpa,] you forget that the existence of avijñapti would
give rise to the same question.Karma
2. The scripture says that there is a pure rupa.The Yogācārins
maintain that the rūpa that arises through the force of the absorption is
since the absorption is pure.
pure,
But other masters, [the Dārṣṭṭāntikas,] ²6 maintain that the rūpa of
the Arhats (organ of sight, etc.) and external rūpa, [namely the five
objects of the senses (i.9a), are pure (anāsrava)] because they are not a
support of the vices.
To this one can object that the scripture expresses itself [without
making a distinction,] "What are the impure dharmas?
All that which is organ of sight, all that which is visible....
[The Dārṣṭāntikas answer that all the dharmas referred to in this
scripture are qualified as] impure because they are not opposed to the
vices: [in fact, only the mind and its mental states can oppose the vices
and destroy them.]
To this one could object that the same dharmas would be impure,
because they are not opposed to the vices, and at the same time pure,
because they are not a support of the vices, with the unpleasant
consequence that the characteristic of pure and impure would be
confused.
No, answer the Dārṣṭāntikas, for these dharmas are not pure from
the same point of view in which they are impure. Further, if the visible
and the other ayatanas are exclusively impure, why would the scripture
specify, "The impure and upādāna-provoking rūpas,²7 . . . the impure
and upādāna-provoking dharmas are the cause of the hardening of the
mind and of hypocrisy." (v. 47) 28
3. The scripture says that merit increases.
The ancient masters say: It is in the nature of things that merit
increases when persons who have received a gift utilize this gift: by
reason of the qualities of these persons (dhyāna, absorption of
benevolence, etc.), by reason of the benevolence that they get out of the
gift for themselves and for all creatures, the mental series of the givers,
be they of bad or of neutral minds, is found to be perfumed by the
volition of giving which has for its object the person who receives: their
series undergo a subtle ascending transformation and arrives at the state
where they are finally capable of bringing forth many results. It is in this
sense that the text says, "Merit increases in an intense and un-
interrupted manner, merit adds to itself." 29564 Chapter Four
But how does one explain the increase of merit in the case of
nonmaterial meritorious work?
[The mental series.transforms itself] by reason of the repetition of
volitions having for their object [the Tathāgata or the Śrāvakas]. Even
during dreams these volitions are linked together.
On the contrary, we do not see how the [Vaibhāṣikas,] partisans of
an avijñapti, can explain the growth of merit in the case of nonmaterial
meritorious work. [This does not consist of bodily or vocal action,
vijñapti, but merely the joy experienced with regard to the Tathāgata or
the Śrāvakas; it does not consist of an absorption. Now according to the
Vaibhāṣikas, the avijñapti can only give rise to the vijñapti or to an
absorption. Hence it is impossible here.]
But according to other masters, [certain Sautrāntikas,] in the case
also of material meritorious works, merit proceeds from the repetition
of a volition having for its object [the person who receives.]
But this opinion is inadmissible in light of the scripture which says,
"When an energetic Bhikṣu, endowed with morality, possessor of good
dharmas, eats the alms of a donor, he then enters into and dwells in the
absorption called 'infinites' (good-will, etc.), and by reason of this fact
there is certainly produced for the donor an out-flowing of merit, and
out-flowing of good and prosperity." 30 Now does the donor whose
merit thus continues to increase, have a special volition whose object is
the person who receives? [We should thus prefer the opinion of the first
masters:] in the case of material meritorious works, the merit proceeds
from a transformation of the series [of the donor by reason of the
qualities of the person who receives.]
4. According to the Vaibhāṣikas, if the avijñapti does not exist, he
who has an action accomplished by another will not be endowed with
the course of action ("path-of-action," karmapatha).When an emissary
charged with murder accomplishes the murder, it is in the nature of
things that the mental series of the author of the instigation will submit
to a certain subtle transformation by virtue of which his series will bear
a result later. This holds likewise when one acts for oneself; when the
course of action (murder, etc.) is achieved, at this moment the series
undergoes a transformation. This transformation is called "course of
action," and consequently the person whose series is transformed is
endowed with the course of action-for the effect (transformation ofM
Karma 565
the series) receives the name which belongs more properly to the cause
(course of action), and this transformation is called bodily or vocal
accordingly as it results from an action of the body or the voice. It is by
virtue of these same principles that the partisans of avijñapti consider
the avijñapti as a bodily or vocal course of action.
The Bhadanta ³1 (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 617a18) proves in a different
manner the nonexistence of avijñapti: "A person is touched by the sin of
murder by reason of a tritemporal volition with regard to the skandhas
which constitute a living being (iv.73), that is, when he thinks, 'I shall
kill; I kill; he is killed." "[The course of action is complete when there is
preparatory action, principal action, and consecutive action, consisting
solely of cetană, iv. 68c.]
But this triple volition does not necessarily bring about the
achievement of the course of action, for, according to the theory of the
Bhadanta, there would be a mortal sin (iv.97) for the child who says,
"my mother has been murdered," if she has not in fact been killed by the
emissary charged with the murder.
Nevertheless all this exercise of volition, “I shall kill, I kill, he is
killed" applies only to the person who kills: the intention of the
Bhadanta is to refer to this type of murder. 32
But, [ask the Sarvāstivādins,] why do you, in
your antipathy, deny
the existence of the avijñapti and yet admit a transformation of the
mental series (ii.36c-d)?
[In truth, avijñapti, a doctrine of the Sarvästivādins, and the
transformation of the mental series, a thesis of the Sautrāntikas, are
both equally difficult to understand;] I thus have no antipathy [for these
doctrines.] But, to say that there arises at the moment of the achieving of
the course of action by a bodily operation dependent on a mind, a certain
dharma, called avijñapti, [in him who has ordered the course of action,]
either from the mind of him who has ordered, or separate from the
body of him who has accomplished the murder, is a hypothesis that
cannot satisfy us; but to say that there is produced at the moment of the
achievement of the course of action by an operation ordered by a certain
person, a transformation of the mental series of this person, is a566 Chapter Four
hypothesis that satisfies us. And it also satisfies us that the result arises
from a transformation of the series and not from an avijñapti.
[Take into account also the arguments enumerated above:] "if the
vijñapti does not exist, [how could there be avijñapti?”, “The avijñapti
consists solely in no longer doing a certain action," "the avijñapti cannot
depend on past primary elements."]
5. The dharmayatana is not defined as nonmaterial. The response to
this objection is as has been given above: there is an invisible rūpa free
from destruction, forming part of the dharmāyatana: this is not the
avijñapti; this is a rupa which is the object of the absorption and which
arises from the force of the absorption.
6. The Way, say the Vaibhāṣikas, would not have eight parts.
How does the saint, when he has attained the Way, [when he sees or
meditates on the Truths,] possess correct speech, action, and livelihood?
Does he pronounce correct speech, act in a correct manner, and correctly
ask for the robes of a monk?
[Such is not our thought, answer the Sarvāstivādins.] In the Path,
the saint takes possession of certain pure avijñaptis, so that, when he
leaves the contemplation, it is by the force of these pure avijñaptis that
he produces correct speech, actions, and livelihood, and does not
produce incorrect speech, actions, and livelihood. A cause takes the
name of its result: thus speech, action and livelihood are designated as
avijñapti.
If this is so, why not accept my theory? There is no avijñapti; but the
saint, when he finds himself in the Path, takes possession of a certain
intention (āśaya) and of a certain personality (aśraya) 33 so that, when he
comes out of this contemplation, by reason of the force of these two
factors he henceforth produces correct speech, actions and livelihood.
One gives to the cause (āśaya and āśraya) the name of their result; and
we can thus affirm that the Path possesses eight parts.
According to another opinion, the parts of the Path solely consist of
non-commission. What is non-commission? The person who is in
absorption acquires, through the force of the Path, definite absolute
abstention (akaraṇaniyama, vi.33a-b). This abstention, which is ac-
quired having the pure Path as its support, is pure. This is a part of the
Path.
Without doubt, the part (correct speech, etc.) is not a "thing"Karma 567
(dravya), being only abstention: but these are not the only real and
distinct things which constitute the dharmas; there are for example, the
eight worldly dharmas:34 possession and non-possession; glory and
non-glory; praise and blame; pleasure and suffering. Non-possession of
clothes, of food, etc., is not a thing. (Anguttara, iv. 157, Digha, iii.260)
7. If the avijñapti does not exist, say the Vaibhāṣikas, the Prātimokṣa
discipline would disappear.
One refutes this objection according to the same principles, by
making a state out of the force of the intention. Discipline is volition
which, after it has been translated into the positive action (vidhi) of
abstaining from transgression, into the pledge of no longer committing
transgression, arrests bad actions and disciplines the body and the voice:
the Prātimokṣa discipline should be understood in this manner.
The Vaibhāṣikas object that, if the Prātimokṣa discipline is volition,
the monk who thinks a thought other than this thought of volition
would cease being “disciplined,” for he does not then possess the
volition which disciplines.
This objection is worthless. In fact, the mental series is perfumed in
such a way that, when a thought of transgression starts to appear, the
memory of the vow undertaken also appears: the volition of abstention
is then found to be present.
8. And this volition has the characteristic of a dike. When one is
obliged not to commit transgression, one remembers this obligation,
shame (brī, ii.32) is present, and one constrains oneself in such a
manner that one does not violate morality.
In your system, on the contrary, if immorality is dammed up by an
avijñapti independent of memory, then even a person who has a faulty
memory would not be able to commit a transgression, since the
avijñapti is always there.
Let us stop this discussion here. The Vaibhāṣikas say that there
exists a certain substantial thing (dravya), sui generis, which is
avijñaptirūpa.
We have seen (i.llb) that the avijñapti arises dependent (upādāya)
on the primary elements: the question is then posed whether it derives
from the same primary elements which are the support of the vijñapti,
that is, the primary elements of the body through which the action
termed vijñapti (iv. p. 3, 33) is accomplished; or if it derives from other568 Chapter Four
primary elements. 35
The avijnapti derives from primary elements different from those
which serve as the support for the vijnapti: for it is impossible that one
and the same complex of four primary elements would produce both a
subtle, derived rūpa,—the avijñapti-, and at the same time a gross,
derived rūpa, the vijnapti. 36
The vijnapti is simultaneous to the primary elements from whence
it derives; is such also the case for the avijnapti?
The general rule is that all derived rūpa is simultaneous to its
primary elements. But certain derived rūpa,-of the present and the
future,-derive from past primary elements:
4c-d. From the first moment, the avijñapti of Kāmadhātu arises
derived from past primary elements.
The moment the avijñapti arises, it arises derived from primary
elements simultaneous to its arising. From this first moment on,
avijñapti of the sphere of Kāmadhātu-in opposition to the avijñapti
arisen from the dhyāna, and pure avijñapti (p. 32)—arises, that is, it
continues to be reborn, being derived (upādāya) from the same primary
elements of the first moment, which are now past: these past primary
elements constitute, from the second moment onward, the support of
the avijñapti, for they are the cause of its pravṛtti, they are its projecting
cause; the primary elements simultaneous to each of the moments from
the second moment onward are the support of the avijñapti, for they are
the cause of its anuvṛtti, they are its supporting cause. In the same way,
the hand that has hurled the wheel and the ground that the supports the
wheel, are the causes, respectively, of the pravṛtti and the anuvytti of the
movement of the wheel (see p. 576).
To which sphere,—Kāmadhātu and the Four Dhyānas—do the
primary elements belong, from whence the bodily and vocal actions of
the different spheres derive?
Karma 569
5a-b. When impure, bodily and vocal action derive from the
primary elements of the sphere to which they belong.
Bodily and vocal actions of Kāmadhātu derive from the primary.
elements of Kāmadhātu, and so on to the bodily and vocal actions of the
Fourth Dhyāna which derives from primary elements of the Fourth
Dhyāna.
5c. When they are pure, they are from the primary elements of
the sphere to which the person who has produced them belongs.
When they are pure, bodily and vocal action derives from the
primary elements of the sphere where the person who produces arises:
for the pure dharmas are transcendent to the sphere of existence
(Kāmadhātu, etc.); for there does not exist any pure primary elements
from whence one could derive a pure action; for the pure bodily or vocal
action arises by reason of the primary elements, and not only through
the mind, since it is derived rūpa (upādāyarūpa) (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
723b29-c6)
What are the characteristics of these two actions, vijñapti and
avijñapti? What are the characteristics of the primary elements from
whence they derive?
5d. The avijñapti is not integral to the organism; it is also an
outflowing; it belongs solely to living beings. Not of absorption,
it derives from the primary elements which are an outflowing,
which are integral to the organism, which are differentiated.
1.37 The avijñapti is a derived rūpa exempt from mass (amūrta),
nonextended (apratigha); thus it cannot be a support of the mind and of
mental states; thus it is anupatta, not integral to the sense organism (i.
34c). The avijñapti is never morally neutral (iv. 7a): hence it is not
arisen from retribution (i. 37); it is not of increase (i. 36); it remains then
that it is an outflowing (i. 36), that is, produced by sabhāgahetu (ii.52).
[The text says, "also of outflowing,” because the avijñapti can be also
kṣaṇika (i. 38b): the first pure avijñapti is not an outflowing.]570 Chapter Four
2. Not absorbed or, in other words belonging to Kāmadhātu, it
derives from primary elements which are an outflowing, 38 and which
are integral to the organism. These primary elements are differentiated,
because each of the seven avijñaptis, the renouncing of killing, etc.,
which form the Prātimokṣa discipline, derive from a distinct group of
the four primary elements.
6. Arisen from absorption, it derives from non-differentiated
primary elements, not integral to the organism, and increase.
3. Avijñapti which arises from samādhi, is divided into two types,
that is, (avijñapti arisen from) absorption, and (avijñapti arisen from)
pure discipline. These two both arise from samādhi, are of increase, and
not integral to the sense organism. They are both arisen from
undifferentiated (i.e., identical) primary elements.
In the same way that the mind which engenders these renouncings
is a unity, the primary elements upon which the renouncings are based
constitute a unity.
[II. Concerning the vijñapti.]
The vijñapti is an outflowing; being bodily, it is integral to the
organism. 39
Does bodily vijñapti, by arising, destroy or not destroy the
preexistent bodily figure which is retribution (vipāka)? The two
hypotheses create difficulties. That it destroys it, is impossible; for it is
contrary to the principles of the Vaibhāṣikas that a rūpa, retribution by
nature, continues again, after having been interrupted (i.37, trans. p.
103). If on the contrary, bodily vijñapti does not destroy the previous
figure, two figures, the first of retribution, the second of out-
flowing, would be found to coexist in one and the same spot.
We must admit that bodily vijñapti arises deriving from new
primary elements, outflowing in its nature, and that it does not destroy
the previous figure.
If this is the case, the part by means of which a bodily vijñapti is
produced would be greater than has existed previously, being pene-
trated by new primary elements from whence this vijñapti derives. If
the part has not been penetrated by these new elements, one could not
say that the avijñapti is created by the whole part.
We could answer that the body-retribution in nature-presentsKarma 571
some voids: thus place is found for the new primary elements,
outflowing by nature, from whence the vijñapti derives.
We have said that action is of two types, cetana and cetanākṛta,
volition and action created by the volition; of three types, mental, bodily,
vocal; of five types, cetană, bodily vijñapti, bodily avijñapti, vocal
vijñapti, and vocal avijñapti.
[What are these action, good, bad, or neutral? 40 To which realm of
existence (dhātu), to which sphere (bhumi) do they belong?]
7a. The avijnapti is never neutral.
It is either good or bad.
In fact, neutral volition is weak; it is not capable of engendering a
powerful action as is the avijñapti, which continues reproducing itself
after its initial cause has disappeared.
7b. Other action are of three types.
Other actions, namely volition and the vijñapti, can be good, bad, or
neutral.
7b-c. Bad action exists in Kāmadhātu.
Not in the other spheres, for, in the other spheres the three roots of
evil (iv.8c-d and v.19), and non-shame and imprudence (ii.26c-d), are
missing.
The restriction of the stanza refers only to bad actions; hence good
actions and neutral actions are in all of the Three Dhātus.
7c. Avijñapti also exists in Rūpadhātu.
"Also" that is to say: in Kāmadhātu as well as in Rūpadhātu; not in
Ārūpyadhātu, for the primary elements are missing there [from
whence the avijñapti is derived (iv.6b).] Only where body and voice
exist, do we find [the avijñapti which] is the discipline of the body and
voice.
Objection. There are no pure primary elements and yet there is a
pure avijñapti.Pure avijñapti derives from the primary elements of the
sphere wherein the person arises who produces the pure avijñapti.In
the same way, when a person arisen in Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu
enters into an ārūpya absorption, he produces an avijñapti of572
Chapter Four
Ārūpyadhātu deriving from the primary elements of Kāmadhātu or
Rūpadhātu.
The case is not the same, for the pure avijñapti transcends the
spheres; it has nothing in common with the defilements of the sphere
where the person who has produced it is found; it is neither of the same
type, nor of a different type through rapport with the primary elements
of the sphere. On the contrary, an avijñapti of Ārūpyadhātu cannot
derive from the primary elements, of a different type, of Kāmadhātu or
Rūpadhātu.
Further, turning away from all rupa-since any idea of rupa is
absent in it-an ärūpya absorption is not capable of producing an
avijñapti, which is rūpa.
The Vaibhāṣikas say: Morality exists in opposition to immorality.
Immorality is of the sphere of Kāmadhātu; morality, consisting of
avijñapti, of the realm of Rūpadhātu is opposed to it. But the ārūpyas
are removed from Kāmadhātu by the four estrangements of aśraya,
prakara, āālambana, pratipakṣa (ii.67; Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 495c23).
7d. Vijnapti exists in the two spheres where there is vicāra.
There is vijnapti, bodily and a vocal action, only in the spheres of
Kāmadhātu and the First Dhyana, where there is vicāra (i.32c, viii. 7). 41
8a. The vijnapti termed nivṛta is also missing in Kamadhātu.
[Nivṛta signifies nivṛta-avyākṛta (ii.66), defiled but neutral.
"Also," in the spheres where there is no vicāra, and "also” in
Kāmadhātu.]
Such vijñapti does not exist in Kāmadhātu, [where all defiled
vijñapti is bad, not neutral.]
This means that vijñapti of the anivṛtāvyākṛta class exists only in
the world of Brahmā. It is reported that Mahābrahmă produced a false
vocal action: in his assembly Mahābrahmā boasted falsely, in order to
avoid the inquires of the venerable Aśvajit. 42
But if vocal avijñapti is absent above the First Dhyāna, how can
sound (śabdāyatana) exist in the Second Dhyāna and above?Karma 573
It exists there, but it has for its cause the external primary elements:
sound caused by the wind, etc. (i.10b). 43
Other masters say: Vijñapti exists in the Second Dhyana and in the
following Dhyanas; it is there in the anivṛtävyäkṛta class, undefiled-
neutral, not good, but not defiled. In fact the beings who are born in
these Dhyānas do not call forth a good or defiled mind of a lower sphere,
by which mind they would be able to produce a good or defiled
vijñapti.For the good mind of a lower sphere is of an inferior order; and
the defiled mind has been abandoned. 44
But [the Vaibhāṣikas] defend the first opinion. 45
Why is the vijnapti, whatever it may be, absent above the world of
Brahmā? Why is the vijñapti of the defiled-neutral class absent in
Kāmadhātu?
8b. Because the cause which produces it is absent.
i. It is the mind associated with vitarka and vicāra which gives rise to
the vijñapti: such a mind is absent in the Second Dhyāna and above.
(iv.7d).
ii. The nivṛtāvyākṛta mind gives rise to a vijñapti of the same
characteristics, since this mind belongs to the class "to be abandoned
through Mediation.” (See p. 575 and foll.)
[In Kāmadhātu, only the nivṛtāvyākṛta mind is the mind associated
with satkāyadṛṣṭi and with antagrāhadṛṣṭi.] Thus, it does not give rise to
vijñapti (ii.67, v.12).
Is it solely by reason of the nature of the mind which gives rise
(samutthapaka) to them-good or bad nature-that the dharmas are
good or bad?
The dharmas are good or bad in four ways: absolutely (param-
arthatas), in and of themselves (svabhavatas), through association
(samprayogatas), and through their original cause (samutthanatas). 46
8b-c. Deliverance is absolute good.
Nirvāṇa, being the cessation of all suffering, is perfectly tranquil-
and-happy; 47 hence it is absolute good. Comparison: like the absence of574 Chapter Four
sickness (Majjhima, i.510).
8c-d. The roots, respect and fear, are good in and of them-
selves. 48
The three roots of good, respect and fear (and lack of greed) (ii. 25),
independent of their associations and of their causes, are good in and of
themselves. Comparison: like a salutary medicine.
9a. That which is associated [with the roots, etc.,] is good
through association.
The dharmas, volitions, and mental states, which are associated
with the roots of good, with respect, and with fear, are good by
association. Associated with these principles, they are good; not
associated with these principles, they are not good. Comparison: like a
drink wherein one has mixed a salutary medicine.
9b. Actions, etc. are good by reason of their original cause.
Having their origin in dharmas good in and of themselves or good
through association, bodily action, vocal action, [the lakṣaṇas,] prāptis,
nirodhasamāpatti, asaṁjñisamāpatti (ii.35 and foll.), 49 are good by
reason of their original cause. Comparison: like the milk of a cow which
has drunk a drink mixed with a salutary medicine.
How can prāptis be good when they have their origin in a mind
which is not good? 50
9c. Evil is the contrary.
The contrary of good is as shall now be taught:
1. Samsāra-or existence-has for its nature the process of all
suffering: it is thus perfectly unhappy, and so absolute evil.
2. The roots of evil, the absence of shame and imprudence (ii. 26c-d)
are bad in themselves.
3. The dharmas associated with these principles are bad in
themselves.
4. Having their origin in the roots, etc., and in the dharmas
associated with these roots, etc., bodily action, vocal action, their
characteristics (arising, etc.) and the prāptis of the bad dharmas, are bad
by reason of their original cause.
14Karma 575
Comparison: sickness, unhealthy drugs, etc.
But, one would say, everything that is impure is integral to saṁsāra:
hence can nothing which is impure be good or neutral?
From the absolute point of view, this is true. But putting oneself in
the point of view of retribution, the impure dharma which is not
defined as to how it should be retributed is called undefined, or neutral
(ii.54), and the impure dharma which produces an agreeable retribu-
tion, is called good.
What is absolutely neutral?
9d. Two entities are neutral in the absolute sense. 51
The two unconditioned things (asaṁskṛta, i.5), namely space and
apratisamkhyānirodha, are, without ambiguity, neutral.
A difficulty. The Vaibhāṣikas teach that action, bodily or vocal, is
good or bad by reason of its original cause, [namely a good or bad
volition.]The same rule should apply to the primary elements which
constitute bodily or vocal action (iv.2b, 3d).
No, answer the Vaibhāṣikas, for the intention of the agent
corresponds to the action, not to the primary elements: [he wants to
create a certain action, not any primary elements.]
But, we should say, how will the avijñapti produced by absorption
(iv.6c-d) be good? The agent, entered into absorption, does not have any
intention with regard to the avijñapti and so does not think, “Let us
create an avijñapti!" We cannot admit that the avijñapti produced by the
absorption has its origin in a non-absorbed mind which proceeds from
the absorption, for this mind is of another class. Thus the avijñapti
produced by the absorption is not good; or rather, if the Vaibhāṣşikas
maintain that it is good, they should consider as good the divine eye and
the divine ear which they regard as neutral (ii.72a, trans. p. 315, vii.45).
There is a difficulty here that the Vaibhāṣikas should resolve.
It has been said above (iv.8b) that the mind susceptible of being
abandoned through Seeing does not give rise to vijñapti. Yet the Blessed
One said, "From bad views there proceeds bad resolution, bad speech,
bad action, bad livelihood." Now bad views are abandoned through
Seeing (v.4).
This Sūtra does not contradict this theory. In fact576
Chapter Four
10a-b. That which gives rise (samutthāna) is of two types, which
are known as hetusamutthāna and tatkṣaṇasamutthāna.52
Samutthāna is that through which the action arises. What is both
cause (hetu) and samutthāna is hetusamutthana. What is samutthāna at
the very moment of the action is tatkṣaṇasamutthāna.
10c-d. Which are respectively first setter into motion and second
mover.
The hetusamutthāna projects, that is to say, produces. It is thus
promoter. The tatkṣaṇasamutthana is second mover because it is
contemporary to the action (see above, p. 568).
But what is [with regard to the action (vijnapti)] the efficacy done by
the tatkṣaṇasamutthana which makes it the second mover?
If the tatkṣaṇasamutthāna is absent, the action will not take place,
even if it was projected [by the agent; as, for example, the action does
not take place when the one who has projected an action ("I shall go to
the village") dies.]
[But if the vijñapti does not take place in the absence of the second
mover,] how is there vijñapti for a person free from a mind which
undertakes the discipline? 53 (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 586a8).
[One will then have recourse to another explanation.] The vijñapti
is clearer in him who is endowed with the mind, which is at the moment
of the vijñapti, the "second mover" mind. Such is the efficacy of this
mind.
lla-b. The consciousness to be abandoned through Seeing is
solely agent.
The mind which is abandoned through Seeing is alone the agent of
the vijnapti, because it is the cause of the mental process (vitarka and
vicāra) which gives rise to the vijñapti. It is not the second mover 1.)
because it no longer exists at the moment when the vijñapti takes place:
this latter is put into motion by a thought "turned inward,” [to be
abandoned through Meditation, which is the second mover;] 2.)
because, to suppose that it is a second mover, it would then follow that
the rūpa (that is, the vijñapti) created by it would also be abandoned by
}Karma 577
this Seeing; [in the same way that the vijñapti created by a thought
abandoned through Mediation is itself to be abandoned through
Meditation.] And this hypothesis is in contradiction to the Abhidharma
(i.40c-d).
In fact, rūpa (=vijñapti) is not contradicted either by vidyā (correct
knowledge), or by avidyā (error, ignorance): hence it cannot be
abandoned by means of Seeing the Truths.54
[The Sautrāntikas would answer that this affirmation, "Rūpa is not
contradicted by vidyā,"] should be proved. For he who maintains the
thesis of the abandoning of rupa through Seeing would not admit that
rūpa is not contradicted by vidya.
[The Vaibhāṣikas say: If the rūpa (=vijñapti) which has its origin in a
thought to be abandoned through Seeing is, itself also, to be abandoned
through Seeing, then the primary elements which serve as a substrate
(aśraya) to this rūpa, to this vijñapti, will be, themselves also, abandoned
through Seeing, for they take their origin from the same thought. But
this is inadmissible, for these primary elements belong to the class of
undefiled-neutral dharmas, and everything that is to be abandoned
through Seeing is defiled (klista, ii.40c-d).]
We deny this consequence. In fact, the primary elements in question
are not good or bad by reason of the thought which gives rise to them,
whereas this is the case for the vijñapti (iv.9d). Or rather, we admit this
consequence; the primary elements in question are abandoned through
Seeing.
[The Vaibhāṣikas repeat that] this is impossible. The primary
elements cannot be abandoned through Seeing; they are no longer
not-to-be-abandoned. For the undefiled dharma is not contradicted
either by vidyā or by avidyā.
[In fact, the undefiled dharma, either of the anivṛtāvyākṛta,
undefiled-neutral class, or of the kuśalaśāsrava, good-impure class, is not
contradicted by vidyā, that is to say through the pure (anāsrava) Path, as
is the case for the defiled dharma which perishes by the fact that its
prāpti is cut off by this said Path…..
Hence the Sūtra quoted above (p. 575, line 32) does not invalidate
our thesis: "The thought susceptible of being abandoned through Seeing
does not give rise to vijñapti," for this Sūtra refers to false views578 Chapter Four
considered as agent. (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 610c22)
llb-c. The manas susceptible of being abandoned through
Meditation is twofold.
The mental consciousness of the bhāvanāheya category is at one and
the same time both agent and mover. 55
lld. The five are solely mover.
The five vijñānakayas, [visual consciousness, etc.,] are solely mover,
[being free from reflexion (vikalpa, i.33)] (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 610a6)
There are thus four cases:
i. The mind susceptible of being abandoned through Seeing is
exclusively agent.
ii. The five sense consciousnesses are exclusively mover.
iii. The mental consciousness susceptible of being abandoned
through Meditation is both promoter and mover.
iv. The pure mind is neither promoter nor mover. 57
Is the "mover" of the same [nature-good, bad, neutral-] as the
agent?
There is no rule on this subject:
12a-b. From a good agent, etc., a mover of three types.
A good, bad, or neutral mover can come from a good agent. The
same for a bad or neutral agent.
12c. With regard to the Muni, mover of the same type. 58
With regard to the Buddha the Blessed One, the mover is of the
same species as the agent: from a good mover, a good mover; from a
neutral agent, a neutral mover.
12c. Or good.
Or rather, it happens that a good mover comes out of a neutral
agent, whereas a neutral mover never comes out of a good agent: the
teaching of the Buddhas is not subject to diminution. 5⁹Karma 579
According to other Schools, 60 the mind of the Buddhas is never
neutral: they are always in absorption; their mental series is exclusively
a series of good thoughts. This is why the Sūtra says, "The Nāga is
absorbed when he walks, when he stands still, when he dreams, and
when he is seated.”
The Vaibhāṣikas say: The Sūtra expresses itself in this manner
because the mind of the Blessed One does not disperse itself towards
objects without his wishing it. [The Blessed One is always absorbed in
the sense that memory is always present in him: walking, he knows that
he walks.]But this is not to say that the Blessed One is exempt from
neutral dharmas: dharmas of retribution (vipākaja), dharmas related to
attitudes (īryāpatha), a mind capable of creating fictive beings (nir-
māṇacitta) (ii.66).
We have seen that the mind susceptible of being abandoned
through Meditation is at one and the same time agent and mover, and
can be good, bad, or neutral.
12d. That which arises from retribution is neither of the two.6
The mind that has arisen from retribution (vipākaja, i. 36, ii.60,
iv.85), is produced without effort, spontaneously, [and so is neither
agent nor mover.]
Is the vijñapti good, bad, or neutral, 1.) according to the character-
istics of the agent, or 2.) according to the characteristic of its mover?
To what does this question lead?
i. First hypothesis. The two wrong views,-personalism, and past-
and-future-of-the-personality-are the agent (iv.lla-b); they are of the
defiled-neutral class. [If the vijnapti to which they give rise follows their
nature, one will then have, in Kāmadhātu, a defiled-neutral action: and
you regard this consequence as inadmissible (iv.8b).]If you maintain
your opinion with regard to this point, you must then admit, [contrary
to your thesis, (iv.lla-b)] that all thoughts susceptible of being
abandoned through Seeing are not agents: whereas satkāyadṛṣṭi and the
antāgrāhadṛṣṭi are not agents, the other wrong views are agents.
Second hypothesis. The vijñapti through which a person under-
takes the Prātimokṣa discipline will not be good, if this person, while he
is receiving the ordination, has a bad or neutral mind.
ii. The Vaibhāṣikas answer. The vijñapti is of the same nature as its580 Chapter Four
agent when this latter is of a mind susceptible of being abandoned
through Meditation. It is not of the same nature as its agent when this
latter is of a mind susceptible of being abandoned through Seeing, for
example, the thought "the soul exists," for, in this case, another agent
arises between the promoter and the action (vijñapti), a thought
susceptible of being abandoned through Meditation, turned inward,
accompanied by vicara and by vitarka, through which, for example, one
preaches the existence of a soul. The first agent is neutral; the second is
bad; the action is bad. From the agent susceptible of being abandoned
through Seeing, there arises an agent susceptible of being abandoned
through Meditation and which is good, bad, or neutral; from this second
agent, there arises an action (vijnapti) of the same nature.
iii. But if the action (vijñapti) is not good, bad, or neutral by reason
of the mover, the explanation that you have given (iv.10a-b) of the
Sūtra does not hold. You have said in effect that the Sūtra considers a
"wrong view" (drsti) as agent and that, as a consequence, by affirming
that a wrong view is the generator of vijñapti, the Sūtra contradicts
neither the principle that the mind susceptible of being abandoned
through Seeing does not engender vijñapti, nor its corollary that, in
Kāmadhātu, there is no vijñapti of the defiled-neutral class. One must
say that the Sūtra considers a wrong view as an agent to which there
follows, separating it from the action (vijñapti), another agent which is
susceptible of being abandoned through Meditation.
This is enough on this point which has been defined above (i.11,
iv.3d).
13a-b. Avijñapti is threefold, discipline (samvara), un-discipline
(asamvara), and different from either discipline or un-discipline.
It is of three types, 1.) samvara, discipline, so called because it
constrains the flux of immorality, because it destroys or arrests the flux
of immorality; 2.) asamvara, the opposite of discipline, un-discipline
(iv.24c-d), and 3.) naivasaṁvaranāsaṁvara, [an avijñapti which has
neither the characteristic of samvara nor asamvara.]
13c-d. Prātimokṣa discipline, pure discipline, discipline arising
from dhyāna.
There are three types of discipline: 1.) the discipline calledKarma 581
Prātimokṣa: this is the morality of the sphere of Kāmadhātu, the
morality of beings of this world; 2.) the discipline produced through
dhyāna is morality of the sphere of Rūpadhātu; and 3.) pure discipline,
which arises from the Path, pure morality.
[Chinese: What is the difference in the characteristics of the first
two disciplines?]
14a. The Prātimokṣa is of eight types.
It includes the discipline of the Bhikṣu, the Bhikṣuṇī, the Sik-
ṣamāṇā,6² the Śrāmaṇera (novice), the Śrāmaṇerikā, the Upāsaka
(pious layman, iv.30), the Upāsikā, and the Upavāsastha ("faster,"
iv.28). These eight disciplines are the Prātimokṣa disciplines: thus, from
the point of view of the names given to them, the discipline of the
Prātimokṣa is of eight types.
14b. In substance however, the Prātimokṣa is of four types.
Four types that
that present distinct characteristics: the discipline of the
Bhikṣu, the Śrāmaṇera, the Upāsaka and the Upavāsastha.
In fact, the discipline of the Bhikṣuṇī does not differ, does not exist
separately from the discipline of the Bhikṣu; the discipline of the
Śikṣamāṇā and the Śrāmaṇerikā do not differ from the discipline of the
Śrāmaṇera; and the discipline of the Upāsikā does not differ from that
of the Upăsaka.
14c. The name changes with the gender.
Linga is vyañjana, that which distinguishes men and women. It is by
reason of gender that the names, Bhikṣu, Bhikṣuṇī, etc., differ.
When their gender is modified, the Bhikṣu becomes a Bhikṣuṇī; the
Bhikṣuṇī, a Bhikṣu; the Śrāmaṇera, a Śrāmaṇerikā; the Śrāmaṇerikā,
like the Śikṣamāṇā, becomes a Śrāmaṇera; the Upāsaka, an Upāsikā; and
the Upāsikā, an Upāsaka. Now one cannot admit that a person, by
changing his gender, abandons the former discipline and acquires a new
one; the change of gender cannot have this influence.63 Thus the four
female disciplines are indentical with the three male disciplines.
***582 Chapter Four
When the disciplines are undertaken successively,-i.e., the dis-
cipline of the Upāsaka with its five precepts, the discipline of the
Śrāmaṇera with its ten precepts, and the discipline of the Bhikṣu with
its two hundred and fifty precepts,-do these disciplines differ solely
through the successive additions of new precepts (virati, renouncings),
as the numbers five, ten, twenty differ, as one coin and two coins differ?
Or rather do these disciplines, produced all of a piece, exist separately
one from the other?
14d. [The disciplines exist] separately.
They are not mixed, for in the parts that are common to them
all-Upāsakas, Śrāmaņeras and Bhikşus all renounce (virati) killing,
stealing, illicit sexuality, lying, intoxicating liquors-the three dis-
ciplines have some distinct characteristics.
Their differencs lie in the difference of the occasions (nidāna) of
transgression. In fact, the person who undertakes the observation of a
greater number of rules, avoids by this action itself a greater number of
occasions of intoxication-pride (mada, ii.33c-d) and of non-diligence
(pramādasthāna, ii.26a); he avoids, by this action, a greater number of
occasions of transgression, killing, etc. 64 Consequently the three series
of renouncings are not identical with one another. If it were otherwise,
that is, if the disciplines of Upasaka and Śrāmaṇera were integral to the
discipline of a Bhikṣu, then the Bhikṣu who renounces the discipline of a
Bhikṣu would renounce at the same time all three disciplines: a thesis
that is not admitted. Hence the disciplines exist separately.
14d. But they do not contradict one another.
They can coexist: by undertaking the following disciplines, one does
not abandon the preceeding ones.65 Thus the fact that a Bhikṣu who
renounces his quality of Bhikṣu remains in possession of the discipline
of Upāsaka and Śrāmaṇera is explained.66
How does one become an Upāsaka, an Upavāsastha, a Śrāmaṇera,
or a Bhikṣu?Karma 583
15. By undertaking the renouncing of the five things to avoid, of
the eight, the ten, of all the things to avoid, one obtains the
quality of Upāsaka, Upavāsastha, Śrāmaṇera, and Bhikṣu.67
1. By undertaking the renouncing of five items: 1. murder, 2.
stealing, 3. illicit sexuality, 4. lying, and 5. intoxicating liquors, one places
himself in the discipline of an Upasaka.
2. By undertaking the renouncing of eight items: 1. killing, 2.
stealing, 3. unchastity, 4. lying, 5. intoxicating liquors, 6. scents, garlands,
and unguents; dances, songs, music; 68 7. high beds, broad beds, and 8.
meals at forbidden times, one places himself in the discipline of an
Upavāsastha.
3. By undertaking the renouncing of these same items and, further,
gold and silver, which make ten, one places himself in the discipline of a
Śrāmaṇera. These make ten items, for one counts "scents, garlands, and
unguents"separately from "dances, songs, and music."
4. By undertaking the renouncing of all the actions of the body and
the voice which should be avoided, one is a Bhikṣu.
The Prātimokṣa discipline is
16a-b. Morality, good conduct, action and discipline.
1. It is morality (sila),69 because it redresses that which is "unjust,"
for transgressors conduct themselves in an unjust manner with regard
to beings. Etymologically, because it cools (f), as it says
in the stanza,
"Happy is the undertaking of morality, because morality does not burn."
2. Good conduct, because it is praised by the wise.
3. Action (karma), because it is action (kriya) by nature.
Objection. Does not the Sūtra say that avijñapti is "not doing"
(akaraṇa) (see above p. 560, 562)? How can avijñapti be action?
Without doubt, the avijñapti makes the disciple, endowed with
shame, to abstain from transgression; it is thus "not doing." But it is
action, according to the etymology kriyata iti kriya: it is doing (kriyate)
either by a bodily-vocal action (vijñapti), or by the mind (citta). 7⁰
According to others, avijñapti is action because it is the cause and the584 Chapter Four
effect of an action.71
4. Discipline (samvara), because it disciplines or constrains the body
and the voice.
The expression "Prātimokṣa discipline" designates all Prātimokṣa
discipline since its origin.
16c-d. The Prātimokṣa is the first vijñapti and the first avijnapti;
these are courses of action (karmapatha).
1. The expression "Prātimokṣa” designates the first vijñapti and the
first avijñapti of the undertaking of the discipline.
The Prātimokṣa is called prātimokşa, for through it there takes
place pratimokṣaṇa,72 that is, the abandoning of transgression: such is
the efficacy of the first moment (vijñapti and avijñapti) of the
undertaking of discipline.
2. This vijñapti and avijñapti are also "Prātimokṣa discipline"
because they discipline the body and the voice.
3. They are courses of action, that is "courses of action properly so
called" (maula, iv.66).
There is no longer any Prātimokṣa in the moment which follows
the first moment and in the moments which follow, for the
transgression is not rejected (pratimokṣyate) by the second moment,
having been rejected (pratimokşsita) by the first; there is prāti-
mokṣasamvara,73 that is, discipline "of the Prātimokṣa type” or
discipline "arisen from Prātimokṣa;” there are no longer courses of
action properly so-called, but solely "consecutive action” (iv. 68).
Who possesses each of the three disciplines?
17a. Eight persons possess the Prātimokṣa.
Eight persons, the Bhikṣu, Bhikṣuni...the Upavasatha, possess the
Prātimokṣa discipline.
Does this mean that non-Buddhists cannot possess a morality that
they have undertaken? 74They can possess a morality, but they cannot possess the Prāti-
mokṣa discipline. In fact, the morality that they undertake (“I shall
abstain from killing,” etc.), rests on an idea of existence; even when they
have in view, not a heavenly existence, but that which they call
"deliverance" (mokṣa), they conceive of deliverance as a certain type of
existence. Hence transgression is not absolutely “rejected” by them, nor
can they be "released" through the discipline they have undertaken.
Karma 585
17b. He who possesses dhyāna possesses the discipline which
arises from dhyana.
"Which arises from dhyāna” (dhyānaja), that is, which arises from
dhyāna (ablative) or by means of dhyāna (instrumental).
Dhyana, means not only the Four Principal (maula) Dhyānas, but
also the absorptions which are close to them (samantaka, viii. 22a). In
the same way, when one says, "There is a field of rice or a field of wheat
in this village," one means the village and its environs.
17c. The Aryans possess pure discipline. 75
The Āryans, the Saikṣas and Aśaikṣas,-possess pure discipline
(iv. 26b-c).
We have seen, in the definition of sahabhūhetu (ii. 51), that two
disciplines "accompany the mind." What are these two disciplines?
17d. The last two disciplines are concomitants of the mind.
The discipline that arises from dhyāna and the pure discpline are
concomitants of the mind; not of the Prātimokṣa discipline, for this
latter continues to exist in a person whose mind is bad or neutral, or
who is unconscious (anyacittācittaka, i. 11).
18a-b. Arising in the anantaryamārgas, in anāgamya, they are
called "abandoning."586 Chapter Four
In the nine ānantaryamārgas of anāgamya these two disciplines, the
discipline of dhyana and pure discipline, are "abandoning disciplines"
(prahāṇasaṁvara-abandoning and discipline), for through them one
abandons immorality and the defilements which produce them
(iv.122a).
There are thus disciplines arisen from dhyana which are not
abandoning-discipline. Four cases:
i. Discipline arising from dhyāna, impure, with the exception of
what arises from the anantaryamärgas of anagamya: discipline arisen
from dhyāna which is not abandoning;
ii. Pure discipline obtained in the anantaryamārgas of anagamya:
abandoning, but not discipline arisen from dhyāna;
iii. Impure discipline in the anantaryamārgas of anāgamya: dis-
cipline arisen from dhyāna which is abandoning;
iv. Pure discipline arisen outside of the anantaryamargas of
anāgamya: discipline not arisen from dhyāna which is not abandoning.
According to the same principles, one would establish four cases
relative to pure discipline which is not abandoning, to abandoning
which is not pure discipline, etc. (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 231a13)
The Blessed One said, "Good is discipline of the body, discipline of
the voice, discipline of the mind, discipline in all things;"77 and again,
"He lives disciplined through the discipline of the organ of sight."78
What is the nature of these two disciplines, discipline of the mind, and
discipline of the organs?
Neither are, by their nature avijñapti of fila. But on the contrary,
18c-d. Discipline of the mind and discipline of the organs are,
each of them, two things: attentive consciousness and
mindfulness. 79
In order that the reader should not come to believe that the first
discipline is consciousness (samprajāāna) and the second mindfulness
(smrti), the author says that each of them is two things. 8⁰
Karma 587
Let us examine who possesses vijñapti and avijñapti, and to what
period these belong in each case (iv.19-22, 23-24b),81
19a-c. He who is in Prātimokṣa always possesses avijñapti of the
present moment, as long as the does not reject the avijñapti.
As we have said previously the person who dwells in the Prātimokṣa
discipline (iv.14a), always possesses present avijñapti as long as he does
not reject the avijñapti which constitutes this discipline (iv.38).
19c-d. After the first moment, he also possesses avijñapti.
After the first moment, which is designated by the expression
Prātimokṣa (iv.16c-d), he also possesses earlier, past avijñapti: this of
course, as long as he does not reject the discipline. 82
As he who dwells in the Prātimokşa discipline,
20a. So too is he who dwells in undiscipline.
He who dwells in undiscipline (asaṁvarastha, iv.24c-d), always
possesses avijñapti of the present moment as long as he does not reject
it; [he also possesses avijñapti of the past, and from the second moment
on, of undiscipline.]
20b-c. He who possesses discipline arisen from dhyāna always
possesses past and future avijnapti.
He who possesses the discipline arisen from dhyāna always
possesses avijñapti of the past, and avijñapti of the future as long as he
does not lose it, [for the avijñapti in question-namely the discipline
arisen from dhyana-accompanies the mind (iv.17d).]
From the first moment when he acquires the discipline of dhyāna,
he takes possession of the discipline of former dhyānas, either of this
existence, or of a previous existence, that he had lost.
20c-d. The Aryan, at the first moment, does not posses past
avijñapti.
The Aryan possesses pure avijñapti, which constitutes his pure
discipline, in the manner in which he who possesses the discipline
arisen from dhyāna possesses the avijñapti arisen from dhyana: he588 Chapter Four
possesses his past and future avijñapti; but with the difference that,
when in the first moment of the Way he takes possession of pure
avijñapti for the first time, he cannot, evidently, possess pure avijñapti
of the past.
21a-b. The person who is in a state of absorption, the person
who is placed in the Way, possesses avijñapti of the present
moment. 83
The person who is absorbed (samahita), the person who is
cultivating the Way (āryamargam samāpannaḥ), possesses, at present,
the avijñapti which is proper to him, arisen from dhyāna, and pure. But
when he leaves the absorption, he does not [possess this present
avijñapti, for this avijñapti only accompanies an absorbed mind.]
As for the intermediary (madhyastha) [the person presently in
neither-discipline-nor-undiscipline, who does not posses discipline like
the Bhikṣu, nor undiscipline like the transgressor:]
21b-c. The intermediary, at the first moment, possesses,.
medially, avijñapti, when the avijñapti is produced.
Medially (madhya) means the present, situated between the past
and the future.
Action (avijñapti) does not necessarily produce avijñapti.The
intermediary does not necessarily possess avijñapti: if there is
avijñapti-either avijñapti created by an act of immorality (killing, etc.),
or avijñapti created by an act of morality (abstention from killing), or
avijñapti is created by some other good or bad acts, the worship of a
Stūpa, hitting and wounding-he possesses this avijñapti, of the
present, at the moment when it arises.
21d. Afterwards, [he possesses avijnapti] of the present and the
past.
[until the moment he rejects it.]K
Karma 589
Can a disciplined person possess bad avijñapti? Can an un-
disciplined person possess good avijñapti? And how long does the
avijnapti last in these two cases?
22. As long as he is endowed with faith or with very active
defilements, the undisciplined person possesses good avijñapti,
and the disciplined person possesses bad.avijñapti.
As long as there continues, in an undisciplined person, the strength
of faith by which, accomplishing actions such as the worship of a Stupa,
he has created good avijñapti; as long as there continues, in a disciplined
person, the power of the defilements by which, accomplishing actions
such as killing, hitting, binding, he has created bad avijñapti, good or bad
avijñapti continues.
At the moment of the action in question, the agent possesses
avijñapti of the present; then he possesses avijñapti of the present and
of the past.
23a-b. Those who have created one vijñapti possess it always, in
the present.
All those who accomplish a bodily or vocal action (vijnapti)
whether they are disciplined, undisciplined, or intermediaries, so long as
they are accomplishing this action, possess it in the present.
23c-d. From the second moment onward, they possess vijnapti
of the past, until the moment when they give it up.
From the second moment onward, that is, after the first moment.
23d. One cannot possess future vijñapti.
No one possesses future vijñapti, because such vijñapti does not
now accompany the mind.
24a-b. One does not possess past vijñapti of the nivṛta and
anivṛta classes.
[That is to say the defiled-neutral and undefiled-neutral actions (see
ii.66 and foll.).]
One does not possess these actions, once they are past, because the
possession (prāpti) of a weak dharma, being weak itself, is not590
Chapter Four
prolonged.
Why is this dharma, a neutral action, weak?
By reason of the weakness of the mind which gives rise to it.
But then the possession (präpti) of this mind too will not be
prolonged.
No: the case is not the same. The vijñapti, in effect, is stupid, for it
does not know an object; furthermore it is dependent, for it depends
upon the mind. Such is not the case with the mind itself. Thus the
vijnapti produced by a neutral mind is weaker than this mind itself; the
possession (prāpti) of the vijñapti is not prolongued, whereas the
possession of the mind is prolongued.
We have spoken of an undisciplined person, one who is in
undiscipline. What is undiscipline (asamvara)?
24c-d. Undiscipline, bad conduct, immorality, action, course of
action.
1. It is undiscipline, because there is no constraining of the body and
voice.
2. It is bad conduct, because it is blamed by wise men, and because it
produces painful results.
3. It is immorality, because it opposes morality (iv.122).
4. It is an action, as it is created by the body and the voice.
5. It is a course of action, as it is included in the principal action
(maula-samgrhitatvāt, iv.68).85
He who possesses vijñapti can also possess avijñapti. Four cases
present themselves.
25a-b. The intermediary, acting with a weak volition, possesses
a single vijñapti.
He who is in neither-discipline-nor-nondiscipline and who, with a
weak volition, does good or bad action (vijñapti), possesses solely thisKarma 591
act (vijnapti), and does not possess any avijñapti. 86 All the more reason
that there is no possession of avijñapti by an agent when his action is
neutral (avyākṛta).
Nevertheless, even accomplished with a weak volition, 1.) material
meritorious works (aupadhikapuṇyakriyāvastu, iv.112) and 2.) a course
of action (iv.68) always create avijñapti.
25c-d. The Aryan possesses a single avijñapti when he has not
produced, or has abandoned, the vijñapti.87
When an Aryan has changed his existence or when he has not
created vijñapti (for example when he is in an embryonic state or when
he is reborn in Ārūpyadhātu), or when he has lost the vijñapti (the
vijñapti created with a neutral volition), he possesses only avijñapti
(pure avijñapti acquired in the previous existence), and not vijñapti.
The two other cases, the possession of vijñapti and avijñapti, and
the non-possession of either, are set up according to the same
principles.
How does one acquire the disciplines?
26a-b. The discipline that arises from dhyana is acquired by one
thought of the sphere of the dhyāna.
It is through one thought of the sphere of the dhyāna, that is, of the
mauladhyāna (the Four Dhyanas) and the samantakas (the four
absorptions which proceed the Four Dhyānas), and with an impure
mind, that is, with a mind not forming part of the Way, that the
discipline of dhyana is acquired: this is a discipline concomitant with
this type of mind.
26b-c. Pure discipline, by the same mind, when it is Aryan.
"Āryan" means pure, forming part of the Way (iv.17c).
We will explain below (viii.22) that the Aryan mind exists in six
spheres of dhyāna, namely the Four Dhyānas, the dhyānāntaras and the
anāgamya (the first sāmantaka).592
Chapter Four
26c-d. That which is called Prātimokṣa, through paravijnapana,
etc.
"Paravijñapana" is informative action to or from another: the
candidate makes known something to another, and another makes
something known to him. 88 "Another" is the Sangha, through the
acquisition of the disciplines of Bhikṣu, Bhikṣuṇī, or Śikṣamāṇā; or a
person (pudgala), the acquisition of the five other prātimoks disciplines.
disciplines.
According to Vinaya scholars of the Vaibhāṣika School, there are six
types of ordination. In order to include them all within his definition,
the author says, " . . . from the information of another et cetera."
1. Ordination by oneself,89 in the case of the Buddha and the
Pratyekabuddhas.
2. Through entry into the Path (niyāmāvakrānti, vi.26a), in the case
of the Five, that is to say of Ājñatakauṇḍinya and his companions.⁹⁰
3. Through the summons, "Come, Oh Bhikṣu!," in the case of
Ājñata.⁹¹
4. By recognizing the Blessed One as master, as in the case of
Mahākāśyapa. ⁹2
5. By satisfying the Blessed One through one's answers, as in the
case of Sodāyin.93
6. By accepting the special obligation of monks and nuns, as in the
case of Mahāprajāpatī.⁹4
7. By a messenger, as in the case of Dharmadinnā.⁹5
8. By an official action as the fifth, that is, ordination before a Sangha
of five Bhiksus, as in frontier lands.⁹
9. By ten Bhikṣus, as in Madhyadeśa.⁹7
10. By repeating three times the formula of Refuge, as in the case of
the sixty Bhadravargas, ordained in a group.
One sees that, according to these scholars, the Prātimokṣa discipline
is not necessarily acquired by means of a vijñapti, for example the
ordination of the Buddha, etc.
When one undertakes the Prātimokṣa discipline, for how long a
time does one undertakes it?27a-b. One undertakes the discipline for a lifetime or for a day
and a night.⁹⁹
Karma 593
The first seven categories of the Prātimokṣa discipline are
undertaken for a lifetime; the fasting discipline (upavāsastha) is
undertaken for a day and a night. Such is the rule.
Why?
Because there are two limits of time, the period of a lifetime, and the
period of a day and a night. As for the forthnight and the other
durations of time, they consist in additions of day and night periods.
What is the dharma that we term “time” (kāla)?
This is not an eternal substance (padārtha), as some believe. The
word "time" is an expression by which the samskäras are designated as
past, present, or future (i.7, v. 25).
When it is light in the four continents, it is daytime; when it is dark
it is night (iii.80c).
Discussion: We admit, say the Sautrāntikas, that the Prātimokṣa
discipline is solely produced for the duration of a lifetime. In fact, even if
one were to undertake to observe these rules in a future life, one would
not now produce this discipline for this other life: 1. the person (aśraya)
that one would become, would be different (see nikāyasabhāga, ii.41);
2. this new person would not be able to apply himself to the rules
undertaken; and 3. he would not remember undertaking them. 100 But if
a person assumes the duties of a faster for more than a day and a
night, for five days, or for ten days, what obstacle would this be to
his producing in himself many disciplines of the fast?
It needs be that there would be an obstacle since the Blessed One, in
a Sūtra, says that one undertakes the fast for a day and a night.
Why did the Blessed One express himself in this manner: did he
think that the discipline of fasting could not be produced for a longer
duration?
He thought that persons in whom the senses are difficult to subdue
would be well capable of undertaking the fast for a day and a night. But,
in truth, nothing is wrong with producing the discipline of the fast for
more than one day.594 Chapter Four
As the Blessed One does not speak of the fast as lasting any longer,
the Vaibhāṣikas do not admit this manner of viewing the matter.
What is the duration of undiscipline (asamvara).
27c. There is undiscipline for a day and a night.
Undiscipline never last longer than a day and a night, like the
discipline of the fast, for it is produced by the acceptance of transgression
for one's entire life.
How is this?
27d. For, says the School, one does not undertake it thus. 101
No one undertakes undiscipline in the manner in which one
undertakes the fast, by saying, “I wish to remain a day and a night in
undiscipline." Rather, he carries out, in effect, shameful actions.
Objection: No one undertakes undiscipline by saying, "I wish to
remain for my life undisciplined." Thus one does not undertake
undiscipline for an entire lifetime.
Answer: It is not in this manner, in fact, that one undertakes
undiscipline. One does not undertake undiscipline by means of a ritual.
One acquires undiscipline by acting with the intention of always acting
badly; one does not acquire undiscipline by the intention of acting badly
for a time. In the case of the fast, the intention is not "for always;"
nevertheless one obtains the discipline through the force of the action
which consists of saying, “I wish to remain a day and a night in the
discipline of the fast," and one accomplishes this action because one
desires to acquire this discipline. If someone desires undiscipline, he
could without doubt give himself over to undiscipline for this period of
time. But the case does not present itself; hence we do not recognize
undiscipline "for a time."
According to the Sautrāntikas, undiscipline does not exist in and of
itself (dravyatas) apart from volition. Undiscipline is the intention toKarma 595
commit evil, that is, a certain volition with the traces which allow this
volition. And, as long as this volition with its traces has not been
destroyed by a contrary volition, the person, even when he has a good
thought, remains filled with undiscipline, a person undisciplined.
How should one undertake the discipline of a day and a night, or the
discipline of the fast? 102
28. One should undertake the fast (upavāsa) in a humble
attitude, speaking after, with ornaments removed, until the
morrow, complete, the morning, from another. 103
1. In a humble attitude, squatting or kneeling; with the hands joined
in kapotaka (by placing the four fingers of one hand between the thumb
and the index finder of the other) or in the position of añjali; except in
the case of sickness. Without a respectful attitude, discipline is not
produced.
2. The candidate does not speak before the ordainer or the giver, the
person who "gives" the fast; nor at the same time. In this way, it is from
another that one undertakes the fast; otherwise, there would be neither
receiving nor a thing received, 104
3. The candidate does not wear any ornaments; he wears his normal
dress, because he does not draw forth vanity from it. 105
4. One undertakes it until the morrow, until the rising of the sun.
[5. One undertakes the complete fast, with its eight rules, and not
with any rules missing (Takakuku, I-tsing, p. 188; Chavannes, Cinq
centes contes, p. 136).
6. The morrow, at the rising of the sun, since this is a discipline
lasting a day and a night (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 647b29).
He who, previously, has formed the undertaking, "I will always
practice the fast, the eighth day of the fortnight, etc.,” undertakes the
fast, even though he eats. 106
7. From another, nor from oneself. If one encounters a cause of
transgression, through honesty with regard to the giver, he will not
violate the obligations undertaken.]
When these rules are not observed, one has nevertheless done a596 Chapter Four
good action (sucarita), but one does not obtain the discipline of the fast.
When the rules are observed, the fast is even more useful for the person
who commits transgressions by day and by night (hunting, murder,
stealing, adultery).
i. The fast is termed upavāsa, 107 because, embracing a way of life
conforming to that of the Arhats, he places himself near (upa) the
Arhats. 108 According to another opinion, it is because he places himself
near the "lifelong discipline" (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 648c29).
ii. It has for its end procuring an increase of the roots of good of
persons who have only small roots of good. As it procures (dhā) an
increase (posa) of good, the Blessed One said, "It is called posadha."109
Why is the discipline of the fast undertaken with eight parts? 110
29a-c. Part of morality (sila), part of vigilence (apramada), parts
of ascetic vows (vrata), have respectively four, one, three parts.
Four parts, the renouncing of killing, stealing, adultery and
lying, constitute the parts of morality (śīlāṁga) by which what is
transgression by nature is abandoned, 111
One part, the renouncing of intoxicating drinks, constitutes the rule
of vigilence by which non-vigilence is arrested. For even if a person who
has undertaken morality drinks intoxicating liquor, he will be non-
vigilent. (ii.25-26, iv.34c-d).
Three parts, the renouncing of high beds, music, etc., and meals at
forbidden times,-constitute the rule of asceticism, for they are
favorable and conform to disgust.
What necessity is there for undertaking the rules of vigilence and of
asceticism?
29d. In order to avoid weakness of mindfulness and arrogance.
When one drinks intoxicating liquor, one loses one's mindfulness of
what one should and should not do. When one uses high and wide beds,
when one attends dances, singing and music, the mind becomesKarma
arrogant. In both cases, one is not far from violating morality.
When one observes the rule of eating at the proper times, and when
one avoids eating outside of this time, one retains a mindfulness of the
obligations of the fast, and disgust is produced. In the absence of the
eighth rule, mindfulness and disgust would be absent.
i. According to certain masters, the fast or upavāsa consists of the
fast
proper, and the renouncing of food at forbidden times; whereas the
other renouncings are the rules or parts of the fast (upavāsānga).The
abstention from food is not a part; thus, with an end to the obtaining the
number of eight parts, one should distinguish two parts in the seventh
rule; first, the renouncing of dancing, singing, and music; and the
second, the renouncing of perfumes, garlands, and unguents.
This interpretation is not in accord with the Sūtra, [say the
Sautrāntikas]; for, according to the Sūtra, immediately after the
renouncing of meals at forbidden times, the faster should say, "By these
eight rules, I imitate the rule, I conform myself to the rule of the Aryans,
the Arhats." 112
ii. Then what would the fast be, distinct from its rules, and yet
embracing eight parts?
According to the Sautrāntikas, it is the very collection of parts which
one says possesses parts; it is to this very collection that one attributes
parts. The expression, “a fast having eight parts" should be understood
in the same way as the expressions, "a part of a carriage,” “a four-part
army" (caturangabala), or "a powder made up of five parts" (pañcan-
gapista). 113
iii. According to the Vaibhāṣikas, the abstaining from food at
forbidden times is at one and the same time the fast and a part of the
fast. In the same way that Right Views (samyagdṛrsti) are at one and the
same time the Path and a part of the Path (mārgānga); in the same way
that Investigation into the Dharmas (dharmapravicaya) is at one and
the same time Bodhi and a part of Bodhi (vi.68); and in the same way
way that Samadhi is at one and the same time dhyāna and a part of
dhyāna (viii.7-8).
iv. But we would say [with the Sauträntikas] that it is impossible for598 Chapter Four
Right Views, Investigation into the Dharmas, and Samadhi to be parts
of themselves. Would you say that earlier Right Views, etc., are parts of
later Right Views, etc.? This would be to admit that the first moment of
the Path does not have eight parts. This would be to admit that the last
moment of the parts of Bodhi is itself not a part. 114
Is the possession of the discipline of the fast kept only by
Upāsakas? 115
30a-b. Others can possess the fast, but not without taking the
Refuges.
When a person who is not a Upāsaka, takes, in the same day and
night, the Three Refuges before he undertakes the rules of the fast, then
the discipline of the fast is produced within him. But not without taking
the Refuges; on the condition that there has been no error, etc. (iv.31d).
The Mahānāma-sūtra says, “Oh Mahānāma, the layman with white
clothes, male and possessing the male organ, who, after having taken
refuge in the Buddha, in the Dharma, and in the Sangha, pronounces
these words, 'Consider me as an Upasaka:' only through this does he
become an Upāsaka." 116 Does this mean that one becomes an Upāsaka
by only taking the Three Refuges?
The Aparāntakas answer yes. (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 645c19).
The Kaśmireans affirm that one cannot be an Upāsaka when one
does not possess the Upāsaka discipline.
But does this not contradict the Sūtra?
No. 117 Because
30c-d. The discipline is produced through the fact that he
accepts the qualities of an Upāsaka. 118
The discipline of the Upāsaka is produced in him by the mere
acceptance of the quality of the Upasaka, when he says, "Consider me,
from today onwards, for the rest of my life, as a prāṇāpeta Upāsaka.” 119
[What is the meaning of the expression prāṇāpeta?]
One should understand, prāṇātipātapeta through ellipis, as free
from killing, having renounced killing (see below, note 127).Karma 599
Thus, by accepting the quality of an Upāsaka, one undertakes the
discipline [since one shows himself as having renounced killing]. Yet,
in order that he understands the points of the rule (fiksāpada),
30d. One explains them to him, as is also the case for a Bhikṣu.
Through an ecclesiastical action the Bhikṣu has acquired the
discipline of the Bhikṣu: yet he is made to undertake the most important
rules: "You are to abstain from this, from that. Your co-religionists will
tell you
the rest." 120 The same holds for the Śrāmaṇera. 121 The same
holds for the Upāsaka: he obtains the discipline by undertaking once,
twice, three time the Three Refuges; he is then made to undertake the
rules, "Abandoning killing, I renounce killing.” Thus one is not an
Upāsaka without possessing the discipline of the Upasaka.
31a-b. If all Upāsakas possess the discipline of the Upāsaka, how
can an Upāsaka be an ekadeśakārin, etc.?
If all Upasakas place themselves within the discipline of the
Upāsaka, why did the Blessed One describe four types of Upāsakas, the
Upāsaka of one rule (ekadeśakārin), of two rules (pradeśakārin), of
three or four rules (yadbhūyaskārin), and of five rules (paripūrṇa-
kārin)? 122
31c. These terms, say the School, refer to the fact of observing
the rules.123
The Upāsaka who in fact observes one of the rules [of all which he
has accepted] is said to practice (kar) this rule. [It should not be
understood that the ekadeśakārin is an Upāsaka who undertakes to
practice only a single rule]. Yet all the Upāsakas are equally placed
within this discipline. 124
The Sautrāntikas object: Your doctrine contradicts the Sūtra.
In what way does it contradict the Sūtra?
i. You say that one acquires the discipline by the mere fact of
accepting the quality of a prāṇāpeta Upāsaka, "Consider me . . . as a
prānāpeta Upāsaka." But, such is not the text of the Sūtra. In fact, the
Sūtra that interests us is the Mahānāma-sūtra which gives the definition
of an Upāsaka, and not another Sūtra. And the Mahānāma-sūtra does
not have the expression "prāänapeta."600 Chapter Four
You hold that you are authorized by another Sūtra, 125 which has,
"From today, for the rest of my life, [consider me as an Upasaka], risking
my life (pranopeta), 126 having taken refuge, believing perfectly
(abhiprasanna)."Now this text refers to persons who have seen the
Truths, who have acquired the faith of intelligence (avetyaprasāda, vi.
73), and who, as a consequence, adhere to the Good Law even at the
price of their lives: "We are incapable of abandoning the Dharma, even
in order to save our lives." This text does not give a definition of the
Upāsaka discipline.
Further, the expression prāṇāpeta, upon which you establish your
theory, is nowhere to be found, either in the Mahānāma-sūtra, nor the
Drstasatya-sutra. Who could admit a similar expression the sense of
which is lacking in precision? 127 Who, based on faith in this expression,
would admit that the Upāsaka has undertaken the five renouncings
before he has undertaken them ritually?
ii. If the expression ekadeśakārin designates a person who violates
the discipline, the question raised in the Sūtra (note 122) is not justified,
nor its answer. In fact, who is it that, being acquainted with the
discipline of an Upāsaka and knowing that it is made up of five rules,
would be incapable of explaining, "He who does not violate a rule
observes a rule" and so on.
On the contrary, someone who does not know the extent of the
discipline of an Upāsaka, seeing the persons capable of observing one,
or two, or three, or all the rules, would he be able to pose the question,
"What does one do to become an Upāsaka of all the rules?"
The Vaibhāşikas answer: If one were an Upasaka without possess-
ing the discipline of an Upasaka, one could also as well be a Bhikṣu or a
Śrāmaṇera with an incomplete discipline.
Answer: How can we know the extent, the number of the rules of
the disciplines of the Upāsaka, the Śrāmaṇera, or the Bhikṣu? Evidently
through the teaching of the Master. Now the Master speaks of the
Upāsaka not possessing the discipline in its entirety; but he does not
speak of an incomplete discipline of the Bhikṣus or of the Śrā-
maneras. 128
The Vaibhāşikas of Kaśmir do not admit this opinion.
31d. All the disciplines are weak, etc., according to the mind.
ARRIKarma 601
The weakness, the mediocrity, and the force of the eight rules
depend on the weakness, on the mediocrity, or on the force of the mind
through which one has undertaken them.
But if such is the case, the Prātimokṣa discipline of an Arhat could be
weak, and that of a Prthagjana could be strong.
Is one an Upāsaka if one solely undertakes the discipline (samvara)
without undertaking the Refuges?
No; except in the case of ignorance by the person who gives and by
the person who receives.
When a person takes refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and in the
Sangha, what does he take refuge in?
32. He who takes the Refuges takes refuge in the aśaiksa
dharmas which form the Buddha, in the two types of dharmas
which form the Sangha, and in Nirvāņa. ¹2⁹
i. He who takes Refuge in the Buddha takes refuge in the dharmas
of the Arhat which form a Buddha, the dharmas which are the causes of
the designation "Buddha,” that is, the dharmas by reason of which, as
principle cause, a certain person is called a Buddha;¹3⁰ or rather the
dharmas by the acquisition of which a certain person, understanding all
things, is called a Buddha. These dharmas are the Knowledge of
Extinction (kṣayajñāna), the Knowledge of Nonarising (anutpäda-
jñāna) and Right Views (samyagdṛṣṭi) (vi.50, 67) with the dharmas
which accompany these jñānas, that is, with the five pure skandhas. 131
As for the material body (rūpakāya) 132 of the Buddha, that is not
subject to modification through the acquistion of the quality of Buddha.
Thus one does not take refuge in the material body of the Buddha which
is, in fact, the material body of the Bodhisattva.
Does one take refuge in all the Buddhas or in one Buddha?
According to the nature of things, and in the absence of an explicit
declaration, in all the Buddhas. For the Buddhas have always followed
the same path, a worldly path and a transworldly path (vii.34). 133
ii. He who takes Refuge in the Sangha takes refuge in both the
faiksa and the aśaikṣa dharmas, of the non-Arhat and of the Arhat,602 Chapter Four
which form the Sangha, that is, the dharmas through the acquisition of
which the Eight Saints become a Sangha; becoming unanimous they
cannot be divided with regard to that which concerns the Path.
Does one take refuge in all the Sanghas or in one Sangha?
According to the nature of things, in all: for the Path followed by the
Saints is always the same. Without doubt, the Buddha said to the two
merchants, "Also take refuge in the Sangha which shall exist in the
future," 134 but the Master expressed himself in this manner in order to
exhault the qualities of the Jewel of the Sangha which would soon be
visible to the merchants.
iii. He who takes Refuge in the Dharma takes refuge in Nirvāṇa,
that is to say, in pratisaṁkhyānirodha (i.5, ii.55d). He takes refuge in all
Nirvāṇa, for Nirvāṇa has for its unique characteristic the cessation of
the defilements and suffering of oneself and others (see vi. 73c, the
meaning of the word dharma in dharma avetyaprasāda).
iv. Discussion.
If the Buddha is none other than the aśaikṣa dharmas, the dharmas
pertaining to an Arhat, how could the fact of wounding the Buddha with
a bad thought constitute a mortal transgression (iv. 96)?
The Vaibhāṣikas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 177b8) answer: "When one
wounds the material elements which are the support of these dharmas,
these dharmas themselves suffer injury."
But the Šāstra (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 177a27) does not say that the
Buddha is solely aśaikṣa dharmas.It says that the Buddha is the dharmas
that form a Buddha, that is to say, either the worldly or transworldly
dharmas which are the object of the designation "Buddha,” are the
Buddha. Thus the Šāstra does not deny that the aśraya—the organism,
the support made up of the five worldly skandhas-forms part of the
quality of Buddha. Hence the objection taken from wounding the
Buddha is without value.
If it were otherwise, if the Buddha was only aśaikṣa dharmas, and if
the Sangha (that is, the Saints, Saikṣas and Arhats) were only faiksa and
aśaikṣa dharmas, a person whose mind is presently "worldly” would not
be able to be either a Buddha or a Sangha. And by virtue of these same
principles, one would have to say that a Bhikṣu is only morality, the
discipline of a Bhikṣu.
But, say the Vaibhāṣikas, if the body is, itself, among the dharmaswhich form the Buddha, why does the Śāstra say, "He who takes refuge
in the Buddha, takes refuge in the aśaikṣa dharmas which form the
Buddha?"
Karma 603
We would answer: In the same way that one who honors Bhikṣus,
honors the morality which makes up the Bhikṣus.
According to another opinion, one who takes refuge in the Buddha
takes refuge in the eighteen ävenikadharmas (vii.28) of the Buddha.
What is the nature of the undertakings of the Refuges?
They are vocal vijñapti (iv. 3d). ¹35
What is the meaning of “Refuge” (śaraṇa)?
The Three Refuges are so named because, by going to them for
refuge one obtains definitive deliverance from all suffering.
The Blessed One said in fact, 136 "Tormented by fear, persons most
frequently 137 take refuge in mountains, in forests, in woods, and in
sacred trees. This is not a good 138 refuge, the supreme refuge; it is not by
taking refuge in these that one is delivered from all suffering. But one
who takes Refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha, when
one sees through wisdom the Four Noble Truths,-Suffering, the
Arising of Suffering, the Extinction of Suffering, and the Holy Eightfold
Path which leads to Nirvāṇa,—this is the good refuge, this is the
supreme refuge; by taking refuge in this, one is delivered from all
suffering."
This is why the undertaking of the Refuges is the enterance to the
undertaking of all the rules of discipline.
The other rules of discipline contain the renouncing of all sexual
activity (abrahmacaryavirati); but the discipline of the Upāsaka only
contains the renouncing of sexual misconduct (kāmamithyācāra, iv. 74).
Why is this?
33a-b. Sexual misconduct, because it is much censured, because
one easily abstains from it, because the Aryans have obtained
abstention from it.604 Chapter Four
1. Sexual misconduct is much censured in the world because it is the
corruption of another's wife, and because it leads to retribution in a
painful realm of rebirth.
2. It is easy for householders to abstain from it, but it is difficult for
them to abstain from all sexual activity: householders do not leave the
world because they are not capable of difficult things. (Divya, 303).
3. The Aryans possess akaranasamvara with regard to sexual
misconduct, that is, they have obtained definite abstention from it; in
fact, in their future existence, they will be incapable of violating this
precept. Such is not the case concerning all sexual activity. As a
consequence, the rules of discipline of the Upasaka contain only the
renunciation of sexual misconduct: it is inadmissible in fact that the
Aryans, in a susequent existence, would be capable of violating the
discipline of an Upāsaka which could happen if this contained the
renuncation of all sexual activity. Akaraṇasaṁvara means akriyāni-
yama, (that is akriyāyam ekāntatā, the certain abstention from one
action). 139
Has the man who marries after having undertaken the Upāsaka
discipline, undertaken renouncing with regard to the woman whom he
marries?
Yes, answer the Vaibhāṣikas; for, in the contrary hypothesis, this
man would have undertaken a restraining discipline (prādešika, iv.36a-
b).
But then this man violates the discipline when he gets married!
No:
33c-d. They have acquired it as they have accepted the discipline;
they have not accepted it with regard to some persons.
They have acquired it as they have undertaken the discipline. They
undertake it by saying, "I renounce sexual misconduct," that is, "I
renounce all sexual activity with all prohibited females;" they do not
undertake it by saying, “I shall refrain from all sexual activity with such
persons. "140 Consequently, they do not violate the discipline by getting
married.alyaula
Karma 605
Among the transgression of speech, why does the renouncing of
lying constitute one of the rules of the Upāsaka, whereas the renouncing
of other transgressions of speech are omitted?
For the same reasons: because lying is much censured in the world,
because householders abstain from it easily, and because the Āryans are
not capable of lying; and also for a fourth reason:
34a-b. Because, having violated any other rule he would lie. 141
[If lying were not forbidden], he would lie when he violates any
other rule, saying, "I have not done it." Consequently the Upasaka
should renounce lying, thinking, "I shall confess what I transgress."
Why are not the transgressions of disobedience 142 included in the
discipline of the Upāsaka?
The question is not justified:
34c-d. One renounces strong liquor, which is a transgression of
disobedience,
Why should the Upāsaka renounce a single transgression of
disobedience and not others?
34d. In order that the other rules may be kept.
One who drinks strong liquor will not keep the other rules.
i. The Abhidhārmikas maintain that strong liquor does not have the
characteristic of being a transgression by its nature. A transgression by
its nature is committed only by a person whose mind is defiled: now it
happens that, as a remedy, one can drink strong liquor in a quantity
where it is not inebriating. But the mind of one who drinks knowing
that such a quantity is inebriating is defiled; the mind is not defiled
when one drinks knowning that such a quantity is not inebriating.
ii. Such is not the opinion of the Vinayadharas. [According to them,
strong liquor is a transgression by its very nature.]606 Chapter Four
1. To Upāli, who asked him, "How should one attend to illnesses?"
the Blessed One answered, "Except, Upāli, by transgression of
nature." 143 And, the Blessed One did not permit strong liquors to sick
Śakyans: "Those who recognize me as their master should not drink any
strong liquor, even a drop on the point of a blade of grass." 144 Since the
Blessed One forbad only transgression by nature in the case of illness (as
in the Upālisūtra) and yet does not permit strong liquor, it is clear that
strong liquor is a transgression by its very nature.
2. The Äryans, even in a following existence, do not drink strong
liquor, not any more than they would commit the other transgressions
of nature, killing, etc. 145
3. Scripture,-the Nandikasūtra ¹46 and elsewhere,-places strong
liquor among the misdeeds of the body, 147
iii. The Abhidhārmikas answer:
1. In general, the transgression of disobedience is permitted to the
ill, as the answer to Upāli proves. But strong liquor is an exception:
though solely a transgression of disobedience, it is forbidden to the ill,
and this with a view to preventing the upleasant consequence of strong
liquor, 148 because its inebriating quantity is undetermined. 149
2. If the Āryans certainly abstain from strong liquor, it is not because
it is a transgression by its very nature, but because they are filled with the
force of modesty; 150 [if they do not drink in secret¹5¹], this is because
strong liquor makes mindfulness fail; even if they do not drink a drop,
this is because the inebriating quantity is not determined, as for poison.
3. Scripture considers strong liquor as a bodily misdeed, because
strong liquor is a "cause of non-vigilence." In fact, the rule of training
relative to strong liquor includes the expression, "Abandoning the
pramādasthāna which is strong liquor, surā and maireya, I renounce
pramādasthāna... "This is not the case for the other transgressions:
one does not say "I renounce the pramādasthāna which is killing," and
that is because the other transgressions are transgressions by their very
nature.
The Scripture says that one is reborn in hell through the practice of
strong liquor. 152 As a consequence of strong liquor, there is continual
activity of a series of bad thoughts; from whence, there is either
projection of a new action retribuable in hell, or else the entry into
activity, at the moment of death, of an old action.***
Karma 607
What is the meaning of the expression surāmaireya madya-
pramādasthāna? 153
Surā is a fermented drink of rice; maireya is a fermented drink of
various ingredients (sugar cane juice, etc.).
At a certain moment, the liquor is no longer inebriating; at a certain
moment, it is no longer that: this is why the word madya (inebriating)
has been added. Even the areca-nut, the paspale (kodrava, etc.) are
termed surā and maireya when they inebriate. 154
Strong liquor is only a transgression of disobedience. The formula
thus contains the words pramādasthāna in order to have one
understand that one should renounce strong liquor because it is the
cause of all failures of mindfulness.
Do the three discipline have the same object?
35a-b. One acquires the discipline of Kāmadhātu relative to all
actions, relative to the two types of beings and to the two types
of actions, relative to things of the present.
The discipline of Kāmadhātu is the Prātimokṣa discipline.
This discipline is relative to all actions, preparatory actions, actions
themselves, and consecutive action (iv.68). 155
This discipline is relative to living beings and to non-living beings,
for example persons and trees.
This discipline is relative to the transgressions by nature and to the
transgression of disobedience, both of which are capable of relating to
living beings (killing; touching the hand of a women when one is a
monk) or to non-living beings (cutting the leaves of a tree; accepting
gold when one is a monk).
This discipline is relative to things-skandhas, ayatanas and
dhātus of the present, for the things of the past and of the future are
neither living beings, nor non-living beings. 156
35c-d. One acquires the discipline of dhyana and the pure608
Chapter Four
discipline relative to actions themselves and to things of the
three time periods.
One acquires these two disciplines relative to actions themselves,
not relative to preparatory actions or to consecutive action, and not
relative to the transgression of disobedience; and relative to the
skandhas, ayatanas and dhatus of the past, present and future.
There are thus some skandhas, āyatanas and dhātus relative to
which one acquires the Prātimokṣa discipline and not the two others.
Four cases: 1. Preparatory and consecutive actions, transgressions of
disobedience, of the present-alluded to by the Prātimokşa. 2. Courses
of action of the past and future-alluded to by the last two disciplines. 3.
Courses of actions of the present-alluded to by the three disciplines. 4.
Preparatory and consecutive actions of the past and the future, with
regard to which one cannot undertake any of the three disciplines.
Objection: It is not correct to say that one undertakes the discipline
relative to the course of action of the present time: for, when one
undertakes the discipline, no bad course of action is present relative to
which one could undertake the discipline. One should say, “One
undertakes the discipline relative to the course of action whose object is
present." I can abstain from a future action relative to a person or to a
thing existing at the present time, but I cannot abstain from a past or
future action.
Does one acquire discipline or undiscipline with regard to all beings,
relative to all of their parts, and by reason of all causes?
36a-b. One acquires discipline with regard to all beings; one
must distinguish regarding the parts and the causes.
1. One acquires discipline with regard to all beings, not with regard
to only some of them.
The discipline of the Bhikṣu is acquired relative to all parts:Karma
abstention from the ten courses of action. The other disciplines are
acquired relative to four parts: abstention from killing, from stealing,
from forbidden sexuality, from lying, for, by parts of the discipline, one
should understand abstention from the courses of action.
If, by cause of the acquisition of discipline, one understands the three
roots of good (non-desire, non-hatred, non-delusion), then the dis-
cipline is acquired by reason of all these causes. If one understands by
cause the cause of the origin, samutthāpaka (iv.9b)-the mind by
which one acquires the discipline, then this cause is considered as
threefold: strong mind, mediocre mind, weak mind. The discipline is
acquired by reason of one of these three minds.
From this last point of view, four alternatives can be distinguished
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 608a20).
1. There is a person abiding in discipline, disciplined with regard to
all beings, but not disciplined relative to all the parts, nor disciplined by
reason of all causes: he who, through a strong, or mediocre, or weak
mind, has acquired the discipline of the Upasaka, the Upavāsastha or
the Śrāmaṇera. 2. There is a person abiding in the discipline, disciplined
with regard to all beings and relative to all the parts, but not disciplined
by reason of all causes: he who has acquired the discipline of the Bhikṣu
through a strong, mediocre, or weak mind. 3. There is a person residing
in discipline, disciplined with regard to all beings, relative to all the
parts, by reason of all the causes: he who has acquired each of the three
disciplines of the Upāsaka, the Śrāmaṇera and the Bhikṣu through
minds which are, respectively, weak, mediocre, and strong. 4. There is a
person residing in discipline, disciplined with regard to all beings,
disciplined by reason of all the causes, but not disciplined relative to all
the parts: he who has acquired each of the three disciplines of the
Upāsaka, the Upavāsastha and the Śrāmaṇera through minds which
are, respectively, weak, mediocre, and strong.
No one abides in discipline who is not disciplined with regard to all
beings: he acquires the discipline through a good mind having for its
object all beings. The person who makes a restriction is not completely
rid of the intention of transgression.
The Prātimokṣa discipline includes the absence of the fivefold
restriction: 1. with regard to beings, "I renounce transgressions with
regard to certain beings;" 2. with regard to parts of the discipline, "I610 Chapter Four
renounce certain actions;" 3. with regard to place, "I renounce
committing transgressions in a certain place;" 4. with regard to time, "I
renounce transgressions for a month;" 5. with regard to circumstances,
"I renounce transgressions except in the case of a quarrel." He who
undertakes such undertakings does not acquire the discipline; rather, he
does a good action similar to the acquisition of the discipline. 157
ii. How can one acquire the discipline with regard to all beings?
How can one acquire the discipline with regard to beings who are out of
range, or with regard to beings whom one cannot kill?
Because, we believe, one acquires the discipline through the
intention of not killing any being.
The Vaibhāṣikas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 623b19, second masters) give a
different explanation. If the discipline was acquired only with regard to
beings who are within range, the discipline would be liable to
augmentation and to diminution: for some humans, who are now
within range, will be reborn as gods, which are out of range; and vice
versa. The discipline would thus be acquired with regard to gods who
become human, and lost with regard to humans who become gods,
without there being any cause either of the acquisition, or of the loss of
the discipline.
This argument does not move us: the transmigration of beings
within range and out of range does not entail the augmentation or the
diminution of the discipline. For the discipline that one undertakes with
regard to grass neither increases nor diminishes when new grass arises,
nor when old grass dries up.
The Vaibhāṣikas deny the value of this comparison. Grass exists
after having been nonexistent, and no longer exists after having existed.
Living beings, on the contrary, continue to exist, sometimes as humans,
and sometimes as gods. Humans, becoming gods, only pass out of range,
whereas grass is annihilated.
But when living beings enter into Nirvāṇa, they no longer exist,
exactly like grass, so the discipline acquired with regard to living beings
is subject to diminution. Thus the explanation of the Vaibhāṣikas is
invalid.
If one objects, "In the case where the Prātimokṣa discipline would be
acquired with regard to all beings, then the discipline of later Buddhas
would be reduced in comparason with that of former Buddhas, for it1
Karma 611
would not be relative to beings who have already entered into Nirvāṇa,
to former Buddhas and their disciples", 158 we would reply: all the
Buddhas discipline all beings; and if former Buddhas were to exist again,
later Buddhas would be disciplined by them.
36c-d. Undiscipline, with regard to all, relative to all parts, and
not by reason of all causes.
One acquires undiscipline with regard to all beings and relative to all
courses of action. No one is undisciplined with an incomplete
undiscipline. One is not undisciplined by reason of all causes, un-
discipline being undertaken by a weak, mediocre, or strong mind. Let us
suppose that an undisciplined person has undertaken his undiscipline
with a weak mind and commits a murder with a strong mind: his
undiscipline remains weak, but he is adorned with a strong vijñapti,
with a strong murder.
The term "undisciplined" is explained etymologically as one "who
resides in undiscipline (asamvara), one who possesses undiscipline."
The butchers of sheep, bird-catchers, the butchers of pigs, fisher-
man, hunters, bandits, exceutioners, jailers, elephant hunters, the
slaughterers of dogs, and the vagurikas are all undisciplined. It also
holds that kings, office holders, judges, etc., are undisciplined.
A butcher of sheep (aurabbrika) is the person whose profession is
to kill sheep (urabbra).The same etymology holds for the names of the
other professions. 159
ii. We understand that discipline, undertaken with the intention of
universal benevolence, would be acquired with regard to all beings. But
the butchers of sheep do not have the intention of maltreating their
parents, their children, or their servants; they would not want to kill
them, even at the price of their lifes. How, [ask the Sautrāntikas], can
one say that they are undisciplined with regard to all beings? (Vibhāṣā,
TD 27, p. 608b20).
The Vaibhāṣikas: Because they have the intention of killing with
regard to their parents who have become sheep through trans-
migration. 160
But they do not kill their parents who have become sheep knowing
that they are their parents! Furthermore, if their parents obtain the
quality of an Aryan, these parents will not be reborn as sheep or as612 Chapter Four
animals: hence the butcher is not undisciplined with regard to them.
Finally, the argument turns against you: if the butcher is undisciplined
with regard to his present parents because he will kill his parents who
have become sheep, one would say as well that he is not undisciplined
with regard to some other sheep since he is not disposed to kill the
sheep which are reborn as humans, as his own children.
The Vaibhāṣikas: He who has the intention to kill his parents who
have become sheep is certainly undisciplined with regard to them.
But, [the Sautrāntikas say,] he who does not have the intention of
killing the sheep who have become his children is certainly not
undisciplined in their regard. Another point: how can the butcher who
does not steal, who is not an adulterer, and who is mute, be
undisciplined relative to all these transgressions?
The Vaibhāşikas: Because his intention is perverted. A mute can
express himself through gestures.
But what is there to say of a man who has accepted two or three
parts of morality?
For the Vaibhāṣikas, nondiscipline is never incomplete, that is,
relative only to certain parts; nor is it partial, that is, including
restrictions (time, place, etc.) in the practice of a certain transgression.
For the Sautrāntikas, discipline and undiscipline with the exception
of the Prātimokṣa discipline can be incomplete and partial. This
depends on the manner in which one undertakes discipline or
undiscipline: one "binds" oneself to a part of immorality, or to a certain
part of morality.
How does one acquire undiscipline? How does one acquire the
avijnaptis which are neither discipline, nor undiscipline?
37a-b. One acquires undiscipline through action or through
accepting it. 161
Persons born in a family of undisciplined persons acquire un-
discipline when they accomplish the actions preparatory to killing (iv.
68c). Persons born in other families acquire undiscipline when they
adopt such a style of life, thinking "We too shall live in this manner."
137c-d. One acquires the other avijñaptis by reason of the field, of
undertaking, of an action seriously undertaken. 162
Karma 613
1. Certain persons are a field of such a nature that by offering them a
garden, etc., one reduces avijñapti. [See below, iv.112, the doctrine of
good material works.]
2. One produces avijñapti by undertaking vows, for example, "I shall
not eat unless I have paid homage to the Buddha," "I shall give alms
food on the fast day, for a fortnight, for a month, for a year,” etc. 163
3. Action undertaken seriously, with a burning faith, with a burning
passion (iv.22d), produces avijñapti.
How does one lose discipline?
38. The Prātimokşa discipline is lost through abjuration,
through death, through hermaphroditism, through the cutting
off of the roots, and by the night coming to an end.
The stanza calls the Prātimokṣa discipline dama because it subdues
(dāmyati) the six organs.
Excluding the discipline of the fast, the Prātimokṣa discipline is lost:
1. through abjuration, intentionally renouncing the rule ¹64 in the
presence of a person capable of understanding it; 2. through the death
or abandonment of the nikayasabhāga (ii.41); 3. through the ap-
pearance of the male or the female organ according to the case; and 4.
through the cutting off of the roots of good (iv.79).
The discipline of fast is lost through these four causes and, further,
when night come to an end.
Abjuration constitutes a vijñapti in contradiction to the under-
taking; death and hermaphroditism constitute the abandoning and the
overturning of the personality who undertook the Prātimokṣa (see
iv.27a); the cutting off of the roots is the cutting off of the foundation of
the discipline itself. Finally the discipline of the fast has been created, or
projected, for a day and a night: it comes to its end when the night is
finished.
39a. Some say through a pataniya.614 Chapter Four
According to the Sautrāntikas, the discipline of the Bhikṣu and the
novice is also lost through any one of the four patanīyas, or
transgressions involving a falling away. 165
39b. Through the disappearance of the Good Law, say some
other masters.
According to the Dharmaguptakas, the Prātimokṣa discipline is lost
when the Good Law disappears: there are no longer any rules, any
boundaries, nor any ecclesiastic actions.
39c-d. The Kaśmīreans believe that the transgressor possesses
morality and immoraltity, in the manner that a person can have
riches and debts.
i. The Vaibhāṣikas of Kaśmīr say: A monk guilty of a grave
transgression, that is, of a pataniya, does not lose his Bhikṣu discipline. It
is not admissible that one loses the entire discipline by destroying only a
part of the discipline. 166 He who commits a transgression other than a
pataniya is not immoral. He who commits a pataniya is at one and the
same time moral and immoral: as a person who has both riches and
debts; but when this transgressor has confessed his transgression, he is
no longer immoral, but solely moral: as a person who has paid his debts.
ii. But the Blessed One has said, "He is not a Bhikṣu, he is not a
monk; he no longer belongs to the sons of Säkya; he falls from the
quality of Bhikṣu; his quality of monkhood is cut off, fallen, erased,
tumbled down, annihilated." 167
The Vaibhāṣikas: In this text "Bhikṣu" signifies a "true Bhikṣu:" the
transgressor, being incapable of seeing the Truths, is not a true Bhikṣu.
An inadmissable explanation: you avoid the question that the
Blessed One made "in a clear sense:" furthermore, you lead defiled
persons to the practice of immorality.
The Vaibhāşikas: How can you prove that this quotation is of clear
sense and should be taken literally?
The Blessed One has explained this himself. "There are four
Bhikṣus: a samjñābhikṣu, a Bhikṣu in name only, is a person who is
called Bhikṣu without his having been ordained; a pratijñābhikṣu, a
self-styled Bhikṣu, is one who is immoral, unchaste, etc.; a person called
Bhikṣu because he begs, 168 is a begger only; and the person who is calledKarma 615
Bhikṣu because he has cut off the defilements, that is to say, the
Arhat." 169 In the text which concerns us 170 ("He is not a Bhikṣu, he is
not a monk..."), this refers to a fifth Bhikṣu, namely a person who has
been properly ordained but who, through pataniya, loses this quality and
this discipline; it is certainly not a question of his being a true Bhikṣu, an
Arhat, for one capable of a pataniya is not a true Bhikṣu, an Arhat, but is
susceptible of losing the quality of being a true Bhikṣu.
iii. The argument that one does not lose the entire discipline
through the losing of one part of it, is refuted by the Master himself who
in fact compares a transgressor monk to a palm tree whose head is cut
off, henceforth incapable of becoming green, of growing, of developing,
or of growing larger: 171 this means that, when one part of the discipline,
the part
which is the root of the discipline, is cut off, the rest of the
discipline is incapable of growing. The pataniya or the maulī āpatti is in
contradiction to the state required of being a Bhikṣu; he embraces an
extreme absence of fear of transgression (anapatrāpya, ii.32a-b); he
breaks off the root of discipline: all his discipline is lost.
The Master excludes persons guilty of pataniya from all com-
merce ¹72 with the Bhikṣus, he prohibits them from participating with
them for even one mouthful of food, he forbids them from even setting
one foot into the monastery. He says, "He who is not a Bhikṣu but who
has the aspect of a Bhikṣu—destroy this tare, uproot this rotten tree,
drive out this plant without seed!" 173 What indeed can be the Bhikṣu
quality of this criminal?
iv. The Kaśmireans answer: He possesses the quality which consists
of his quality of Bhikṣu. For the Blessed One said, "Cunda, there are four
monks and not a fifth: the mārgajina, who triumphs through the Path;
the mārgadaisika, who teaches the Path; the mārgajīvin, who lives in
the Path; and the margadūşin, who soils the Path, the immoral
monk." 174
We believe that the Blessed One gives the name of "monk" to an
immoral monk because his external form is that of a monk. Does one
not speak of burning wood, of a dried up pond, of a parrot-nose (a motif
of architectural decoration), of rotten seed, of a circle of fire, or of a dead
being?
v. Answer of the Kaśmireans: One does not lose the quality of
monkhood through pataniya, since the Blessed One admits a monk616 Chapter Four
guilty of unchastity as a penitent. 175
We do not say that any Bhikṣu guilty of unchastity is a pārājika, a
fallen or destroyed Bhikṣu. But whoever is a pārājika is no longer a
Bhikṣu. It is the idea of hiding the crime which is decisive here: if, thanks
to the excellence of his moral dispositions, thanks to the excellence of
his "series," the guilty one does not have the thought of concealing his
fault for an instant, then the King of the Law admits him as a penitant.
The Kaśmireans: If a pārājika is no longer a Bhikṣu, why is he not
again admitted to ordination?
Because he is susceptible to discipline: his mental dispositions are
ruined and overturned by the excess of imprudence (anapatrapya,
ii.32a-b). Also, even if he had renounced the rules (nikṣiptaśikṣa, iv.38)
[after his transgression], he cannot be ordained again. To what good
does this discussion lead? If a similar Bhikṣu is a Bhikṣu, we pay homage
to this quality of Bhikṣu. 176
vi. When the Good Law disappears, all ecclesiastical acts become
impossible, and as a consequence also all acquisition of the discipline.
But he who possesses the discipline will not lose it (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
608cll).
How does one lose the discipline of dhyāna (iv.17b) and the pure
discipline?
40a-b. The "good" of the sphere of dhyana is lost through a
change of state and through falling. 177
All of the good of the sphere of dhyāna, that is, material and
non-material good, is lost through two causes: 1. through arising in a
superior or inferior stage: this refers to the "good" which appears to
persons arisen in the heavens of Rūpadhātu; 2. through falling away:
when the ascetic falls away from this absorption.
One should add a third cause, [according to vi.21:] the Prthagjana
loses certain good dharmas through death even when he is reborn in the
same heavenly stage from whence he died.
40c. The same for the good of Arūpyadhātu.
{Karma 617
It is lost through the changing of the stage or through falling away.
Note that discipline does not exist in this sphere.
40c-d. Pure good is lost through the obtaining of a result,
through perfection of the faculties, or through falling away.
1. By obtaining a result, the Aryan abandones the good dharmas of
the path of the candidate (pratipannakamārga, which is threefold,
prayoga, änantarya, vimukti, vi.65b); 2. when he perfects his faculties
(indriyasaṁcāra, vi.29), he abandons the path of weak faculties; and 3.
when he falls, he abandons the result or the path of a superior result
(vi.32).
41 a-b. Undiscipline is lost through the acquisition of discipline,
through death, or through hermaphroditism.
i. Acquisition of the discipline: either he ritually undertakes the
Prātimokṣa discipline; or, through the efficacy of an internal cause
(hetu-sabhāgahetu, ii.52) or an external cause (the teaching of another),
one obtains the absorption which constitutes the discipline of
dhyāna. 178 The discipline of dhyāna cuts off undiscipline, being a
threefold change hostile to undiscipline.
Death and hermaphroditism are, respectively, the abandoning and
the overturning of the person through which undiscipline had been
undertaken.
ii. An undisciplined person who rejects the tools of his work, dagger
and net, even with the intention of no longer committing murder, does
not by this cut off his undiscipline if he does not undertake the discipline.
Illness does not improve without medicine, even though one may avoid
the causes of illness.
iii. Does an undisciplined person who undertakes the discipline of
the fast remain undisciplined when he departs from the fast, or rather,
does he find himself in the intermediary state, neither-disciplined-nor-
undisciplined?
Opinions differ. For some, 179 he is found to be undisciplined, for the
person who undertakes the fast does not have the intention of
definitively renouncing transgressions: a mass of iron turned red
returns to its original state.618 Chapter Four
For others, 180 once an undisciplined person has departed from the
fast, he is no longer undisciplined, for the acquisition of indiscipline
supposes a physical or vocal action (vijñapti).
How does one lose avijñapti which is neither discipline nor
undiscipline (iv.131-b)?
41c-d. Intermediate avijñapti is lost through the cutting off of
the force, the undertaking, the action, the object, the life, and the
roots.
We have seen (iv.37c-d) how one acquires avijññapti which differs
from discipline and from indiscipline.
This avijñapti is lost by reason of six causes: (1) when the intense
force of faith, or the defilements which have projected the avijñapti,
come to an end. Example: the movement of the arrow and the potter's
wheel; (2) when one renounces the undertaking, "From this moment
onward, I shall no longer do that which I was engaged in doing;" 181 (3)
when one cuts off the action, that is to say, when one does not do that
which one was engaged in doing, [for example: venerating the Buddha,
making a maṇḍalaka before eating (see note 163)]; 182 (4) when the
object is cut off: the caitya, the garden, the monastery, the bed, the seat,
which one was in engaged in venerating or in giving; the instrument,
the net, etc.; 183 (5) when life is cut off; and (6) when one begins to cut off
the roots of good. 184
42a-b. Good non-material action, of the sphere of Kamadhātu, is
lost through the cutting off of the roots, and through arising in a
superior sphere.
We have explained how material action, namely bodily action, vocal
action, and the avijñapati, is cut off. Good non-material action of
Kāmadhātu is lost thorough the cutting off of the roots of good, and
through birth in Rūpadhātu or Ārūpyadhātu, ¹85
42c-d. That which is defiled and non-material is lost through the
arising of its opposite.F
All that which is defiled, of whatever sphere, is lost through the
arising of the Path which opposes this defilement. This refers to a path
of abandoning (prahāṇamārga, distinct from vimuktimārga, vi.65b)
which can be Seeing or Meditation, and which can be worldly or
transworldly. This Path causes the abandonment of a certain category of
upakleśa 186 and, with it, all its attendant prāptis, etc.
Karma 619
What beings are susceptible to discipline and to undiscipline?
43a-d. Humans-with the exception of the two categories of
eunuchs, hermaphrodites, and the Kurus-are susceptible of
undiscipline; the same for the discipline which pertains also to
the gods.
f
Undiscipline exists only among humans. One must furthermore
except sandhas and pandakas, hermaphrodites 187 and beings in
Uttarakuru.
Discipline exists among humans, with the above-mentioned
exception, and among the gods: 188 thus, it exists in two realms of
rebirth.
1. Eunuchs are not susceptible of discipline: this results from the
Sūtra, "Oh Mahānāma, white clothed laymen, male and possessing the
male organ..." (iv.30a-b), and from the Vinaya, "One must expel such
a person."
Why is this?
Because they possess, to an extreme degree, the defilements of the
two sexes; because they are incapable of the reflection necessary to
combat these defilements; and because the vigor of respect and fear (hrī,
apatrāpya, ii.32a-b) is absent in them.
Why are they not susceptible to undiscipline?
Because the intention of committing transgressions is not strong
among them; because undiscipline is opposed to discipline; and only one
who is susceptible to discipline is susceptible to undiscipline.
2. The Uttarakurus are lacking the undertaking of any discipline,
from whence there is an absence of the Prātimokşa discipline; and they
lack absorption, 189 from whence there is an absence of the other two620 Chapter Four
disciplines. On the other hand, the intention of committing trans-
gressions is absent in them.
3. In the painful realms of rebirth there is no vigor of respect and
fear: now a vigorous respect and fear are necessary for discipline; in
order for there to be indiscipline, it is necessary to destroy respect and
fear (iv.97b).
Neither discipline nor undiscipline can arise in the bodies, or in the
persons, of eunuchs, hermaphordites, and beings in the realms of
painful rebirth, for these bodies are similar to soil saturated with salt
wherein there can neither grow wheat, nor bad herbs.
Objection: The Sūtra says, “Oh Bhikṣu, there is a Nāga born from an
egg (iii.9a) which, each eighth day of the fortnight, leaves its dwelling,
and comes to undertake the eightfold fast." (Samyutta, iii.,241; Vibhāṣā,
TD 27, p. 648c19; compare with Visuddhimagga, 300).
This refers, for the Nāgas, not to discipline, but to good actions.
Discipline exists thus solely among humans and among the gods.
43d. The three disciplines exist among humans.
These three are the Prātimokṣa discipline, discipline arisen from
dhyāna, and pure discipline.
44a-b. Discipline of dhyāna exists among the gods of Kāma-
dhātu and Rūpadhātu. 1⁹⁰
Not in higher spheres.
44b-d. So too the pure discipline, with the exception of the gods
of the intermediate dhyāna and the Asaṁjñisattvas; and also in
Ārūpyadhātu. 191
It exists in Rūpadhātu with the exception of the dhyanāntarikas of
beings arisen in intermediate dhyāna, and the Asaṁjñisattvas; and in
Arūpyadhātu. The gods of Arūpyadhātu never in fact manifest this
discipline, since discipline is matter, rūpa; but they can "possess” it (see
iv.82). 192
Following the examination of action, the author now defines the
diverse categories of action which are taught in different Sūtras.Karma 621
There are three actions, good, bad, and neutral (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
263a6).
45a-b. Good action is salutary, bad action is pernicious, and
action differing from good and bad is different from the salutary
and the pernicious.
Such is the definition of good action, etc.
Good action is salutary, because it is of agreeable retribution and as a
consequence it protects one from suffering for a time (: this is good, but
impure action); or rather, because it brings about the attainment of
Nirvāṇa and, as a consequence, definitively protects one from suffering
(: this is good, pure action).
Bad action is pernicious: this is action of disagreeable retribution.
Action concerning which the Blessed One does not say whether it is
good or bad, that is, morally neutral action, is neither salutary nor
pernicious.
45c-d. There are meritorious actions, demeritorious actions, and
non-agitated actions; and three actions of which the action of
agreeable feeling is the first.
There are three actions: meritorious action, demeritorious action,
and non-agitated action. There are three actions: action of agreeable
feeling, action of disagreeable feeling, and action of neither disagreeable
nor agreeable feeling.
46a-b. Meritorious action is a good action in Kāmadhātu; non-
agitated action is a good action above there. 193
Good action of the sphere of Kamadhātu is called "meritorious"
action, because it purifies, and because it produces an agreeable
retribution, 194
"Good action above there," that is to say, of the two higher spheres,
is called "non-agitated." 195
But did not the Blessed One say that the first three Dhyānas are
agitated? Did he not say that "the Aryans say that the vitarkita and the
vicarita of the First Dhyāna are agitation?" 1⁹6
The Blessed One said in fact that the first three Dhyānas are
agitated, but he is saying this from the point of view of the corrupted622
Chapter Four
characteristics of these dhyānas (iii.101c, vi.24a, and the full explanation
viii. 11); their vices are what agitate them. But in the Iñjitasūtra, 197 the
Blessed One declared that these dhyānas are non-agitated because he
considerd them a pathway favorable to non-agitation. 1⁹8
But why term that which is agitated non-agitated? 199
46c-d. Because, with regard to that which concerns its retribu-
tion, action of the domain of the higher stages does not vary.
Action of the sphere of Kāmadhātu is agitated in its retribution. The
place of retribution is not fixed: one action which produces, naturally, a
certain realm of rebirth, can be retributed in another one; an action
which produces a heavenly realm of rebirth can be retributed in another
heavenly realm of rebirth. In fact it happens that actions which produce
power, a good figure, beauty, or objects of enjoyment, instead of being
retributed in a heavenly realm of rebirth, are retributed in a human,
animal, or Preta realm of rebirth through the efficacy of certain causes.
But no cause can make an action of the sphere of Rūpadhātu or
Arūpyadhātu be retributed in any but the sphere which is proper to it.
Bad action is demeritorious. This is well known in the world and
there is no good reason to insist on what is well known in the world.
As for actions of agreeable feeling, etc.:
47a-b. Good action, up to the Third Dhyāna, is of agreeable
feeling. 200
Agreeable sensation 201 does not exist above the Third Dhyānas: it
thus has Kāmadhātu and the first three Dhyānas for its domain. Hence
the retribution of good action is of agreeable feeling up to the Third
Dhyana. Action having such a retribution is called "of agreeable
sensation" (see iv.49).
47b-c. Above, it is of neither agreeable nor disagreeable
sensation, 202
Agreeable and disagreeable sensation do not exist above the Third
Dhyana. There only remains the sensation of indifference, which is the
only retribution of good action retributed above the Third Dhyāna.
47c-d. Bad action, here below, is of disagreeable sensation. 203Karma 623
Bad action is of disagreeable sensation. The kārikā says "here below"
in order to indicate that this action exists only in Kāmadhātu.
Is the result of all these actions only sensation?
No; they also have the apparatus of sensation as their (retributive)
result. 204
48a. According to some, intermediary action also exists
below, 205
According to others, intermediary action that is, action which has
for its retribution neither agreeable nor disagreeable sensation also
exists below the Fourth Dhyāna, (contrary to the doctrine iv.47a-c; see
Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 596b13; two arguments, 48b and 48c-d.)
48b. Since there is no retribution with regard to dhyānāntara. 206
If intermediary action is absent below the Fourth Dhyāna, there
would not be any retribution of dhyānāntara action, 207 or rather, 208
there would not be any retribution of any action whatsoever in
dhyānāntara, 20⁹ for there are no agreeable and disagreeable sensations
therein.
[Responding to this argument,] some say that the retribution of
dhyānāntara action is the sensation of pleasure (sukhendriya, ii.7;
viii.9b) of the dhyāna itself; 2¹0 some others say that the retribution of
this action is not sensation, (but rūpa, etc.).211
These two opinions are in contradiction to the Śāstra (Jñāna-
prasthāna, TD 26, p. 973a20), "Does it happen that an action is solely
mental sensation? Yes, the retribution of a good action which was free
from vitarka."212
48c-d. Because it is admitted that the retribution of the three
types of action takes place at the one and same time.
This is the second reason why one should admit that intermediary
action exists below the Fourth Dhyāna.
The Sastra says in the same place, "Does it happen that there is at
one and the same time retribution of the three types of action? Yes.624 Chapter Four
There can take place at the same time: (1) the retribution of an action of
agreeable sensation, namely of material dharmas, [the organ of seeing,
etc.]; (2) the retribution of an action of disagreeable sensation, namely
the mind and the mental states [excluding dissatisfaction, ii. 10b-c]; (3)
the retribution of an action of neither agreeable nor disagreeable
sensation, namely the dharmas dissociated from the mind, [vital organ,
etc., ii.35]."
Now, the three types of action cannot be retributed simultaneously
outside of Kāmadhātu, for the retribution of action of disagreeable
sensation takes place only in Kamadhātu (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 615c4).
T
Is the action of neither agreeable nor disagreeable sensation [when
it belongs to a stage lower than the Fourth Dhyana] good or bad?
It is good, but of weak force.
But didn't you say that "good action, up to the Third Dhyāna, is of
agreeable sensation (iv.47a)?"
This definition refers to cases in general.
But how can one say that action is of agreeable sensation? Action, by
its nature, is not sensation, 213
One expresses oneself in this way because action is favorable to
agreeable sensation; or rather, because its retribution is agreeably
sensed. In the same way that one calls bathing clothes, snānīyakāṣāya,
"the clothes with which one bathes," in that same way one terms "to be
sensed" (vedaniya) action through which one senses a retribution.
Further,
49. There are five ways of being vedaniya, "sensed," "ex-
perienced:" of itself, through sensation, as an object, by being
retributed, and by the fact of its presence. 214
1. Sensation, by its nature, is feeling. Agreeable sensation is
agreeable experience, etc. (i.14c; ii.24).
2. Contact is feeling because it is associated with sensation: contact
deelnKarma
of agreeable sensation, etc. (Samyukta, TD 2, p. 88a4 et passim,
Samyutta, v.211; Kośa, ii. trans. p. 169 and 180).
3. The six objects (visaya) of the six organs are feeling in the role of
object (ālambana), "Seeing color with the eye, he experiences, he feels
the color, but he does not feel the color with affection." 215 Color is thus
the object of sensation.
4. Action is feeling in its role of being retributed, "an action
experienced in the present existence" (Madhyama, TD 1, p. 433all).
5. Sensation is feeling through the fact of its appearance. "When he
feels, when he experiences agreeable sensation, two sensations, the
disagreeable and the neutral, are then found to be obstructed by it:"216
hence when agreeable sensation is functioning, there is no other
sensation through which one would feel it. Thus if one says that this
sensation is "to be felt" (vedaniya), this is because it is present.
50a. This action is determinate or indeterminate. 217
The action (agreeable sensation, etc.) that we have just described is
either determinate, that is, "which will necessarily be felt," or
indeterminate, "which will not be necessarily felt."
50b-c. Determinate action is of three types, to be experienced in
the present life, etc. 218
Determinate action is: (1) to be experienced in the present life; (2)
to be experienced after having been reborn, in other words in the next
immediate life; and (3) to be experienced later.
By adding indeterminate action, this makes, from the point of view
of the modality of retribution, four types.
50c-d. According to one opinion, action is of five types. 219
By dividing indeterminate action into two categories: that which is
indeterminate with regard to the period of its retribution, but whose
retribution is in any case certain; and that which is indeterminate with
regard to its retribution, which can be not retributed.
Action experienced in the present life is action which ripens or is626 Chapter Four
retributed in the same existence in which it was accomplished. Action
experienced after being reborn is action which is retributed in the
existence which follows that in which it was accomplished. Action
experienced later is action which is retributed in a later existence, from
the third existence on.
But, some other masters, [the Sautrāntikas], cannot admit that a
very strong action has a weak retribution. Consequently, the retribution
of an action experienced in the present life can continue into other
existences; yet, as this retribution begins in the present life, this action is
said "to be experienced in the present life."
The Vaibhāṣikas do not accept this way of looking at it. There is,
they say, some actions whose results are near, and some actions whose
results are distant. In the same way flax bears its fruit after two and a
half months, but wheat and godhūma after six months. 220
51a. Others distinguish four alternatives. 221
The Dārṣṭāntikas 222 distinguish four cases: 1. Action determined
with regard to the period of its retribution, but indeterminate with
regard to its retribution. If this action is retributed, it will certainly be
retributed at such a moment, but it is not necessarily retributed: this is
niyatavedaniya, but aniyatavipāka action. 2. Action determined with
regard to its retribution, but indeterminate with regard to the period of
its retribution. This action will be retributed, but the period of its
retribution remains undetermined: niyatavipāka, but aniyatavedaniya.3.
Action determinate from two points of view: niyatavipāka and
niyatavedaniya.4. Action indeterminate from two points of view:
aniyatavipāka and aniyatavedaniya.
According to this system there are eight types of actions: 1. action
experienced in the present existence and of certain retribution, 2. action
experienced in the present existence and of possible retribution... 7.
action which can be experienced in any existence, but of certain
retribution; and 8. action which can be experienced in any existence and
of only possible retribution (aniyatavipāka).
But actions defined in Scripture as "to be experienced in this life,"
etc., are always of certain retribution; action defined as "indeterminate"
may not be retributed (iv.50a-c). 223
◄Karma
Does it happen that a person produces or projects all four types of
actions at one and the same time?
Yes. Suppose that a man has murder, stealing, and lying committed
by another person; he himself commits adultery; and that these four
actions, which belong respectively to the four types, are committed at
the same instant (iv.67).
51b. Three types of actions project existence.
Action experienced in the present existence does not project the
present existence (nikāyasabhāga, ii.41a); this has been projected by a
former action.
How many types of action can be produced in the different spheres
of existence and in the different realms of rebirth?
51c. Fourfold production throughout.
In the three spheres of existence and in all of the realms of rebirth
the four types of good or bad action can be produced. But this general
rule has some restrictions. On the one hand, there is no bad action above
Kāmadhātu; on the other hand (51d-53):
51d. Good action, in the hells, is solely of three types.
In the hells, one can produce good action to be experienced in the
next existence, good action to be experienced in a later existence, and
good action which is indeterminate; but no good action to be
experienced in the present existence, for there is no agreeable
retribution in the hells.
52a-b. When he is firm, the fool does not produce any action to
be experienced, at the stage from whence he is detached, in his
next existence.
"When he is firm," that is, when he is not subject to falling away
(aparihāṇadharman, vi.56; see Puggalapaññatti, p. 12)
"The fool" refers to a Pṛthagjana.
"When he is detached from a certain stage," that is, when he is628 Chapter Four
delivered from attachment with regard to a certain plane of existence
(Kāmadhātu, the First Dhyāna...), in this stage he never produces
action to be experienced in his next rebirth.
52c. The Āryan no longer produces any action to be experienced
in a later existence.
When he is firm, the Saint does not produce, in the stage from
whence he is detached, any action to be experienced either in the next
existence or in a later existence.
In fact, the Prthagjana incapable of falling away is not reborn, in the
next existence, in the stage from whence he is detached; and a Saint
incapable of falling away is never reborn at this stage.
Both produce, relative to the stage wherein they are born, actions to
be experienced in the present existence, and indeterminate action.
52d. The Äryan, not firm, when he is detached from Kāmadhātu
or from Bhavagra, the same.
An Aryan detached from Kāmadhātu is an Anāgāmin (vi.36).
An Aryan detached from Bhavägra or naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana,
the last stage of Ārūpyadhātu, is an Arhat (vi.45).
Even when they are subject to falling away, that is to say, susceptible
of losing the results obtained, these Saints do not produce action to be
experienced in the next existence, nor in a subsequent existence, either
in Kämadhātu or in Bhavagra.
We shall explain (vi.60) how the Saint, subject to falling away,
always reacquires the results before dying.
Does the intermediate being (antarābhava, iii.12c) produce any
actions?
53a-b. The intermediate being, in Kāmadhātu, produces twenty-
two types of actions. 224
The embryo passes through five states, kalala, arbuda, pesin, ghana,
and praśākhā.A human being passes through five states, as an infant, an
adolescent, a grown person, a mature person, and an old person. 225Karma 629
The intermediate creature produces determinate actions to be
experienced as an intermediate being, as kalala, as arbuda... as an infant,
as an adolescent....there are eleven types of determinate actions. In this
same way he produces eleven indeterminate actions.
53c. These actions bear their results in the present existence.
The eleven determinate actions of the intermediate being belong to
the category
"to be experienced in the present existence."
Why?
53d. For all these states form, together with the intermediate
existence, only a single existence. 226
The intermediate existence and the ten states which follow it are
projected by a single action (iii.13). Thus one does not distinguish an
action "to be experienced in the intermediate existence:" this is
projected, in fact, by the action itself which is to be experienced in the life
which follows the intermediate existence. 227
By virtue of what characteristics is an action determinate, that is to
say, necessarily retributed?
54. Action accomplished through intense defilement or through
intense faith, with regard to the field of qualities, continually,
and the murdering of a father and a mother, are determinate.
Action accomplished through intense defilement, action accom-
plished through intense faith, action accomplished with regard to a field
of qualities, and action continually accomplished, are determinate.
"Field of qualities" signifies either the Three Jewels, or certain
persons, namely the possessors of the results, or Saints (Srotaäpanna,
etc.), and the possessors of certain absorptions (nirodhasamāpatti,
ii.44d; araṇā, vii.35c; maitrī, viii.29). Action accomplished with regard
to these fields, even in the absence of an intense thought of defilement
or of faith, or of continuity, is determinate, whether it is good or bad.
The same for the murder of one's father or mother, with whatever
intention it was committed. 228630 Chapter Four
All other action-which is done with a weak defilement, etc.-is
indeterminate.
By virtue of what characteristic is an action experienced in the
present existence?
55a-b. Action bears result in the present existence by reason of
certain characteristics of the field and the intention. 229
By reason of the excellence of the field, even though the intention
may be weak: for example, the Bhikṣu who becomes a woman through
having insulted the Sangha, "You are nothing but women!"
By reason of the excellence of the intention: for example the eunuch
who delivered bulls from the danger of being castrated, and so regained
his own sexuality. 230
Or still further:
55c. And also, when one is definitively detached with regard to
the stage in which the action appears.
When a person is definitively detached from a certain stage (iv.52),
he cannot anymore be reborn in this stage: as a consequence, action
retributable in this stage, but in another existence, whether it is good or
bad, changes its nature and becomes retributable in the present
existence.
55d. Action "determinate with regard to retribution." 231
This refers to action having a necessary retribution, but in-
determinate with regard to the period of its retribution: this action will
be retributed in the present life.
As for action determinate with regard to the period of its
retribution, it will be retributed in the period for which it is determinate:
the person for whom actions should be retributed, in this first rebirth, in
a certain stage, cannot be definitively detached from this stage.
As for action non-determinate with regard to the retribution itself,
it will not be retributed if one detaches himself from the stage where it
could have been retributed.***
Karma 631
Which field confers on an action which is in a relationship with it,
the quality of being necessarily retributed in the present existence?
In general, it is the Sangha of Bhikṣus having at its head the Buddha;
to enumerate its persons, there are five types of persons:
56. Persons who have left either nirodha, or maitrī, or araṇā, or
Seeing the Truths, or the result of Arhat: all good and all bad
with regard to them is immediately retributed. 232
The person who leaves the absorption of extinction (nirodha-
samāpatti, ii.41c, viii.33): in this absorption he has obtained an extreme
tranquility of thought, for this absorption is similar to Nirvāṇa. When
he leaves it, it is as if he had gone to Nirvāṇa and has returned from it.
The person who leaves the absorption which arrests the defile-
ments of another (araṇāsamāpatti, viii.35c): in this absorption, his
mental series is endowed with the intention of placing an infinite
number of beings into the absence of defilement; when he leaves it, his
series is penetrated with an intense and measureless merit.
The person who leaves the absorption of compassion (maitrī-
samāpatti, viii.29): in this absorption, his series is endowed with the
intention of increasing the well-being of an infinite number of beings;
when he leaves it, his series is penetrated with an intense and
measureless merit.
The person who leaves the Path of Seeing the Truths: 233 in this
Path, he has abandoned all the defilements which are abandoned
through Seeing the Truths. When he leaves it, his series is thus pure,
since his personality has just been renewed.
The person who leaves the result of Arhat, that is to say, who has
just acquired the result of Arhat: he has just achieved the abandoning of
all the defilements which are abandoned through Meditation on the
Truths. His series is pure, since his personality has just been renewed.
This is why good or bad actions, well or badly done, with regard to
these five persons, bear a result in the present existence (Vibhāṣā, TD
27, p. 782c27).
The Paths of Meditation through which one obtains the results of
Sakṛdāgāmin and of Anāgāmin, are incomplete in themslves and in632 Chapter Four
their result. Persons who leave the conquest of these two results are not
fields of merit comparable to an Arhat. Their series is not pure; their
personalities have not been recently renewed.
The essential element of retribution is sensation.
Can the retribution of a certain action be excusively mental
sensation, and not bodily sensation (kāyiki, ii.7)? And can the
retribution of a certain action be bodily sensation, and not mental
sensation?
57a-c. Sensation, the result of good action free from vitarka, is
xclusively mental.
Actions of the the sphere of dhyānāntara, the interval between the
First and Second Dhyānas (iv.48b), and the actions of the higher stages
are free from vitarka (ii.31, viii.23c). Like bodily sensation, that is to say,
associated with the five sense consciousnesses, which always embraces
vitarka and vicāra (i.32), it cannot be the result of a retribution of an
action free from vitarka. 234
57d. Sensation, which is the result of a bad action, is exclusively
physical.
A sensation, the result of retribution of a bad action, is painful;
painful mental sensation is what is termed a sensation of dissatisfaction.
We have established that dissatisfaction is never the result of retribution
(ii. 10b-c). 235
But if dissatisfaction, or painful mental sensation, is not retribution,
in which consciousness-visual consciousness, etc., mental conscious-
ness-is mental trouble or trouble-of-the-mind, which is painful
sensation, produced? [Apparently it is the retribution of a bad action].
58a. Mental-trouble is produced in the mental consciousness. 236
The expression that the Kārikā uses, manascitta, “mental thought,"Spekta
Karma
is equivalent to the expression manovijñāna, “mental consciousness,
consciousness of the manas."
The five sense consciousnesses cannot be troubled because they are
free from imagining, inquiry and memory, and mental trouble is the
imagining of that which does not exist (asadvikalpa, i.33).
58b. It arises from the retribution of action.
Mental trouble arises from the retribution of action.
The person who troubles and deranges the mind of another
through curses and formulas; the person who causes another to drink
poison or alcohol when he does not want to drink it; the person who
frightens game, either in the hunt, or by setting the jungle on fire, or by
the hollowing out of traps; and the person who, by whatever means,
troubles the memory and the presence of mind of another, will have his
own mind troubled, deprived of the aid of his memory through the
effect of the retribution of these actions. 237
58c-d. Through fear, the attack of demons, irritation of the
elements, and fear. 238
1. Demon beings, 239 with horrible features, will approach such a
person: seeing them, the person is frightened and his mind is troubled.
2. Furious at the evil conduct of humans, demon beings will hit them in
their vital parts. 3. The primary elements of the body will lose their
equilibrium: the wind, heat and liquid will be irritated. 4. Fear also
troubles the mind, for example in the case of Vāsiṣṭhī, etc. 240
But, one would say, if mental trouble, or trouble of the mental
consciousness, arises from the retribution of action, how can one say
that this mental sensation is not retribution?
We do not say that trouble of the mind-a troubled mind-is
retribution of action, but that it arises from the retribution of action.
The primary elements in a state of disequilibrium are retribution: the
troubled mind proceeds from it; it thus arises from retribution. One says
that the mind is troubled when,-by reason of the disequilibrium or the
irritation of the humors, which results from action, the mind is634 Chapter Four
deranged, anarchic, devoid of mindfulness.
Four alternatives: 1. The mind troubled without being disturbed: the
mind undefiled but troubled; 2. the mind disordered without being
troubled: the mind defiled, but tranquil; 3. the mind troubled and
disordered; [and 4. the mind neither troubled nor disordered].
Among whom is trouble of the mind produced?
58d. Among beings in Kāmadhātu, with the exception of the
Kurus.
Among the gods of Kāmadhātu, there are two madnesses; all the
more so is there madness among humans, Pretas, and animals.
Beings in hell always have troubled minds: their vital parts are
incessantly hurt by thousands of different torments; they are crushed
down by suffering; they do not recognize themselves, so they do not
distinguish that which they should do and that which they should avoid.
We give as an example a being in hell who laments by saying, "Ah! The
mind!"
With the exception of the Buddha, the Āryans are not free from
trouble of the mind: their thoughts can be troubled following the
disequilibrium of the elements. But their disequilibrium of the elements
is never retribution: for "determinate" actions where retribution could
produce trouble of the mind are retributed before they have obtained
the Path, and "indeterminate" actions will not bear their results due to
the fact that the Path is obtained. Neither terror, nor the attack of
demon beings, nor fear can trouble the mind of the Aryans, for they are
above the five fears, 241 they do no disobedient actions which excite the
fury of demon beings, for they completely know the nature of things. 242
The Sūtra teaches that there are three crookednesses, crookedness
of the body, speech, and mind; and thus three corruptions and three
stains.Karma 635
59a-b. What is termed crookedness, corruption, stains, 243 is
action arisen from hypocrisy, hatred, and attachment.
Action of the body, speech, and mind which arises from hypocrisy,
proceeds from crookedness, and is called crookedness (kautilya, vi.50b);
action which arises from hatred, proceeds from hatred, and is called
corruption; and action which arises from attachment, proceeds from
stain, and is termed stain. 244
59c-d. Action is of four types, white, black, etc. 245
The Sūtra teaches that action is of four types: black, of black
retribution; white, of white retribution; black-white, of black-white
retribution; neither black nor white, without black or white retribution;
and that which destroys the other actions.
60. Bad actions, good action of Rūpa, good actions of Kāma, are,
respectively, black, white, black-white; action which destroys the
other actions is pure action. 246
1. Bad action, being defiled, is absolutely black; retribution, being
painful, is black.
2. Good action of the sphere of Rupadhātu, not mixed with the bad,
is absolutely white; its retribution, being agreeable, is white (see above
p. 621, aniñjya action).
Objection: Why not say the same for good action of the sphere of
Ārūpyadhātu?
Because 247 the qualification "white" applies only to action which has
two retributions (i.e., in intermediate existence and in an existence
proper),248 and which is threefold, bodily, vocal and mental. Now action
of the sphere of Ārūpyadhātu does not present these characteristics.
But the Sūtra describes action of the sphere of Arūpyadhātu as white
and of white retribution. 249
3. Good action of the sphere of Kāmadhātu, being mixed with the
bad, is black-white; its retribution is mixed, so it is thus black-white.
This definition is to be understood as applying, not to the nature of
the action itself, but to the "series" or the person; in one and the same
mental series, good action is mixed with bad action. There is no action
which is black-white, nor any retribution which is black-white, which
would be a contradiction, 250636 Chapter Four
Objection: But bad action is also mixed with white action, hence bad
action should be defined as black-white.
Bad action is not necessarily mixed with good action; whereas, in
Kāmadhātu, good action is necessarily mixed with bad, because, in this
sphere, the bad is stronger than the good. 251
4. Pure action destroys the other three types of action. Not being
defiled, it is not black; not being retributiion, 252 it is not white. It is
"non-white" (aśukla).
This expression of the Sutra, afukla, is "intentional:" the Blessed
One wishes to oppose pure action to white action; but, speaking in the
Mahāśūnyatāsūtra²53 of the dharmas proper to the Arhat, he expresses
himself thus, "The dharmas of the Arhat, Oh Ananda, are absolutely
white, absolutely good, absolutely irreprochable." And one reads in the
Treatise, 254 "What are the white dharmas? The good dharmas and the
neutral dharmas?"
Pure action does not have any retribution, for it is not of the domain
of the spheres of existence; in fact, it arrests the process of existence. 255
Does any pure action destroy all the actions of the first three
categories, black, white, or black-white?
No.
61. A volition may be of twelve types, namely the volition of the
dharmakṣāntis and of the first eight paths of abandoning in the
detachment of Kāmadhātu: such is the action which destroys
black action. 256
Four volitions correspond to the four dharmakṣāntis of the Path of
Seeing the Truths; eight volitions correspond to the first eight paths of
abandoning in the detachment of Kāmadhātu: in all twelve volitions, all
pure actions which destroy bad actions.
62a-b. The volition of the ninth is the action which destroys
black-white action.
The volition which corresponds to the ninth path of abandoning in
the detachment of Kāmadhātu is the pure action which causes the
abandoning of black-white action and black action, for at this moment
one abandons, in its entirety, good action of Kāmadhātu (which is
black-white) and the ninth and last category of bad action.Karma 637
62c-d. Volition which arises in the last paths of abandoning of
the detachment of the dhyanas destroys good action.
The volition of the ninth and last path of abandoning which
produces detachment of Kāmadhātu with regard to each dhyāna is
fourfold volition which destroys white action.
Objection: The first eight paths of abandoning in the detachment of
Kāmadhātu destroy black action. But you attribute the power to destroy
white-black and white action (good and impure actions: kuśalasäsrava)
solely to the ninth path of abandoning. Why is this?
There is not, properly speaking, abandonment of any good
dharmas, for even if they are abandoned, the good dharmas can
reappear; but when the defilement which has this dharma for its object
is destroyed this dharma is said to be abandoned. Therefore as long as
the last category of defilement which can grasp it as its object is not
destroyed, this good dharma is not considered abandoned. [Now it is the
ninth path of abandoning which breaks the prapti of the ninth category
of defilement relative to each sphere (Kāmadhātu, dhyānas) and, as a
consequence, allows one to obtain disconnection (ii.57d) from this
defilement). 257
63a-b. According to others, the first two actions are retributed in
hell and retributed moreover in Kāmadhātu.
According to other masters (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 590al) action
which should be experienced in hell is black action; action which should
be experienced elsewhere in Kāmadhātu, in addition to hell, is black-
white action. Infernal retribution is produced exclusively through bad
action: as a consequence, action which should be experienced in hell is
black action. Retribution in Kamadhātu, with the exception of hell, is
exclusively produced by good-bad action (that is, by good action mixed
with bad action).
63c-d. According to others, arisen in Kāma, actions are black
when they can be abandoned through Seeing the Truths; they
are black-white in the contrary case. 258
According to other masters (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 590c5) action which
is abandoned through Seeing the Truths, not being mixed with the638 Chapter Four
good, 259 is black. All other actions of Kāmadhātu, namely action which
is abandoned through Meditation, is black-white, that is, good mixed
with bad.
The Sūtra says, "There are three silences, silence of the body, voice,
and of the mind." 260
64a-c. Afaikṣa, that is, an Arhat's, actions of the body, voice and
mind, are, in this order, the three silences. 261
Silence of the body and silence of the voice is bodily and vocal action
which belongs to the Arhat. 262 Silence of the mind is the mind or
thought which belongs to an Arhat: this is not mental action.
Why is this?
Because the mind is the true Silent One, the true Muni.
The Vahāṣikas say that one knows through inference-by reason of
the actions of the body and voice-that the mind is afaikṣa.
But an Arhat's bodily and vocal action, is, in its nature, “abstention,"
whereas the action of the mind is not, by nature, "abstention," because
three is no avijnapti of the mind. 263
But "silence" is abstention, thus the mind itself "which abstains"
receives the name of silence.
Why does only the mind of the Arhat receive this name?
Because the Arhat is the true Silent One through the cessation of all
murmuring of his defilements.
The Sūtra says, "There are three purifications, purification of the
body, purification of the voice, and purification of the mind." 264
64c-d. The threefold good practice in its entirety is the threefold
purification.
All the good practices of the body, pure or impure, are a purification
of the body, because, either for a time or in a definitive manner, they
efface the impurity of the defilements and bad practices.Karma 639
The same holds for the voice and mind.
This teaching has for its goal the instruction of persons who take a
false silence for silence, and a false purification of purification.265
The Sūtra 266 says that there are three bad practices.
65a-b. The bad actions of the body, speech and mind are
regarded as being the three bad practices.
Bad actions of the body are the bad practices of the body and so on. 267
65c-d. Even though greed, wickedness, anger and false views are
not actions, they constitute a threefold bad practice of the mind.
Further, there are three bad practices of the mind which, by their
nature, are not mental action: 268 greed, wickedness or harm, and false
views.
The Dārṣṭāntikas 269 say that greed, wickedness and false views are,
in fact, mental actions, for the Samcetaniyasūtra considers them as
actions, 270
The Vaibhāṣikas: In this hypothesis, defilements and actions would
be the same thing.
The Dārṣṭāntikas: What harm do you see in that?
The Vaibhāşikas: To admit that defilement is action is to contradict
the Sūtra and the definition that it gives of action (iv.lb). As for the
Saṁcetanīyasūtra to which you allude, it is volition itself that it
designates when it says "greed," because volition comes into play under
the influence of greed.
Because these produce a painful retribution, and because they are
condemned by good persons, these practices of the body, speech and
mind are bad; they are thus termed bad practices.
66a. Good practice is the opposite. 271
The opposite of bad practice is good practice: good actions of the
body, speech, and mind; further, non-greed, non-wickedness and right
views.640
Chapter Four
How can false views or right views by regarded as bad, or good? 272
In fact, the first does not contain an intention to do evil, and the second
does not contain an intention to do good to another.
This is true, but they are the root of this twofold intention.
66b-d. By taking, among these practices, the most evident, one
defines the ten courses of action, good and bad respectively. 27
The Sūtra defines ten courses of action: good courses of action, by
taking the most important, which are the easiest to see from among
the good practices; and bad courses of action, by taking the gravest from
among the bad practices.
What practices, bad or good, are not included in the courses of
action?
A part of the bad practices of the body, namely (1) preparatory and
consecutive actions of bodily courses of action (prayoga, pṛṣṭhabhūta,
iv.68c); and (2) certain defiled actions of the body, for example, drinking
alcohol, hitting, binding, etc. (Majjhima, iii.34), are not included among
the courses of action, because these practices are not extremely grave.
Among the bad practices of the body are courses of action which deprive
another of his life, of his goods, or of his wife: one must absolutely
abstain from them.
That which is very grave among bad practices of speech, is, for this
same reason, declared to be a course of action, not preparatory,
consecutive, or minor action.
One part of the bad practice of the mind, volition, is also excluded
from the bad courses of action. 274
The good courses of action do not include 1. either a part of the good
practice of the body: preparatory or consecutive; abstention from
inebriating drinks, etc.; alms, worship, etc.; 275 2. or one part of the good
practice of speech, affectionate words, etc.; 276 3. or one part of the good
practice of the mind, good volition.Karma 641
Among the courses of action,
67a. Six bad courses of action can be exclusively avijñapti. 277
When one has six courses of action-murder, stealing, lying,
malicious speech, harmful speech, or inconsiderate speech-performed
by another, then these six courses of action are only avijñapti.He who
had these actions carried out is lacking the principle vijñapti, that is, the
act of killing itself, etc. 278
67b. One bad course of action is always of two types.
Adultery is always vijñapti and avijñapti, for it must be perpetrated
in person. When one has it committed by another, he does not procure
the same pleasure.
67b. Six, when one carries them out himself, are of two types
also, 279
When one executes them himself, the six courses of action specified
above (67a) are at one and the same time vijñapti and avijñapti if death
takes place 280 at the same moment as the vijñapti (that is, at the
moment of the stroke by which one intends to kill): if death takes place
later, there is only avijñapti.
Among the good courses of action,
67c. Seven good courses of action are of two types.
Seven courses of material actions, that is, of the body and the voice,
are of two types, vijñapti and avijñapti. In fact the morality that one
undertakes depends on one vijñapti.
67d. They are only avijñapti when they have arisen from
absorption.
The courses of action which are included in dharmaśīla, that is, in
the discipline of dhyana and in the pure discipline, are qualified as642 Chapter Four
"arisen from absorption." These two disciplines depend on a single
thought: the courses of action are thus not vijnapti. 281
Is this also the case for preparatory and consecutive actions as for
the principle action or the course of action proper?
68a. The samantakas are vijñapti.
The samantakas or preliminary actions are actions which prepare
for the courses of action of the sphere of Kāmadhātu. They are always
vijñapti (iv.2b, 3d).
68b. They may or may not be avijñapti.
When they are accomplished with a great violence of passion
(paryavasthāna, v.47, ährīkya, ii.32, etc.), or with an extreme strength of
faith (prasādaghanarasena, iv.22), they are avijñapti. If not, then no.
68c. The opposite concerning consecutive action. 282
Consecutive actions are, on the contrary, necessarily avijnapti.They
are vijñapti when, having accomplished a course of action, one continues
to commit actions analogous to the course of action.
What is it that constitutes preparatory action, the course of action
proper, and consecutive action? 283
A man, desiring to kill an animal, rises from his bed, takes some
silver, goes to the market, feels the animal, buys the animal, leads it,
pulls it, makes it enter, mistreats it, takes a sword, strikes the head once
or twice: as long as he does not kill it, the action preparatory to killing
lasts.
At the stroke by which he deprives the animal of its life-that is, at
the moment when the animal dies—the vijñapti of this moment and
the avijñapti which is simultaneous to this vijñapti, are the course of
action proper. For it is by reason of two causes that one is touched by the
transgression of murder: by reason of the preparatory action and by
reason of the achievement of the result [of the preparatory action]. 284
The moments that follow, the moments of avijñapti created by the
killing, are the consecutive action; the series of the moments of vijñaptiKarma 643
are also consecutive action: moments that constitute pulling the hide off
the animal, washing it, weighing it, selling it, cooking it, eating it, and
congratulating oneself on it.
In the same way one can explain, with the necessary changes, the
other six courses of bodily and vocal action. 285
There is no reason to distinguish preparatory and consecutive
action for greed, wickedness and false views: at the moment when they
manifest themselves, by the sole fact of their presence, they are courses
of action proper.
Objection: A question is raised. Is the course of action made up of
vijñapti and avijñapti at the moment when the animal is in maraṇa-
bhava, 286 that is, at the moment when the animal dies? Or is the vijñapti
and the avijnapti of the moment when the animal is in mṛtabhava, that
is, when it is dead?
If you accept the first hypothesis, a person would be guilty of the
transgression of killing when he kills at the very moment when the
killed animal dies: but your system (siddhānta, iv.72a-b) does not admit
this. And in the second hypothesis, you have rightly said that, "at the
stroke by which he deprives the animal of its life, the vijnapti of this
moment and the avijñapti simultaneous to this vijñapti, are the course
of action proper." [You should have said, mṛte prāṇini yā vijñaptiḥ…….
"The vijnapti which took place when the animal dies... "]
Further, if you accept the second hypothesis, you contradict the
explanation that the Vaibhāṣikas give to the phrase, "while the prayoga
has not yet disappeared," that one reads in the Mülaśāstra (Jñāna-
prasthāna, TD 26, p. 975a8). This Šāstra says, "Can it be the case that a
living being has already been killed but that murder has not yet
occured? 287 Yes, when the living being has already been deprived of life,
but when the prayoga [of the murder] has not yet disappeared." 288 The
Vaibhāşikas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 617a3) explain this text by saying that
the word prayoga ("conjoined with")-which normally signifies
preparation-here has the meaning of consecutive action. Now you
contradict this explanation since, placing the course of principle action
at the moment when the animal dies, it is indeed the course of principal644 Chapter Four
action which, according to you, has not disappeared at the moment
when the animal dies. You interpret the word prayoga of the Sastra in
the sense of the principal action.
The Vaibhāṣikas: One must explain the Sastra in such a manner that
it does not lend itself to criticism. And how is that? In the text in
question, prayoga signifies principal course of action: [at least when one
envisions the moment which immediately follows the death of the
animal; when one envisions the moments which follow this moment,
prayoga signifies, as the Vibhāṣā says, the consecutive action.]
But how could the vijñapti of the moment when the animal is
already dead be the principal course of action?
The Vaibhāṣikas: Why would it not be?
Because it is ineffective. [The animal is dead: one does not cause it to
die again.]
The Vaibhāṣikas: But how is avijñapti, which is always ineffecive, a
course of action? It is not their efficacy which makes a vijñapti and an
avijñapti courses of action; it is the fact that they are produced at the
moment of the achievement of the result of the preparatory action. 289
Can it be the case that one course of action is either a preparatory
action or a consecutive action of another course of action?
Yes. For example the ten courses of action can be a preparatory
action for murder. A man desires to kill his enemy; in order to assure the
success of this enterprise, he takes the goods of another and offers an
animal in sacrifice; as a means to this same end, he committs adultery
with the wife of his enemy in order to make her an accomplice; through
lying, malicious, injurious, and frivolous words, he causes a falling out
between his enemy and his friends who would be able to defend him; he
covets the goods of his enemy; he wishes to do evil to his enemy; he
nourishes false views with regard to the murder that he wants to
commit.
In this same way the ten courses of action can be the consecutive
action of murder. And the same for the other courses of action, stealing,
etc. 290
But, greed, wickedness and false views are never preparatoryJEZUA
Karma 645
actions, for they are not the beginning of an action; nor are they
preparatory actions, for they are solely a production of the mind, 291
The Sūtra says, "There are, Oh Bhikṣus, three types of killing:
killing arisen from desire, killing arisen from hatred, and killing arisen
from ignorance," and thus following to, "There are, Oh Bhikṣus, three
types of false views." What are these different killings, etc.?
All the courses of action are not indifferently achieved by desire,
hatred, or ignorance; but
68d. Preparatory action arises from three roots. 292
The preparatory action of all of the courses of action can
indifferently arise from the three roots. The Blessed One, by expressing
himself as we have seen, refers to the first cause, the cause which gives
rise (samutthāpaka, iv.10a-b) to the course of action.
1. Killing (iv.73) arisen from desire: 293 killing in order to seize a
certain part of an animal; killing in order to seize some goods; killing for
pleasure; killing in order to defend oneself, or one's friends.
Killing arisen from hatred, in order to satiate hostility.
Killing arisen through ignorance. To consider the sacrifice as a
pious action and so to kill; 294 when a king, according to the authority of
the legalists kills through duty, "The first of the meritorious actions of
the king is to punish evil-doers"; when the Persians say, “One should
kill one's aged and sick parents"; 295 when one says, "One should kill
serpents, scorpions, and tryambuka flies (Mahāvyut patti, 213, 91), etc.,
because these creatures are poisonous; 296 one must kill game, cattle,
birds, and buffalos in order to nourish oneself."297
And finally killing which is provoked by false views: murder
committed by a person who denys a future life and whom nothing can
stop.
2. Stealing (iv.73c-d) arisen from desire. Either one steals the object
desired, or one steals in order to then gain possession of another object,
to acquire honor and respect, 298 or in order to defend oneself and one's
friends.
Stealing arisen from hatred, in order to satiate hostility.646 Chapter Four
Stealing arisen from ignorance. A king, upon the authority of the
legalists, seizes the goods of evil-doers. The Brāhmins say, "All things
have been given to the Brāhmins by Brahmā; and it is through the
weakness of the Brahmins that the Vrsalas enjoy it. Consequently, when
a Brāhmin steals, he takes that which belongs to him; he eats what is his,
wears what is his, and gives what is his." 2⁹9 And yet, when Brāhmins
take, they indeed have the notion of the goods of another.
Stealing provoked through false views is also stealing from
ignorance.
3. Illicit sexuality (iv.74a-b) arisen from desire. Sexual intercourse
with the wife of another, either through love, or in order to obtain
honor and respect, or in order to defend oneself and one's friends.
Illicit sexuality arisen through hatred, in order to satiate hostility.
Illicit sexuality arisen from ignorance. The Persians, etc., have
intercourse with their mothers and other forbidden women. 300 In the
gosava sacrifice, 301 a Brāhmin drinks water in the manner of an animal,
grazes through the grass, has intercourse with his mother, his sister, or a
woman of his gotra; he must copulate with them wherever he finds
them: in this manner this bull will triumph over the world. And such
too are those that say, "Women are like rice mortars, flowers, fruits,
cooked food, ladders, roads, and ferryboats: they are there to be used." 302
4-7. Lying (iv.74c-d) and other vocal transgressions arisen from
ignorance and from hatred, as above.
Lying arisen from ignorance. "Oh King, playful lying, lying to
women, in marriage, or in danger of death, does not hurt: one says that
these five lies are not transgressions." 303 This is lying provoked by false
views.
Malicious words and other vocal transgressions arisen from
ignorance. These are provoked through false views. Further, the false
discourses of the Vedas, etc., are frivolous words arisen from ignorance.
8-10. How do greed, wickedness and false views (iv.77-78) arise out
of desire, etc.? Since they are not preparatory action, this creates a
difficulty:
69a-b. Greed and the other two mental courses arise from the
three roots because they appear subsequent to these roots.
When they appear immediately after desire, they arise from desire;the same for the other two roots.
Karma 647
We have explained the bad courses of action in their relationship
with the roots. As for the good courses of action,
69c-d. Good actions, with their preparatory and consecutive
actions, arise fron non-desire, non-hatred, and non-ignorance.
Good courses of action, with their preparatory and consecutive
actions, have a good mind for their originating (pravartaka, iv.10) cause.
This good mind, being necessarily associated with the three roots, arises
from the three roots.
The renouncing of a preparation of a bad course of action is a
preparation of a good course of action; the renouncing of the action
proper which constitutes a bad course of action is itself a good course of
action; the renouncing of a consecutive action of a bad course of action is
a consecutive action of a good course of action.
Let us give as an example: the ordination of a novice. From the
moment when the novice enters into the nānāvasa, 304 salutes the
Sangha, addresses his request to the Upadhyāya, until the first or second
karmavācana, this is the preparatory action. 305 At the achievement of
the third karmavācana there takes place a vijñapti, and an avijñapti
simultaneous to this vijñapti, which constitute the course of action itself.
After this moment, when one notifies the new monk of the niśrayas,
when he makes known that he accepts them, 306 and as long as the series
of the avijñapti created by the principal action continues that is to say,
as long as the monk does not lose the Prātimokṣa discipline (iv.38)—
this is the consecutive action.
We have seen that bad courses of action were not indifferently
"achieved" by the three roots.
70a-b. Killing, wickedness, and injurious words are achieved
through hate.648 Chapter Four
Solely by hate. They are achieved when one thought of murder, 307 or
one thought of violence (concerning wickedness and injurious words)
manifests itself.
70b-d. Adultery, greed, and stealing are achieved through desire.
"Adultery" is illicit sexuality.
71a. False views, through ignorance.
Through an extreme ignorance.
71b. The others, by the three.
The other courses of action,-lying, malicious words, and in-
considerate words, are achieved either through desire, hatred, or
ignorance.
The courses of action, which have just been divided into four
sections, three (70a-b), three, one and three, have respectively for their
71c-d. Object: living beings, objects of enjoyment, namarūpa,
and nāman. 308
Living beings are the objects of killing, wickedness and injurious
speech; the objects of enjoyment are the objects of adultery, greed and
stealing; nāmarūpa, that is, the five skandhas, are the object of false
views; naman, that is, the namakaya (ii.47) is the object of lying and the
other two transgressions of the voice. 309
When one has decided to kill someone, and if the murderer dies
either before the intended victim, or if he dies at precisely the same
moment as the victim, is there a principal course of action for the author
of the murder?
72a-b. If one dies before or at the same time, there is no principal
course of action, 310
This is why the Vibhāṣā says, "Question: When a person has made
the preparation for killing, can it be that, at the moment when the result
of this preparation is achieved, this person is not touched by theKarma
transgression of killing? 311 Answer: Yes, when the murderer dies
before or at the same time [as the victim]." The reason is clear: as long
as the victim is living, the murderer is not touched by the transgression
of murder; and when the victim dies, he (=the murderer) no longer
exists if he died at the same time or before.
72b. Because a new body has come into existence.
The body-the personality-by whom the preparation had been
accomplished, the body of the murderer, is destroyed; the murderer
takes up a new body which belongs to another nikāyasabhāga (ii.41a):
this body did not make the preparation, is not prayoktar and, as a
consequence, cannot be touched by the transgression of murder.
When many persons are united with the intention to kill, either in
war, or in the hunt, or in banditry, who is guilty of murder, if only one of
them kills?
72c-d. As soldiers, etc., concur in the realization of the same
effect, all are as guilty as the one who kills.
Having a common goal, all are guilty exactly as he who among them
kills, for all mutually incite one another, not through speech, but by the
very fact that they are united together in order to kill.
But is the person who has been constrained through force to join the
army also guilty?
Evidently so, unless he has formed the resolution, "Even in order to
save my life, I shall not kill a living being."
What does he do in order that he who kills should commit the
course of action? Same question for the other transgressions up to and
including false views.
73a-b. Murder is to kill another, consciously, without making an
error.650 Chapter Four
When a person kills by thinking, "I am killing such a one," and kills
this same person, and not another through error, then there is
murder, 312
But is there murder when a person kills, doubting if he hits a living
being or a thing, or if he hits another?
This person possesses the certitude, "This is certainly him"; he hits
him; and as a consequence, there is the thought of parityāga.313
How can there be murder, or destruction of the praṇa (prāṇātipāta),
since the skandhas are momentary? 314
Prāna, the “vital breath", is a wind whose existence depends on the
body and the mind.³¹5 This prāṇa is annihilated by a murderer in the
same way in which one annihilates a flame or a sound of a bell, that is to
say, by obstructing the continuation of its reproducing itself.
Or rather, 316 prāna is the vital organ (jīvitendriya, ii.45a): when a
person creates an obstacle to the arising of a new moment of the vital
organ, he annihilates it, and is touched by the transgression of killing.
But to whom do you attribute the vital organ? Who do you say is
dead when life is absent? 317
The true value of the pronoun "to whom" or "of whom" will be
examined in the chapter on the Refutation of the Pudgala (Chapter
IX), 318 Let us observe that the Blessed One said, “When life, heat and
consciousness leave the body, it lies abandoned, like a piece of wood,
deprived of feeling." 319 One says that the body lives when it is endowed
with the organs; and that the body is dead when it is devoid of them.
According to the Nirgranthas, 320 a transgression (adharma) results
for the doer from killing, even committed without knowing it, or
without desiring it, in the way that contact with fire results in burning.
But if this is the case, then one is guilty when one sees, or touches,
without wanting to, the wife of another; he who trims the hair of the
Nigranthas is guilty; the master of the Nirgranthas is guilty since he
preaches terrible austerities; he who gives the Nirgranthas food whichmana, de
Karma 651
provokes cholera and death is also guilty. The mother and the embryo
which are both the cause of suffering, are guilty; guilty also is the person
killed, for he is bound to the action of killing as the object killed: and fire
burns its own support. But on the other hand, he who has murder
committed by another is not guilty, for one is not himself burned when
one has another person touch the fire. Since you do not take intention
into consideration, wood and other materials, even though lacking
consciousness, are guilty of murder when a house collapses and living
beings perish, 321 If you would avoid these consequences, recognize that
but one example-the example of the fire-and it alone, not
accompanied by any argument, cannot prove your thesis.
73c-d. Stealing-taking what is not given-is to appropriate to
oneself the goods of another through force or in secret. 322
The reservation above holds: "with the condition that there has
been no error." 323
To appropriate to oneself, through force or in secret, that which is
possessed by another, when one does not confuse the person from
whom one wants to steal with another person, constitutes stealing.
The plunder of a Stūpa is to take a thing that has not been given by
the Buddha: for, at the moment of Nirvāṇa, the Blessed One accepted,
appropriated to himself all the gifts made to Stūpas. 324 According to
others, this is to take a thing which has not been given by the guardians
of the Stupa, 325
To take a thing that does not have an owner is to take what is not
given by the ruler of the country.
To take the goods, the robes, etc., of an deceased monk, 326 is to take
what is not given by the Sangha of the parish, 327 in the case when an
ecclesiastical action has not been done; in the opposite case, this is to
take what is not given by all the disciples of the Buddha.
74a-b. Illicit sexuality, fourfold, is intercourse with a woman
with whom one should not have intercourse. 328
1. Intercourse with a forbidden woman, that is, the wife of another,652 Chapter Four
one's mother, one's daughter, or one's paternal or maternal relations; 329
2. Intercourse with one's own wife through a forbidden way; 330 3. in an
unsuitable place: an uncovered spot, a caitya, an araṇya;³³1 4. at an
unsuitable time: when the wife is pregnant, when she is nursing, 332 or
when she has taken a vow. 333 Some say: when she has taken a vow only
with the consent of her husband.
The reservation relative to killing, "with the condition that there
has been no error," also extends to illicit sexuality, and there is no course
of action when one has intercourse with the wife of another if one
thought that he was with his own wife. 334
Opinions differ on whether there is a course of action when one
takes the wife of a certain one for the wife of another one. For some, yes,
for it is the wife of another who was the object of the preparatory action;
it is also the wife of another that one enjoys. For others, no, as in the case
of killing with an error of person: the object of the preparatory action is
not the object of the enjoyment, 335
With regard to whom is intercourse with Bhikṣunis illicit sexuality?
With regard to the master of the land, who is not disposed to
tolerate it. As for the master of the country himself, if his spouse, when
she has undertaken a vow, is forbidden to him, all the more reason are
nuns so forbidden.
Intercourse with a young girl is illicit with regard to the man to
whom she is engaged, and, if she is not engaged, with regard to her
guardian; if she has no guardian, then with regard to the king. (Vibhāṣā,
TD 27, p. 585a20)
74c-d. Lying is discourse held, with differing thoughts, with a
person who understands the meaning. 336
1. Lying is discourse held, with thoughts different from the sense
expressed, with a person who understands the meaning. When the
person addressed does not understand, such discourse is only frivolous
words.
2. Discourse (ii.47a-b) is sometimes made up of numerous syllables.
Which will be the course of action? Which will be lies?
The last syllable, which is vijñapti and which is accompanied by
avijñapti. Or rather, the syllable whose hearing causes the meaning to be
understood. The preceeding syllables are a preparation for the lie.Karma 653
3. How should one interpret the expression arthābhijña, "a person
who understands the meaning?" Does this refer to the moment when
the person addressed understands the meaning? Does it refer to a
person addressed capable of understanding the meaning? In the first
hypothesis, you admit that the course of action takes place when the
person addressed has understood the meaning; it follows then that the
course of action is solely avijñapti: for the person addressed understood
the meaning through mental consciousness, which is consecutive to
auditory consciousness; and the vijñapti, or vocal action, perishes at the
same time as the auditory consciousness. There is no longer any vijñapti
at the moment when the person addressed understands. In the second
hypothesis, this difficulty is not present. But what must one do in order
that the person addressed is "capable of understanding the mean-
ing?" 337
The person who knows the language and in whom auditory
consciousness has arisen is "capable of understanding the meaning."
One must interpret the text in a manner in which it will not give
rise to criticism.
The Sūtra 338 teaches that there are sixteen "vocal actions," eight of
which are bad: to say that one has seen what one has not seen, to say that
one has heard, cognized, or known what one has not heard, cognized, or
known; to say that one has not seen when one has seen; and to say that
one has not heard, cognized, or known when one has heard, cognized, or
known; and eight are good: to say that one has not seen when one has
not seen ...
What is the meaning of the words seen (dṛṣṭa), heard (śruta),
cognized (vijñāta), and known (mata)?
75. What is perceived through the visual consciousness, through
the auditory consciousness, through the mental consciousness,
and through three consciousnesses, is called, in order, seen,
heard, cognized, and known.
What is perceived through the visual consciousness receives the
name of seen, ... what is perceived through the consciousness of smell,654 Chapter Four
taste, and touch, receives the name of known.
How do you justify this last interpretation?
The Vaibhāṣikas say that odors, tastes and tangible things, being
morally neutral, are as dead (mṛtakalpa); this is why they are called
mata.
The Sautrāntikas: According to what authority do you maintain that
the expression mata refers to what is smelled, tasted, and touched?
The Vaibhāṣikas: According to the Sūtra, and by virtue of reasoning.
The Sūtra says, "What do you think, Oh Mālakīmātar, 339 the visible
objects that you have not seen, that you have not seen formerly, that you
do not see, about which you do not think 'Would that I could see them,'
do you have, by reason of them, any longing, lust, desire, affection,
attachment, appetite, or searching out? 340 No, Lord. Oh Mālakīmātar,
with regard to the subject seen, you will only think, 'it is seen,' with
regard to the subject heard, cognized, and known, you will only think, 'it
is heard, cognized, known (matamātraṁ bhaviṣyati).'
The words "seen," "heard," and "cognized," certainly refer to visible
things, to sounds, and to the dharmas: hence the word mata refers to
smells, tastes, and tangible things (opinion of Buddhaghosa, Visuddhi-
magga, 451). If it were otherwise, the experience relative to smells,
tastes and tangible things would not be refered to in this teaching of the
Blessed One.
The Sautrāntikas: This Sūtra does not have the meaning that you
believe it does, and is does not confirm your interpretation of the word
mata.The Blessed One does not aim to define the characteristics of the
four experiences, having seen, having heard, having cognized, having
mata.His mind is evidently, "In the fourfold experience, seeing, etc.,--
each of which bears on the sixfold objects, visible things, sounds, smells,
tastes, tangible things and dharmas,-you maintain only that this
experience takes place, that you see, etc., without attributing (adhya-
ropa) to the object the characteristic of disagreeable or agreeable."
Then what should one thus understand by seen, heard, mata
(known) and cognized?
According to the Sautrāntikas, that which is immediately perceived
by the five material organs, is seen, drsta; that the consciousness of
which is transmitted to us by another, is heard, fruta; what is admittedKarma 655
by reason of correct reasoning, is mata, known; and what is perceived by
the mental organ is cognized, vijñāta. ³41 Thus five categories of
objects-visible matter, sounds, odors, tastes, and tangible things-are
seen, heard, known, and cognized; the sixth category-dharmas-is not
seen: such is the fourfold experience that the Sūtra refers to. It is thus
false that, in the hypothesis where mata does not designate odors, tastes,
and tangible matter, the experience relative to these objects would be
omitted in the Sūtra: thus the argument of the Vaibhāṣikas does not
hold.
According to former masters,342 "seen" is what is perceived by the
organ of seeing; "heard" is what is perceived by the organ of hearing and
what one learns from another: "known" is what is personally accepted
or experienced; 34³ and “cognized" is what one feels in and of oneself
(i.e., agreeable sensation, etc., or an intuition that one has in an
absorption).
Does he 344 who, by means of his body and not by means of speech,
causes to be understood what is not in his mind, commit lying?
Yes. The Šāstra says in fact, "Question: Can one be touched by the
transgression of killing, without acting, without attacking bodily?
Answer: Yes, when one acts vocally. 345 Question: Can one be touched by
the transgression of lying without vocal action? Answer: Yes, when one
acts bodily. Question: Can one be touched by the transgression of
murder, by the transgression of lying, without either bodily or vocal
action? Answer: Yes, for example the Rṣis, guilty of murder through
their anger,346
‚346 and a Bhikṣu, guilty of lying through his silence in the
confession ceremony. ”347 (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 617c25).
But, we would say, how could one admit that Rsis and a Bhikṣu
accomplish a course of action which is at one and the same time vijnapti
and avijnapti? Neither the Rṣis nor a Bhikṣu have bodily or vocal action:
hence there is no vijñapti; and avijñapti of the sphere of Kāmadhātu
cannot exist where vijñapti is absent (iv.2a). This is a difficulty that
must be resolved, 348
76a-b. Malicious or slanderous speech is the discourse of a656
Chapter Four
person with a defiled mind with a view to dividing. 349
The discourse that one has, with a defiled mind, with a view to
dividing others and creating enmity, is malicious speech.
The restrictions formulated above, "when the person addressed
understands, when there is no confusion of persons," applies here.
76c. Injurious words are abusive discourse.
Discourse pronounced with a defiled mind, outraging, understood
him whom one addresses, addressed to him whom one wants to
address, is injurious speech. ³
76c-d. All defiled discourse is inconsiderate speech. ³51
The Kārikā has "all defiled ..."; but it refers here to discourse.
All defiled discourse is inconsiderate speech; one who utters it is
thus an"inconsiderate speaker"; but the Karika has bhinnapralapitā in
place of sambhinnapralapa.
77a. According to others, inconsiderate speech is the defiled
discourse which differs from the others.
Lying, malicious and injurious speech and defiled discourse: the
name "inconsiderate speech" is reserved for the defiled speech which is
neither lying, nor malicious, nor injurious.
77b-c. For example, boasting, singing, declamations; for
example, bad commentaries.
For example, a monk boasts about himself in order to obtain alms,
etc.; 352 through frivolity 353 some others sing; in the course of plays or
dances, the dancers, in order to entertain the public, hold inconsiderate
discourse; adopting the doctrines of bad philosophers, non-Buddhists
read bad commentaries. And in addition, there are lamentations and
loquaciousness, 354 carried out with a defiled mind but which differ from
lying, malicious speech and injurious speech.
But is it not true that, in the period of a Cakravartin King, there are
songs that do not have inconsiderate words?
In this period, songs are inspired by a spirit of detachment, not by
sensuality, 355 Or, according to another opinion, there is, in this period,Karma 657
inconsiderate words, since one speaks of āvāha, of vivāha, etc.;³56 but
this inconsiderate speech does not constitute the course of action of this
name.
77c-d. Greed is the desire to appropriate to oneself, by
illigitimate means, the goods of another.
To desire to appropriate to oneself the goods of another in an
illegitimate manner, in an unjust manner, by force or secretly-"Would
that the goods of another were mine!" 357-is the course of action called
greed, abhidhyā.
According to another opinion, abhidhyā means all desire of the
sphere of Kāmadhātu, for the Sūtra of the Five Nīvaraṇas, 358 on the
subject of kamacchanda, expresses itself thusly, "Having abandoned
abhidhyā..."
But, say other masters, Cakravartin Kings and the Uttarakurus are
not guilty of the course of abhidhyā action, and yet they are not delivered
from desire of the sphere of Kāmadhātu.
Let us admit that all desire of the sphere of Kāmadhātu is abhidhyā:
but all abhidhyā is not a course of action. Only the most notable among
the bad practices are included among the courses of action (iv.66b).
78a. Wickedness is a hatred of living beings, 359
It is a hatred of living beings, by which one desires to harm the
person of another, 360
78b-c. False view is the opinion that there is neither good nor
bad, 361
As it is said in the Sūtra, "There is no gift, no sacrifice, no oblation,
no good action, no bad action... there are no Arhats in the world." False
view, as this Sūtra shows, consists of negating action, its results, and the
existence of Aryans. The Kārikā only indicates the beginning.
Such is the definition of the ten bad courses of action.
What is the meaning of the expression "course or pathway of
action" (karmapatha)?658
Chapter Four
78c-d. Three are courses of action; seven are also action. 362
Greed, wickedness and false views are courses of action-courses of
action that one terms volition (cetanā, iv.lb). In fact, volition which is
associated with them is moved by their movement, in that, by their
force, it acts in conformity with them: it moves by their out-going.
Murder and the other six transgressions are action, for they are, by
their nature, actions of body and voice; and they are also courses of this
action that is called volition, for the volition that gives rise to them
(tatsamutthānacetanāyāḥ, iv.10) has in these transgressions its end and
reason for existence.
The expression "course of action" thus simply means course of
action when one applies it to greed, etc.; it signifies action and course of
action when it is applied to killing, etc. A similar composition is justified
by the rule of asarūpāņām apy ekaśeṣaḥ: "A single meaning is
maintained even when the terms of a compound are different" (Pāṇini,
i.2.64).
In the same way one should understand the good courses of action,
the renouncing of killing, etc., non-greed, etc.
Why are not preparatory and consecutive actions considered as
courses of action (iv.66b-d)?
Because preparatory action is accomplished with a view to the
action proper; and because consecutive action has for its roots the action
itself. 363 Furthermore, the most notable among good and bad practices
alone are courses of action. And finally, courses of action are actions the
augmentation and diminution of which have for their result the
augumentation or the diminution of things and living beings (iv.85,
iii.89).
The Sautrāntikas do not recognize volition as a mental action; for
them, there is no mental action outside of greed, etc. (iv.65c-d).
How then do they explain the fact that the Sūtra gives the name ofKarma 659
course of action to greed etc.? This is a question they must answer.
The response is not difficult. Greed, wickedness (anger) and false
view are mental actions and they are pathways leading to bad realms of
rebirth; or rather they are both courses of action, for greed sets into
motion wickedness (anger) and false view, and vice versa.
The ten bad courses of action are in complete contradiction with the
good dharmas.
79a. The view of negation cuts off the roots of good. 364
The cutting off of the roots of good takes place through the false
view of the ninth degree, strong-strong (iv.79d).
Objection: You affirm that only false view cuts off the roots of good,
but the Treatise 365 says, “What are the strong roots of evil? They are the
roots of evil which cut off the roots of good, the roots of evil which are
initially adandoned when one acquires detachment from Kāmadhātu."
This text proves that greed and the other roots of evil cut off the roots of
good.
Answer: Only false view cuts off the roots of good; but false view is
brought about by the roots of evil: hence the Treatise attributes to these
last the operation which more properly belongs to false views. In the
same way that one says that bandits burn a village because it is they who
light the fire that burns the village.
What roots of good are cut off?
79b. The innate roots of the sphere of Kāmadhātu. 366
The roots of good of the sphere of Kāmadhātu are cut off when one
cuts off the roots of good; for one who cuts off the roots of good of
Kāmadhātu is not endowed with the roots of good of Rūpadhātu or
Ārūpyadhātu.
If this is so, how should one understand this text of the Prajñāpti,
"What cuts off this person's roots of good of the three spheres?"660 Chapter Four
(quoted in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 184b17).
This text means that, at this moment, the acquisition of the roots of
good of the superior spheres become distant, because this person, who
was formerly fit for these acquisitions, ceases to exist through the
cutting off of the roots of good of Kāmadhātu.
It refers to the innate roots of good: for one who cuts off the roots of
good has already fallen from the acquired roots of good (prayogika,
ii.71b, trans. p. 314, Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 183b5).
What is the object of the false view which cuts off the roots of good?
79c. The false view which negates cause and result.
Negation of cause is to think, "There is neither good nor bad
action." Negation of result is to think, "There is no retribution, no result
of good or bad action” (iv.78b-c, v.7).
According to another opinion, these two false views, that which
negates cause, and that which negates result,-contribute to the cutting
off of the roots of good in the same way as ānantaryamārga and
vimuktimārga contribute to the cutting off of the defilements (vi.28,
65b).
Some say
that the negation which cuts off the roots of good has for
its object (that is, denies) sāsrava, the impure, or the first two Truths,
and not anāsrava, the pure, or the last two Truths; rather it has for its
object the sphere where one is to be found, and not Rūpadhātu and
Ārūpyadhātu. In fact, the negation which bears on the "pure" or the
higher spheres is weak, because it is in relation with these objects only
by association (v.17-18). 367
But the Vaibhāṣikas say: 368
79d. Completely.
The roots of good are cut off completely by false view, whether this
refers to cause or result, pure or impure, Kāmadhātu or the higher
spheres.
***Karma 661
Some say that the nine categories of the roots of good, weak-weak
roots of good, weak-medium, weak-strong, medium-weak, etc., are cut
off all at once through one moment of false view, in the same way that
the defilements which are abandoned by Seeing into one Truth are, in
all their categories, abandoned through the Seeing of this Truth (vi.lc-d).
But the Vaibhāṣikas say:
79d. Gradually.
The roots of good are cut off in the manner in which the
defilements to be abandoned through Meditation on the Truths
(satyabhāvanā, vi.33) are abandoned: this means that the strong-strong
root of good is cut off by a weak-weak false view, and thus following to
the weak-weak root of good which is cut off by a strong-strong false
view.
This theory is not in agreement with the text, 369 "What are the
'small and concomitant' roots of good. 370 They are those which are
abandoned lastly to the cutting off of the roots of good; those through
the absence of which a person is termed one-who-has-the-roots-of-
good-cut-off."
Objection: If the cutting off is gradual, how should one understand
the text, "What are the strong-strong roots of evil? The roots of evil
through which one cuts off the roots of good?"
This text refers to the achievement of the cutting off of the roots of
good, for it is through the strong-strong roots of evil that the roots of
good totally disapear. As long as the last category of the roots of good,
the weak-weak, is not cut off, it can determine the reappearance of the
others, 371
According to certain masters, the cutting off of the nine categories
takes place at one time, without interruption, 372 like the abandoning of
the defilements through the Path of Seeing into the Truths. But the
Vaibhāṣikas say that it takes place either without interruption, or at
several times.
According to certain masters, the abandoning of discipline
(samvaraprahāṇa, iv.38) preceeds the cutting off of the roots. But the
Vaibhāṣikas say that the discipline is lost when one loses the mind of
which this discipline is the result (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 183c8), 373662 Chapter Four
What beings are capable of cutting off the roots of good?
79d. The cutting off takes place among humans.
Only humans cut them off; not the creatures in the painful realms of
rebirth; for their discernment (prajñā), whether defiled or not, is not
firm; not the gods, for the result of action is manifest to them. 374 And
only humans of the three continents cut them off, not those of
Uttarakuru, for they do not possess bad afayas.375
According to another opinion, 376 only humans in Jambudvipa cut
off the roots of good. But this is in contradiction with the text, "The
inhabitants of Jambudvīpa possess a minimum of eight organs; the
same for the inhabitants of Pürvavidena and of Avaragodānīya." 377
80a. Men and women cut off the roots.
According to another opinion, women do not cut off the roots
because their will and their application are weak. But this is in
contradiction with the text, "Whoever possesses the female organ
necessarily possesses eight organs” (ii.18d).
The sensualist does not cut off the roots of good because his āśaya is
in movement; the only one who cuts them off is
80a-b. The rationalist. 378
Because his āśaya is bad, firm, and hidden. 379
By virtue of these same principles, eunuchs, etc., 380 do not cut off the
roots of good, because they are counted among the sensualists, and
because their discernment, like that of the creatures of painful realms of
rebirth, is not firm.
What is the nature of the cutting off of the roots of good?
80b. The cutting off is non-possession.
When the possession of the roots of good is obstructed in rearising,
in continuing, then ten non-possessions (aprāpti), or non-endowed-
ments (asamanvāgama, ii.37) arise.
When aprāpti has arisen, there is a cutting off of the roots of good.***
Karma 663
When the roots of good have been cut off, how do they rearise?
80c. Rearising through doubt, through insight into the existence
of cause, etc.
It can happen that a person whose roots of good have been cut off
produces, relative to cause and result, either doubt or insight into their
existence, which is Right View. When Right View has arisen, then one
says that the roots of good have arisen, 381 because the possession of
these roots is henceforth present. The roots arise in their nine
categories; but they will only gradually manifest themselves, in the same
way that one initially regains one's health and then, gradually, one's
strength, 382
80d. Not here, for one guilty of ānantarya. 383
Other persons who have cut off the roots of good can take them up
again in this life, but not one guilty of an anantarya transgression (iv.97)
who has thus cut off the roots of good. It is with regard to this
transgressor that it is said, "This person is unfit to again take up the
roots of good in this life; but he certainly will take them up either by
dying in hell, or by being born." 384 "By being born" means to be found in
an intermediate state [which preceeds existence in hell]. "By dying"
means disposed to die [in hell]. The roots of good are taken up by being
born since they have been cut off by the force of the cause; and by dying,
since they have been cut off by the force of a condition. Same difference
when they have been cut off by one's own force, or by the force of
another. 385
The person who is afayavipanna 386—that is to say, lost (vipanna)
by the fact of his false view-can take up again the roots of good in the
present existence. The person who is both afayavipanna and prayo-
gavipanna-that is, one who is furthermore lost through the fact of his
ānantarya transgression-takes up the roots again only after the
destruction of his body. 387 [This is a variant of what has just been said,
"One who has cut off the roots by his own force, or by the force of
another . . . "]. Same difference for one who is dṛstivipanna (lost
through false view) and one who is at the same time both dṛṣṭivipanna664 Chapter Four
and filavipanna (lost further by an anantarya transgression). 388 [This is
a variant on the immediately preceeding passage].
One can cut off the roots of good and not be destined to hell
(mithyātvaniyata, iii.44c-d). Four cases: 1. Pūraṇa and the other five
masters; 389 2. Ajātaśatru; 3. Devadatta; and 4. persons who have not cut
off the roots and who have committed an ānantarya transgression.
A person with a false view, who has cut off the roots of good, is
punished in Avici Hell; a person guilty of an anantarya transgression is
punished in Avici, or elsewhere. 390
Volition is the principal action. We shall explain with how many
courses of action volition can coexist.
81a-c. With regard to the painful realms of rebirth, volition can
coexist at most with eight courses.
Volition can coexist with one course of action, as when either greed,
anger, or a false view manifests itself, without any "material” (rūpin)
course of action having taken place; or rather the person who has
prepared one of the material courses of action finds himself to have a
non-defiled, that is, a good or neutral mind, at the moment when, on his
instigation, this course of action is perpetuated. 391
Volition can coexist with two courses of action, as when a person
with an angry mind kills; or when a person who is prey to greed steals,
or commits adultery, or speaks in an inconsiderate manner. 392
Volition can coexist with three courses of action, as when a person
with an angry mind kills and steals at the same time. 393
But haven't we seen that stealing is only achieved by desire alone
(iv.70)? This restriction refers to the achievement of stealing com-
mitted by a person who only thinks of stealing. 394
Volition can coexist with three courses of action, as when greed is
present at the moment when two material courses of action are
completed that one has committed by another.
Volition can coexist with four courses of action, as when one lies or
when one injures with the intention of dividing: there is one mental
course of action and three vocal courses of action. 395 Or rather, when theKarma 665
mind is in the prey of greed, etc., at the moment when three material
courses are completed.
Volition can coexist with five, six, or seven courses of action, as
when the mind is in the prey of greed, etc., at the moment when four,
five, or six material courses of action are completed.
Volition can coexist with eight courses of action, as when a person
has made the preparatory action of six courses of action, murder, etc.; at
the moment when these six courses of action are completed, he is in the
prey of greed and commits adultery.
Volition cannot coexist with nine courses of action, or with ten
courses, because greed, anger, false view are not simultaneous.
81c-d. Concerning good courses of action, volition can coexist
with ten.
The ten good courses of action can be simultaneous to volition.
81d. Volition does not coexist with one, eight, or five courses of
action, 396
Volition can coexist with two courses of actions, as when a person in
the absorption of Arūpyadhātu, in possession of kṣayajñana or
anutpādajñāna (vi.45, 50): his five consciousnesses are good. There are
thus two courses of action: non-greed and non-anger. 397
Volition can coexist with three courses of action, as when the mental
consciousness is associated with Right View and when the seven good
material courses of action are absent.
Volition can coexist with four courses of action. When, with a bad or
neutral mind, one undertakes the discipline of an Upāsaka or a
Śrāmaṇera which embraces four material good courses of action, non-
killing, etc.
Volition can coexist with six courses of action, as when, the five
consciousnesses being good, one undertakes the same disciplines: four
good material courses of action, non-greed and non-anger.
Volition can coexist with seven courses of action. When, with a good
mental consciousness, one undertakes the same discipline, add Right
View. Or rather, when, with a bad or neutral mind, one undertakes the
discipline of Bhikṣu: only seven material courses of action.
Volition can coexist with nine courses of action. [Three cases:] One666
Chapter Four
undertakes the discipline of a Bhikṣu, the five consciousnesses (visual
consciousness, etc.) being good: Right View is absent; one undertakes
this same discipline at a moment when, in an absorption of Ārūpya-
dhātu, one possesses kṣayajñāna or anutpādajñāna. [This is the case,
examined above, of the two courses of action: one must add the seven
courses of action of discipline, which is here not avijñapti]; in the course
of an absorption of a dhyāna, one possesses kṣayajñāna or anutpāda-
jñāna [Right View is absent; the seven material courses of action exist as
part of the discipline of dhyana (avijñapti)]. 398
Volition can coexist with ten good courses of action. In the different
cases: when one undertakes the discipline of a Bhikṣu with a good
mental consciousness, except in the case of kṣayajñāna and anutpāda-
jñāna; and all volition concomitant with the discipline of dhyana and
pure discipline when this volition is not associated with kṣayajñāna or
anut pādajñāna.
We have shown under what conditions volition coexists with the
good courses of action included in the disciplines. If one looks at the
good courses of action independent of the disciplines, volition can also
be found with one course of action, five courses of action, and eight
courses of action:
1. When one renounces a transgression and when one has a mind
different from that which provokes this renouncing, that is, a defiled or
neutral mind; 2. when one renounces two transgressions and when one
has a good mental consciousness: this good mental consciousness
includes the three mental actions to which is added two renouncings,
two material actions; and 3. when, under the same conditions, when one
renounces five transgressions. 399
What are the courses of action which exist, either in fact or as
potentiality, 400 in the different realms of rebirth?
82a-b. Inconsiderate words, injurious words, anger, of two types,
exist in hell, 401
Inconsiderate words exist in hell, for beings in hell lament: injurious
words, for beings in hell mutually reproach one another; 402 and anger,Karma 667
because they hate one another for the duration of their lives.
82c-d. Greed and false views, as potentiality.
Beings in hell possess greed and false views, but these do not
actually exist in hell: because of the absence of any object to which one
could become attached, 403 and because the result of action is manifested.
In hell killing is absent, for beings in hell die through the exhaustion
of their actions (karmakṣaya, ii. trans. p. 235-6); stealing and adultry are
absent, for beings in hell do not have property or objects of property, or
women; lying is absent, for it is useless; and malicious words are useless,
for beings in hell are at a distance and are always separate from one
another.
82d. Three exist in Uttarakuru.
Greed, anger and false views exist in Uttarakuru in the sense that
the inhabitants of Uttarakuru are in possession of a potentiality for
greed, anger and false views. But, in fact, greed is absent there, for no
one has anything of his own; in the same way anger is absent, because
they are soft, and because there is no cause for displeasure; so too false
views are absent, because there is no bad āśaya (apāpāśayatvāt, iv.80d).
83a. The seventh course exists there in fact also.
Inconsiderate words exist there in fact; for, sometimes, the
inhabitants of Uttarakuru sing with a defiled mind.
Because bad āśaya is absent there; because the duration of one's life
is determined there (iii.78c; ii. trans. p. 236); and because no one
possesses any property or object of property, or women, and also
through its lack of usefulness, killing and the other courses of action are
absent in Uttarakuru.
If the men of Uttarakuru do not have wives, how can they have
unchaste behavior? They take the women with whom they desire to
enjoy pleasure by the hand and go to a tree. If sex with this woman is
allowable, the tree covers up the couple with its branches; in the
contrary case, the tree does not cover up the couple. 404
83b. The ten bad courses of action exist elsewhere in Kāma-
dhātu.668 Chapter Four
The ten bad courses of action exist in fact in Kāmadhātu with the
exception of hell and Uttarakuru.
Concerning animals, Pretas and gods, the bad courses of action are
not necessarily connected with undiscipline (asamvaranirmukta, see
iv.24c); with regard to humans, the bad courses of action are either
necessarily connected, or not necessarily connected to undiscipline.
Does killing exist among the gods? The gods do not, amongst
themselves, kill one another, but they kill beings belonging to other
realms of rebirth, Pretas, etc. According to another opinion, the gods
also kill by cutting the head or the body. 405
83c-d. Three good courses of action exist everywhere, as
potentiality and in fact.
Everywhere, in the three spheres of existence and in the five realms
of rebirth, non-greed, non-anger and Right Views exist both as
potentiality and in fact.
84a-b. In the Ārūpyas, among the Unconscious Ones, seven
courses of action exist as potentiality.
Among the beings of Arūpyadhātu and the Asāmjñisattvas (ii.41d),
the seven good material courses of action, bodily and vocal, exist solely
as potentaility.
In fact, Āryans who are born in Arūpyadhātu possess the
past and
future discipline of pure morality, and the Unconscious Ones possess
the discipline of dhyāna (iv.13c) under the same conditions.
The past pure discipline that the Aryan who is in Ārūpyadhātu
possesses, has for its base of support the stage or stages (Four Dhyānas)
which he has produced and destroyed; the future pure discipline that he
will possess, has on the contrary the five stages (Kāmadhātu and the
Four Dhyānas) for its base of support. 406
84b-d. For the rest, good courses of action also exist in fact, with
the exception of beings in hell and the Uttarakurus.
The rest, that is, in the other spheres of existence, and in the other
realms of rebirth.
Beings in hell and the Uttarakurus do not undertake any morality.
Elsewhere the seven good material courses of action exist in fact.Karma
One must make a distinction. Among the animals and Pretas, the
good courses of action are never necessarily connected with discipline;
in Rūpadhātu, they are always necessarily connected with discipline;
elsewhere they can be of one or the other category.
85a-b. All the other courses of action have retributive results,
outflowing result, and predominating results. 407
Good or bad, the ten courses of action have a threefold result.
1. Through each bad course of action practiced (äsevita), cultivated
(bhävita), developed (bahulikṛta), 408 a transgressor is reborn in hell. 409
Such is the retributive result. 410
2. If a transgressor is reborn in a human existence, through murder
he will be of brief lifespan; through stealing he will be poor; through
illicit sexuality, he will have an unfaithful spouse; through lying, he will
be slandered; through malicious speech, his friends will become
enemies; through injurious speech, he will only undertand disagreeable
speech; through inconsiderate speech, his words will not come to be
believed; through greed, he will have great desires (maheccha, vi.6);
through anger, he will have great hate; and through false views, he will
have great ignorance, for ignorance is great in false views. Such is the
outflowing result.
But, one would say, a human existence, even if it is short, is the
retribution of a good action. How can one regard it as an outflowing
result of murder?
We do not say that this existence is the result of murder; we say
rather, that a murderer will have a short life by reason of the murder;
murder is the cause which rends a human existence short, an existence
otherwise caused by a good action.
3. By reason of the intense practice of killing, external things 411
plants, the sun, etc.,-are of little vitality; by reason of stealing, they are
crushed by rains of stones, dust and acid;412 by reason of illicit sexuality,
they are covered by dust or acid; by reason of lying, they are of bad odor;
by reason of malicious speech, they are in a hole or on a hill; by reason of
injurious speech, the land and the sun are impregnated with salt and are
sterile, and the plants are detestable and pernicious; by reason of
inconsiderate speech, the seasons are reversed; by reason of greed, fruits
are small; by reason of anger, fruits are sour; and by reason of false670 Chapter Four
views, fruits are very few, or are totally absent. Such is the pre-
dominating result.
Is it by reason of killing that a murderer is reborn in hell and then
only enjoys a short human life?
According to some, it is by reason of killing. Existence in hell is a
retributive result, whereas shortness of life is an outflowing result of the
killing. [In fact, retribution is always sensation, vedanā].
According to others, existence in hell comes from the preparatory
action of killing; the fact of having a short life comes from the action
itself. It is true that the Sūtra speaks of killing as the cause of existence in
hell, but it understands by killing, not only killing, but killing with all the
actions that accompany it. What is called outflowing result does not here
exist separately from the retributive result and the predominating
result. It is called outflowing by reason of the resemblance between the
cause and its effect (to kill-to have a short life; to steal-to be poor,
etc.).
Why is the result of the courses of action threefold? One who
commits murder causes the victim to suffer, causes him to die, and
destroys his vigor:
85c-d. The result is threefold, because one makes him suffer,
because one makes him die, and because one destroys his
vigor. 413
Because one causes suffering, there is a retributive result, that is,
suffering in hell; because one makes him die, there is an outflowing
result, that is, his life is short; and because one destroys his vigor, 414
there is a predominating result, that is, external things are of little vigor.
The same for the other courses of action.Karma 671
The same for the three results of the good courses of action: through
having practiced, cultivated, and developed the renouncing of killing,
one is reborn among the gods; if one is reborn down here in human
condition, one will have a long life. The results of all good actions
oppose
bad actions (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 589a18-21).
The Blessed One distinguishes wrong speech (mithyāvāc), wrong
action (mithyakarmānta), and wrong manner of livelihood (mithya-
jiva). 415 Is this to say that wrong livelihood is separate from wrong
speech and wrong action?
It does not exist separately:
86a-c. Bodily and vocal actions which arise from attachment are
"wrong manner of livelihood"; it constitutes a separate category,
because it is difficult to purify. 416
Bodily action and vocal action arising from hate and ignorance are,
respectively, wrong action and wrong speech. Arisen from attachment,
both constitute wrong manner of livelihood, distinguished in this way
because the manner of livelihood is difficult to purify.
Attachment is by its nature, a bandit: one watches with difficulty the
mind of the actions which provoke attachment. Consequently, since the
manner of livelihood is, as long as one lives, difficult to purify, the
Blessed One, with an end that one should apply himself to purifying it,
made a separate category of wrong livelihood. There is a stanza, 417 "The
layman purifies his views with difficulty, for he is always in the prey of
multiple views; the monk purifies his manner of livelihood with
difficulty, for his subsistance depends on others."
86c-d. If one says that it is solely action issued from attachment
to the resources necessary for life, no; for this is in contradiction
with the Sūtra.
If someone thinks that to dance, to sing, etc., for one's own pleasure
is not a wrong manner of livelihood, because wrong manner of
livelihood is only bodily and vocal actions inspired by attachment to the
means of subsistance, 418-we would answer: no. In fact, the Blessed672 Chapter Four
One, in the Silaskandhikā, 419 taught that looking at elephant fights, etc.,
is a wrong manner of livelihood. And why? Because this is to enjoy bad
objects.
We have seen (ii.56) that there are five results, predominating
results, results of virile activity, outflowing results, retributive results,
and disconnection or liberation. How many results are included in the
different types of action?
87a-b. Impure, in the path of abandoning, action embraces the
five results.
The path of abandoning is so called because it has abandoning for its
goal, or because the defilements are abandoned due to it. This is the
ānantarya path which will be defined later (vi.28, 49) and which is of
two types, pure and impure.
Action which forms part of the impure path of abandoning,
includes the five results: 1. retributive result: an agreeable retribution
which belongs to the same stage as the action; 2. an outflowing result:
dharmas arisen from the absorption, similar to the action, and later than
it; 420 3. a disconnective result: disconnection from the defilements, the
abandoning of the defilements; 4. a result of virile activity: the dharmas
that this action gives rise to, namely (a) the path of deliverance
(vimuktimārga, vi.28), (b) the coexisting dharmas, 421 (c) the future
dharmas of which this action causes one to obtain possession, and (d)
the abandoning itself; 422 and 5. a predominating result: all the
conditioned dharmas with the exception of the action in question, and
with the exception of the dharmas already arisen (ii.59).
87c. Pure, it includes four results.
The preceding ones, with the exception of the retributive result.
88a-b. The rest of pure action and neutral action, three results.
The rest of pure action-that is, pure action not included in the path
of abandoning, but forming part of the prayoga-vimukti-višeșa-mārgas
(vi.65b)-embrace neither disconnective result, since it is not the causeKarma 673
of abandoning, nor retributive result, since it is pure.
The same two results are absent also in neutral action, whether it is
defiled nor not.
What is the nature,-good, bad, or neutral,-of the results of
different actions?
88c-d. The good, bad, neutral dharmas, constitute four, two, and
three results of good action.
Outflowing results, disconnective results, virile activity, and pre-
dominating results of good action are good dharmas.Retributive results
are neutral by nature (ii.57).
Virile activity and predominating results of good action are bad
dharmas.
Outflowing results of a good action are necessarily good; dis-
connective results are good by their nature.
Retributive results, virile activity, and predominating results of
good action are neutral dharmas.
89a-b. Good, bad, neutral dharmas, constitute, respectively two,
three, and four results of bad action.
The expression anukraman ("respectively") signifies yathākraman.
Two results,-virile activity and predominating results of bad
action,--are good dharmas.
Three results-by omitting retributive results and disconnective
results are bad dharmas.
Four results-by omitting disconnective results-are neutral
dharmas.
It is admitted then that an outflowing result of bad dharmas can be
made up of neutral dharmas. How is this? 423
Two neutral dharmas,-the belief in personality (satkāyadṛṣṭi) and
the belief in the past and in the future of a soul (antagrāhadṛṣṭi)
(v.6b)-are an outflowing result of bad dharmas: namely of the
universal defilements (ii.54, v.12) which one abandons through the
Seeing of Suffering and Arising, and of the defilements of the rāga class,674 Chapter Four
etc., which one abandons through the Seeing of Suffering.
89c-d. The same dharmas-good, bad, neutral dharmas-make
up two, three, and three results of neutral action.
Two results,-virile activity and predominating results,-are good
dharmas.
Three results-by omitting retributive results and disconnective
results are bad dharmas. In fact some bad dharmas of the five
categories (ii.52b), to be abandoned through Seeing the Truth of
Suffering, etc., are an outflowing result of two neutral dharmas, namely
of satkāyadṛṣṭi and antagrāhadṛṣṭi.
Three results-the same as above-are neutral.
With regard to the time period, and the stage, etc.,
90a. Some dharmas of all types constitute four results of past
action.
All the dharmas or some dharmas of all types, that is, past, present
and future, can constitute four of the results of past action. 424 One must
exclude the disconnective result which is outside of time.
90b. Some future dharmas constitute four results of median
action.
Median action, that is, present action, has four results-by excluding
disconnection which are future dharmas.
90c. There are two which are median dharmas.
Some present dharmas are predominating results and virile activity
of median action.
90c-d. For action not yet arisen, there are three results made up
of future dharmas.
That is, retributive results, predominating results, and virile activity.
Future action does not have outflowing results (ii.57c).Karma 675
91a-b. Some dharmas of the same stage constitute four results,
whereas some dharmas of another stage constitute three or two
results.
An action of a certain stage produces four results-by excluding
disconnection which are dharmas of its own stage.
Some pure dharmas belong to a stage different from that of the the
action which constitutes three results of this action: virile activity,
predominating result and also outflowing result, after the rule given in
ii.53.
Some impure dharmas belong to a stage different from that of the
action which constitutes virile activity and the predominating result of
this action.
91c. Some Śaikṣa dharmas, etc. constitute three results of Saikṣa
action, 425
Some dharmas "characteristic of the Saint who is not an Arhat"
(Saikṣa) constitute outflowing results, virile activity, and predominating
results of Saikṣa action.
The same for dharmas “characteristic of the Arhat” (Aśaikṣa).
Neither-Saikşa-nor-Aśaikṣa dharmas constitute virile activity, pre-
dominating results and disconnective results of Saikṣa action.
91d-92b. Śaikṣa dharmas, etc., constitute one result, three
results, and two results of Aśaikṣa action, etc.
Śaiksa dharmas are a predominating result of this action.
Aśaikṣa dharmas are a predominating result, an outflowing result,
and virile activity of this action.
Neither-Saikşa-nor-Aśaikṣa dharmas are predominating results
and virile activity of this action.
92c-d. Some Śaikṣa dharmas, etc., constitute two results, two
results, and five results of action differing from the two
preceeding.
This refers to neither-Saikṣa-neither-Aśaikṣa action.
Some Śaikṣa dharmas and some Aśaikṣa dharmas are virile activity
and predominating results of this action.676 Chapter Four
Some neither-Śaikşa-nor-Aśaikṣa dharmas are five results of this
action.
93a-b. Dharmas susceptible of being abandoned through Seeing
the Truths (darśanaheya), susceptible of being abandoned
through Meditation (bhāvanāheya), and not susceptible of being
abandoned (aprabeya), constitute three results, two results, one
result of action susceptible of being abandoned through Seeing
the Truths.
Some darśanaheya dharmas are predominating results, virile
activity and outflowing results of darśanaheya action.
Some bhāvanāheya dharmas are four results of this action:
excluding disconnection.
Some apraheya dharmas are predominating results of this action.
93c-d. The same dharmas constitute two, four, and three results
of action susceptible of being abandoned through Meditation.
Darśanaheya dharmas are virile activity and predominating results
of bhāvanāheya action.
Bhāvanāheya dharmas are four results of this action: excluding
disconnection.
Apraheya dharmas are virile activity, predominating results, and
disconnection of this action.
94a-b. The same dharmas constitute, respectively, one result,
two results, and four results of action not susceptible of being
abandoned.
Darśanaheya dharmas are predominating results of apraheya action.
action.
Some bhāvanāheya dharmas are predominating results and virile
activity results of this action. 426
Some apraheya dharmas are four results of this action: omitting the
retributive result.
The text has yathākraman, "respectively," the same as the above
passage (iv.89b) has anukraman in the sense of yathakraman.It repeats
here "respectively": one concludes from this that this word should be
supplied in each definition. Such is, in effect, the process of abbreviation.Karma 677
In the teaching of the doctrine of action the following question is
again posed: the Treatise (the Jñanaprasthāna) speaks of proper action
(yogavihita), improper action (ayogavihita), and neither-proper-nor-
improper action. What is the meaning of these three actions?
94c-d. Improper action is defiled action; according to some,
irregular action also. 427
Some say that improper action is defiled action, because this
proceeds from a wrong judgment. 428 According to others, irregular
action is also irregular action: when a person walks, stands still, eats, or
dresses himself in a manner other than that which he should, this
action which is undefiled-neutral-is improper, for this person acts
contrary to received usage (ayoga).
There is the same divergence of view with regard to proper action:
this is either good action, or good and regular action.
Action which differs from proper action and improper action is
neither-proper-nor-improper action.
Does one action project one birth or many births? Do many actions
project one birth or many births?
According to the system of the School:
95a. One action projects one arising.429
arising, janman, one should understand, not merely birth (jāti),
but an existence (nikāyasabhāga, ii.41a). He who comes into an
existence is said to be born.
1. One action projects one arising and no more.
The Sautrāntikas: This thesis is in contradiction with what the
Sthavira Aniruddha says, "Through the retribution of this single alm
(pindapāta), after having been born up to seven times among the
Thirty-three Gods, I am finally born in the family of the rich
Sākyans." 430
Answer: Aniruddha, through this alm, obtained a great prosperity;678 Chapter Four
he obtained a memory of his past lives; and he accomplished many new
meritorious works. By expressing himself as he did, he intends to
indicate his point of departure. It is thus that a person who had acquired
a sum of one thousand by means of a single penny, could say, "It is
through one penny that I have acquired this fortune."
One answers again: 431 By reason of his alm, Aniruddha produced
many streams of volition: one result appeared to each volition.
2. Many actions do not together project one arising: for if this were
the case, the projection of existence would take place in parts. But
admitting that one existence is projected by a single action,
95b. Many actions complete an existence.
The same way that a painter with one stroke delineates the outline
of an image, and then fills in this image: 432 so too, even though their
quality of being a human is the same, certain humans have perfect
organs, major and minor members; certain humans are beautiful
through the excellence of their hue, figure, shape and power, whereas,
in certain humans this or that is lacking. 433
It is not solely action which projects one existence: all retributive
dharmas, namely sensation, etc., also project it. 434
However
95c-d. Neither the two absorptions of unconsciousness nor the
prāptis project (an existence).
Even though they are retribution, the two absorptions of un-
consciousness (ii.42) do not project an existence, because they do not
coexist with action. The prāptis (ii.36) do not project an existence,
because they do not have the same result as does the action with which
they coexist. 435
The Blessed One said that there are three avaraṇas or obstacles: the
obstacle of action (karmavarana), the obstacle of the defilements
(kleśāvaraṇa), and the obstacle of retribution (vipākāvaraṇa). 436
What are the three obstacles?Karma
96. Anantarya actions; chronic defilements; and bad realms of
rebirth, and Asamjñisattvas and Kurus, are the threefold
obstacle. 437
The obstacle which consists of action are the five mortal
(ānantarya) transgressions: matricide, patricide, the killing of an Arhat,
schism, and wounding the Tathagata with thoughts of hatred. 438
The obstacle which consists of the defilements is chronic defilement.
Defilement is of two types, chronic and violent: chronic defilemet is
continual defilement, and violent defilement is strong defilement.
Chronic defilement constitutes an obstacle, as is the case, for example,
among eunuchs. Defilements which surge up from time to time, even if
their impulse is strong, can be overcome, but not continual defilement,
even though it is at rest. The person in whom this is found does not find
the time to make an effort to overcome it. From being small, they
become medium sized; and from medium sized, they become strong:
thus they form an obstacle.
The obstacle which consists of retribution is the three painful
realms of rebirth-existence in hell, animal existence, and Preta
existence and one part of the good realms of rebirth—human
existence in Uttarakuru, and heavenly existence among the Un-
conscious Ones.
What does "obstacle" mean?
That which causes an obstacle to the Way and to the roots of good
preparatory to the Way, uşmagatas, etc. (vi.17).
Objection: One should mention as actions forming obstacles other
categories of actions besides mortal transgressions. Actions which
necessarily produce painful realms of rebirth, etc.,439 which produce
birth in eggs, birth in sweat, birth as a woman, or an eighth birth, form
obstacles.
Answer: Only actions easily discernible by others and by the agent
himself, and that from five points of view-are mentioned here.
Actions which are mortal transgressions are murder, lying, and
preparation for murder; its result are painful; the rebirth realm which it
produces is hell; the period of its retribution is the next existence; the
murderer himself receives the name of patricide...: from five points of
view, action which is mortal transgression is easy to discern. 44⁰680 Chapter Four
Among the obstacles, the gravest is the obstacle of defilement,
followed by the obstacle of action. For these two obstacles rend one
incapable of health, not only in the present existence, but also in the
next existence.
According to the Vaibhāṣikas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 601a2-7), the
obstacle of defilement is the gravest because it produces the obstacle of
action; the obstacle of action is heavier than the obstacle of retribution
because it produces this obstacle.
What is the meaning of the word änantarya?
The five moral transgressions are called anantarya because they
cannot be "traversed" (antarita), that is to say, prevented in their
retribution through actions which should be retributed in the next
existence. 442 Or rather a person guilty of a mortal transgression is
reborn, after this life, immediately (anantaram) in hell; the guilty
person is thus antara, “one without intermediate (existence)"; thus the
dharma the possession of which makes the guilty one an anantara is
called anántarya, like one terms frāmaṇya the dharma which makes
someone a Śrāmaṇa (vi.51).
In what sphere of existence are the obstacles found?
97a. Mortal transgressions exist in the three continents. 443
The inhabitants of Uttarakuru and living beings which are not
humans are not capable of mortal transgressions. And all the more
reason mortal transgression is absent in the higher spheres. And,
among humans, only men and women can commit mortal trans-
gressions:
97b-c. It is not admitted that eunuchs, etc., are capable of this
transgression, because of the mediocrity of their kindness and
respect.
For the same reasons that rend eunuchs, etc., incapable ofKarma 681
indiscipline (iv.43c); and, further, because their parents, having given to
the eunuch only an incomplete body and having only a mediocre
affection for their son, are mediocre benefactors; 444 because, on the
other hand, the eunuch does not experience a strong respect (lajjitva =
hrīvypatrāpya, ii.32) for his parents the destruction of which would
render him guilty of a mortal transgression.
For the same reasons then, Pretas and animals, if they were to kill
their parents, are not guilty of mortal transgressions. Nevertheless, the
Bhadanta said that animals in whom intelligence is lively, for example,
the ājāneya horse, are capable of mortal transgressions (Vibhāṣā, TD
27, p. 619c4-7).445
For the same reasons, a human born of demon (or non-human)
parents does not commit a mortal transgression in killing them.
97d. The other two obstacles exist in the five realms of rebirth.
Birth in Uttarakuru is an obstacle of retribution for humans; birth
among the Asamjñisattvas is such for the gods.
What are, by their natures, the different actions of mortal
transgression?
Four are bodily action; one is vocal action; three are killing; one is
lying; and one is the preparation for murder,446 for the Tathāgatas
cannot be killed by the attack of another. 447
We say that schism (sanghabheda) is lying, and that this lying is the
fourth mortal transgression. How is this?
If we make schism a mortal transgression, this is because we give
the name of schism to lying which is the cause of schism; or rather the
word "schism" should be explained as "that which the divides Sangha."
In fact,
98a-c. Schism is, by its nature, disharmony; this is an undefiled-
neutral dharma disassociated from the mind. 448682 Chapter Four
Schism, that is, disharmony, is a saṁskāra not associated with the
mind (ii.35, trans. note 180), and is undefiled-neutral: how could it hence
be a mortal transgression? As much as it is a person who divides the
Sangha, the schismatic is not in possession of the schism. On the
the contrary
98d. It is the Sangha which possesses the schism.
It is that which is divided, and not the schismatic, which "possesses"
the saṁskāra called "division of the Sangha."
But what does the schismatic possess?
99a-b. The transgression of schism is lying; it belongs to the
schismatic.
The schismatic possesses the transgression of schism, which is
lying. This lying arises at the same time as the schism itself; it consists of
vocal vijñapti and avijñapti.
Possessed of this lying,
99c. The schismatic falls into Avici for a kalpa.
He falls into the great Avici hell for an intermediary period
(antarakalpa, iii.83).449 Those guilty of other mortal transgressions are
not necessarily in Avici.
Yet all mortal transgressions are retributed in the next existence:
what would happen if a person is guilty of many mortal transgressions?
99d. Suffering grows by reason of supplementary transgression.
A person guilty of many moral transgressions possesses in Avīci a
large body and very tender flesh by which he feels twofold, threefold,
fourfold, or fivefold, and his torments are extrememly numerous and
insupportable.
Who is capable of dividing the Sangha?
100a-b. A Bhikṣu who is an intellectual, who is virtuous,
divides. 450It is a Bhikṣu who divides, not a layman, not a nun, etc.45¹ This
Bhikṣu should be an intellectual, not a sensualist; 452 he should be
virtuous, not immoral: for the words of an immoral Bhikṣu lack
authority.
Where does schism take place?
100b. Elsewhere.
Not where the Tathāgata is found. Schism is impossible where the
Master is to be found, for the Tathāgata cannot be conquered and his
word is full of authority.
Karma 683
Who does the schismatic divide?
100b. Fools.
Only fools and not Aryans, for Aryans see the Dharma with direct
insight. According to another opinion, the schismatic can no longer
divide possessors of kṣānti. 453
What does the Sangha do that it is divided?
100c-d. When it admits another Master, or another Path, it is
divided. 454
Once it is divided, how long does it remain divided?
100d. It does not exceed a day.
A night of the same day. 455 When the Sangha is divided, infallibly,
the Sangha will again be in concord at sunrise.
The schism that we have just described, and which is a "mortal
transgression,"684
Chapter Four
101a. Is what we understand by breaking the Wheel.
The Wheel of the Law of the Blessed One is then broken, because
the progress of the Path is hindered. As a consequence there is, at the
same time, both breaking of the Wheel and a division of the Sangha. 456
Where is breaking of the Wheel produced?
101b. In Jambudvipa.
Not in the other continents where the Buddhas do not appear.
By how many Bhikṣus?
101b. By nine or more. 457
The maximum number is not fixed. The Sangha susceptible of
being divided counts at a minimum eight Bhikṣus; the ninth monk
necessary is the schismatic. In order for there to be schism, it is necessary
that a Sangha be divided into two parts-the first is for the Buddha, the
second is for the schismatic-forming thus two Sanghas of four Bhikṣus
each, which is the minimum number required in order to constitute a
Sangha (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 602c5-13).
Another type of schism, different from the breaking of the Wheel
and which is not a mortal transgression results from a division in
eccesiastical actions: when, in one parish (sīmā), the monks divide
themselves in order to perform ecclesiastical actions, poșadha, etc.
101c. Ritual schism in three continents. 458
Only there where the Religion exists.
101d. This schism supposes eight Bhikṣus or more.
It is necessary to form two groups of four Bhikṣus; but, here, there is
not one schismatic who declares himself a Master.
At six periods, the schism of the breaking of Wheel cannot take
place.(PRAME SACHEN
102. The breaking of the Wheel is impossible at the beginning;
at the end; before the abscess; before a pair; when the Sage is
extinguished; or when a parish has not been delimited. 459
Karma 685
At the beginning, that is, when a little time has passed since the
setting into motion the Wheel of the Law; and at the end, that is, at the
period of the Parinirvāṇa of the Blessed One: in these two periods the
Sangha is penetrated by a single sentiment. 460 In the interval, breaking
is impossible before the appearance of an abscess: 461 as long as the
abscess of precepts and the abscess of views does not appear in the
dispensation (sāsana). It is also impossible before the apparition of a
pair: as long as a pair of excellent disciples has not appeared, because the
Sangha should not pass a night in a state of division, and because this
pair of disciples has for its task the reestablishment of harmony.
Breaking is impossible when the Sage is extinguished, for, once the
Master has entered into Parinirvāṇa, a schismatic would have no
opponent. Finally, when a parish has not been delimited, 462 for one says
that the Sangha is divided when there two parties in one parish.
All Buddhas do not have their Wheels broken as does Śākyamuni:
this depends on their former actions.463
Why are the transgressions enumerated above, matricide, etc.,
mortal transgressions to the exclusion of other transgressions?
103a-b. Because they destroy or hurt a field of benefaction, or a
field of qualities.464
Matricide and patricide are mortal transgressions because they
destroy a benefactor. One's mother and father are benefactors because
they have given birth.
How does the murderer destroy them?
By killing them. 465
The murder of an Arhat and the last two mortal transgressions are
mortal transgressions because an Arhat, the Sangha and the Buddha are
fields of qualities. 466 One does not destroy the Sangha and the Buddha,
but one can hurt them.
***686 Chapter Four
But if the gender of the mother and father changes, does the quality
of mother and father no longer exist within the mother and father?
103c. Even if their gender changes, there is mortal transgression
in killing him who was the mother, and in killing her who was the
father.
It is said in fact (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 619c19-23), "Can a person be
guilty of a mortal transgression killing a man who is not his father, or
who is not an Arhat? Yes, if he kills his mother whose gender has
changed. Can a person be guilty of a mortal transgression by killing a
woman who is not his mother, or who is not an Arhat? Yes, if he kills his
father whose gender has changed."
When the embryo of a woman falls out and when another woman
deposits it in her womb, 467 which of these two women is reputed to be
the mother whose murder constitutes a mortal transgression?
103d. The mother is the woman from whose blood one is born.
The second woman takes up the offices of a mother: she is the one
who gives the child liquid to drink, who nourishes it, and who raises
it. 468
There is no mortal transgression if, wanting to kill one's mother a
person
kills someone else; there is no mortal transgression if, wanting
to kill another person, a person kills his mother. 469 For example, a man
who kills his mother stretched out on a bed where he believes there is a
man asleep, and the child of the laundryman who kills his father
wanting to kill a mosquito, do not become guilty of mortal trans-
gressions. 470
If a man kills his mother and another person with the same stroke,
there are two avijñaptis, an avijñapti of simple murder, and an avijñapti
of a mortal transgression; but the vijñapti is solely of the mortal
transgression, by reason of the force of the mortal transgression. Yet,Karma 687
according to Ghoṣaka (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 617b23-25), there are two
vijñaptis, for a vijñapti is made up of atoms.
The person who kills an Arhat without knowing him to be an
Arhat, thinking only to definitely kill such a person, does not have any
discrimination with respect to the person to be killed.
The person who kills his father, when his father is an Arhat, is
guilty of only one mortal transgression, namely the killing of an Arhat:
for the father and the Arhat make up only a single person.
Objection: 471 [The Arhat Rudrāyaṇa, assassinated by order of his
son Sikhaṇḍin, said to the assassin,] "Go! Tell Sikhaṇḍin that he has
committed two mortal transgressions, patricide and the murder of an
Arhat." How do you explain these words?
Rudrāyaṇa means that his son commmitted a mortal transgression
through two causes of mortal transgression; or rather Rudrāyaṇa said
"two mortal transgression" in order to doubly condemn the conduct of
his son.
Does the person who, with a bad mind, cause the blood of the
Tathāgata to flow, necessarily commit a mortal transgression?
He commits a mortal transgression when he has the intention to
kill:
104a. No, when he only had the intention of striking the
Buddha. 472
Is a person guilty of a mortal transgression when he injures to death
a person who becomes an Arhat after being injured?
104b. No, with regard to the person who became an Arhat after
the blow.
Add, according to that which precedes, "no mortal transgression."
In fact, the preparation for murder had for its object a person who was
not an Arhat.
Can a person who made preparation for a mortal transgression,
obtain detachment and its result by arresting it? 473688
Chapter Four
104c-d. Detachment and its results are impossible for one who
has made preparation for a mortal transgression. 474
Why?
Because there is an absolute contradiction between the intention of
a mortal transgression and the acquisition of detachment or a result.
A person who enters the Path after having done the preparation for
any other evil deed, will not produce this deed, by reason of the absolute
contradiction between his new personality and the deed. 475
What is the gravest of the mortal transgressions?
105a-b. Lying with a view to schism is considered the gravest
transgression.
A person who, knowing what is Dharma and non-Dharma, lies
with a view to dividing the Sangha and teaching falsely, by this makes
himself quilty of the gravest transgression among all misdeeds. In fact,
he wounds the Dharma body of the Tathāgatas, he creates an obstacle to
temporal well-being and to the deliverance of creatures. As long as
concord is not established in the Sangha, there is hindrance to entry into
the Path (niyānāvakrānti, vi.26a), to the acquisition of results, to the
acquistion of detachment, and to the destruction of the defilements: all
actions relative to dhyāna, study and reflection are also arrested; the
worlds of gods, Nāgas and humans are troubled and saddened, they are
not masters of themselves, and misguided. This is why the retribution
for this crime lasts a cosmic age and takes place in Avici.
Among the other mortal transgressions, the fifth, the third and the
first are, in descending order, the heaviest. Patricide is the lightest. 476
Objection: The Blessed One said that mental danda is the most
culpable of the three dandas; 477 he said also that false view is the gravest
among all the transgressions.
One must understand that, among the mortal transgressions,
schism is the gravest transgression; that mental danda is the gravest
among the three actions; and that false view is the gravest among the
bad views. Or rather schism is the gravest transgression if one considersKarma 689
the extent of its retribution; manodanda, if one considers the number of
persons destroyed by it; 478 and false view, if one considers the roots of
good which false view alone cuts off.
Among the good actions, which bears the greatest result?
105c-d. Among the good worldly dharmas, a volition for
Bhavagra bears the greatest result. 479
"Volition for Bhavägra" means the mental action through which
one is reborn in the highest stage of Arūpyadhātu. This action is the
most fruitious of good worldly actions, for its retribution is a perfect
tranquility for twenty-four thousand cosmic periods (iii.81).
This is understood from the point of view of its retributive results.
From the point of view of its disconnective result (ii.57d) the most
fruitious action is volition associated with Vajropamasamādhi (vi.44d;
see iv.112b), for this volition has for its result the cutting off of all the
bonds. This is why the Kārikā says, “Among the good worldly dhar-
mas...
Is it only through a mortal transgression that a person is necessarily
reborn in hell?
A person is also necessarily reborn in hell through transgressions
similar to mortal transgressions. Others add: but not immediately
(anantaram) so.480
106-107b. To defile one's mother, to defile an Arhantī; to kill a
predestined Bodhisattva; to kill a Saikṣa; and to steal the goods
of the Sangha are transgressions similar to mortal trans-
gressions; the fifth is the destruction of a Stupa. 481
These five transgressions, in this order, are similar to mortal
transgressions: to defile one's mother, to defile an Arhanti (=matricide);
to kill a predestined Bodhisattva (=patricide); to kill a Saint who is not
an Arhat (=murder of an Arhat); to rob the Sangha of its means of690 Chapter Four
substance (=schism); and to destroy a Stūpa (=to wound the Tathāgata).
Other actions embracing retribution are impeded in three cir-
cumstances:
107c-d. He absolutely impedes actions by the acquisition of
Kṣānti, the quality of Anāgāāmin, and the quality of Arhat. 482
When, upon leaving the stage of mūrdhānas, he obtains the stage
called patience (kṣānti, vi.23), the actions which should be retributed in
painful realms of rebirth, being impeded, remain below, because he
passes beyond the state of retribution of these actions. In the same way
the creditors of the man who is about to emigrate from his country rise
up.
When he obtains the quality of Anāgāmin (vi.36d), the actions
which should be retributed in Kāmadhātu, being impeded, remain
below, with the exception of those which should be retributed in the
present existence.
The same for the actions which should be retributed in Rūpadhātu
and Ārūpyadhātu when he obtains the quality of Arhat.
We have seen that the killing of a Bodhisattva is a quasi-mortal
transgression.
108a. Since when is one a Bodhisattva?
From what moment on does one receive the name of Bodhisattva?
108b. When he begins to cultivate actions which produce the
marks. 483
Starting from the moment when he begins to cultivate actions
which have for their retribution the thirty-two marks, he is
"predestined."
How is this?
From this moment onward, he alwaysKarma
108c-d. Has good realms of rebirth; he is born into noble
families; he possesses all the organs (avyakṣaḥ); he is a male; he
remembers his past lives; and he does not desist (anivṛt).
One says that he is sugati ("well gone"), because his rebirth realms
are excellent, for he is born among gods and humans.
He is born in the wealthy families 484 of Ksatriyas, Brāhmaṇas, and
Grhapatis, not in humble familes.
The man whose organs are not complete is vikalendriya; if his
organs are complete, he is an avyakşa, a synonym for avikalendriya. 485
He is always male, never female, and, even more so, never non-
sexual (sandha, etc.).
In all of his existences, he remembers his past births.
One desists by giving in; as he does not give in, he is avivṛt, a
synonym for an avaivartika, one who does not desist or regress: in fact,
with an end to being useful to all creatures, he is not cast down by all
sorts of sufferings, or by any outrages. 486 He is called the slave not
purchased by the world, 487 indeed the Bodhisattva: this great-souled one,
who yet possesses the most sublime prefections (sampad, vii.34), acts
through pure compassion; he acts without egoism, like a dog,488 in the
presence of all creatures; he bears, on the part of all creatures, outrages
and bad treatment; he assumes all fatiguing and painful tasks.
He cultivates actions which have the marks for their retribution.
109. In Jambudvīpa, being a male; in the presence of the
Buddhas, thinking of the Buddhas; having their origin in
reflection; in the course of one hundred supplementary cosmic
ages. 489
The Bodhisattva cultivates actions which ripen in the marks solely
in Jambudvipa, not elsewhere, for the inhabitants of Jambudvipa are of
lively intelligence; 4⁹0 he is a male and not a female, for he has already
gone beyond the state of female; and he is only in the presence of
Masters, for his volition has the Buddhas for its object. These actions
have their origin in reflection, not in hearing or in the absorptions. The692 Chapter Four
Bodhisattva accomplishes these actions in the course of one hundred
supplementary cosmic ages, 491 and not during a longer time.
Nevertheless the Blessed Sakyamuni, through the purification of
his energy, leaped over nine of these cosmic ages 492 and carried out the
actions ripening in marks in the course of ninety-nine cosmic ages so
that, in this way, one hundred were completed. This is why, speaking to
Asibandhaka, he said, "Oh village chief, remembering ninety-one
cosmic ages from now, I do not see any family that has been
impoverished or inconvenienced by the giving of cooked foods." 493 The
Blessed One expressed himself in this way because his natural memory
bore on this number of cosmic periods. (See vii.30, 37, 42)
Former masters 494 say: It is when he finished the first cosmic age
that the Bodhisattva abandoned the four defects and obtained the two
qualities.
Of the marks
110a. Each arises from one hundred merits. 495
What is the measure of each of these one hundred merits?
According to some, it is equal to the merit which has for its result
the pleasure of all beings, with the exception of the Bodhisattva close to
Bodhi-that is to say, accomplishing actions which ripen in marks.
According to others, it is equal to the collective action of all beings,
which, through its predominating result (ii.56b), produces the creation
of the world. 496
According to others, only the Buddhas know the measure of this
merit.
How many Buddhas did the Blessed One venerate when he was a
Bodhisattva?
In the course of the first asamkhyeya kalpa, he venerated seventy-
five thousand Buddhas; seventy-six thousand in the course of the
second; and seventy-seven thousand in the course of the third. 497Karma 693
Who were the Buddhas at the end of each samkhyeya kalpa?
In the reverse order of their enumeration,
110b-c. At the end of the three asamkhyeyas, Paśyin, Dīpa, and
Ratnaśikhin.
In the period of the perfect and complete Buddha Ratnaśikhin, he
completed the first asamkhyeya kalpa; in the period of the Blessed
Dipaṁkara he completed the second; and in the period of the
Tathāgatha Vipaśyin he completed the third.
Of all the Buddhas that he venerated
110d. The first was Śākyamuni.
It was an ancient Śākyamuni (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.89c), a perfect
Buddha, under whom the Blessed One, the then Bodhisattva, formulated
for the first time the vow of Bodhi by saying, “May I too become a
Buddha in all ways similar to you!" This Sākyamuni, as ours, appeared
during a bad age of the world; 4⁹8 also his Law lasted only one thousand
years.
How did the Bodhisattva complete each Paramitā (p. 694, line 17)?
Illa-b. He completed Giving by giving everything to everyone,
out of compassion.499
When he gave everything to everyone, even to his eyes and the
marrow of his bones, out of compassion, without desiring any
happiness for himself, he completed the virtue of Giving.
lllc-d. Morality and Patience were completed by his not being
irritated, even when his limbs were broken, although he was still
tied to desire. 500
When, even though he was not detached, he was not at all irritated
when his limbs were broken, he then completed the virtues of Morality694 Chapter Four
and Patience.
112a. Energy, by praising Pusya. 501
The Blessed One, when he was a Bodhisattva, saw the Tathāgata
Pusya who had become incandescent 502 in the interior of a cave in a
mountain. 503 He praised him for seven days and seven nights, standing,
repeating the stanza, "Neither in heaven nor on earth, nor in this world,
nor in the abode of Vaiśravaṇa, nor in the palace of the Marus, nor in
other celestial abodes, nor in any of the ten directions, would one find,
Oh Chief of Men, an ascetic who is your equal, even if one were to
traverse, if one wished, the entire world, with all of its people, with its
mountains and with its forests."504 Then, according to this School, he
was found to have fulfilled the virture of Energy and nine cosmic ages
were passed over.
112b. Absorption and Intelligence, immediately before. 505
At the moment of Vajropamasamadhi, 506 immediately before
Bodhi, he accomplished the virtues of dhyāna and prajñā.
The Pāramitās receive the name of paramita 507 because they have
arrived (gamanāt) at the other shore (param) of the other shore of the
totality of the perfections proper to each of them.
The Sūtra teaches that there are three items of meritorious work
(punyakriyāvastu), which consist of Giving, Morality, and Meditation.
How are Giving, Morality, and Meditation items of meritorious work?
112c-d. Three are merit, action, occasions of the exercise of
action, as in the case of deeds. 508
These three, Giving, Morality, and Meditation, each according
to its nature, are merit, action, or occasion of exercise, either in
combination, or in isolation; the same way that the deeds are either at
one and the same time actions and deeds, or only deeds.
To consider first the item of meritorious work which consists of
Giving, one must distinguish: 1. bodily and vocal action which is an item
of meritorious work on three grounds: merit, because its retribution isKarma 695
agreeable; action, because it is action by nature; and an occasion for the
exercise or an object of the volition of giving which provokes it; 2. the
volition of giving, which is merit and action; 3. and the dharmas
(sensations, etc.) which accompany bodily and vocal action, and which
are solely merit.
The item of meritorious work which consists of Morality is
exclusively bodily and vocal action; it is necessarily merit, action and
occasion of exercise of action.
For the item of meritorious work which consists of Meditation, let
us consider the Meditation of Compassion (maitrī, viii.30): 1. this
mediation is merit; it is also an occasion for the exercise of a meritorious
action, namely that of a volition associated with compassion; 2. the
volition in question is merit and action. The same also for the Morality
which consitutes dhyānasaṁvara, the discipline of dhyāna, which a
person who practices the Meditation of Compassion possesses; 3. the
other dharmas (faith, etc.) concomittant to this Meditation are solely
merit.
Or rather the expression punyakriyā signifies punyakāraṇa, or
punyaprayoga.Giving, Morality and Mediation are vastus of punyakriya,
because, with a view to realizing them, one undertakes the preparation
of merit. 509
According to another opinion, punyakriyā is, to speak precisely,
good volition; Giving, Morality and Meditation are its vastu, an occasion
for the exercise of this volition.
What is Giving, dāna?
Without doubt, dāna in general is what is given (deya), but here
113a. Giving is what gives. 510
But one gives through fear, or with the hope of reciprocity, or
through attachment, etc.: now this does not refer to this type of giving.
Consequently, in order to specify, the author says, "Giving is what
gives."
113b. Through the desire to render homage or service. 511696 Chapter Four
What is it that gives?
113c. It is bodily and vocal action and that which produces this
action.
A collection of mind-and-mental states gives rise to a bodily or vocal
action: this collection and this action give. As the stanza says, "When a
person, with a good mind gives what belongs to him, then one says that
the good skandhas give."
113d. It has for its results great joys. 513
The punyakriyavastu which consists of Giving (dānamaya) has
great joys as its result.
The suffix maya, which we translate "which consists of," should be
understood as "having as its nature," the same way that one says, “a
house made of grass” (tṛṇamaya grha), or “a vase made of leaves."514
114a-b. Giving is beneficial to oneself, to others, to both or
neither.
A gift made to a Caitya is not useful to another; but it is useful to him
who gives when he is an Aryan not detached from desire, or a
Prthagjana detached or not detached (see iv.121).
The gift that a detached Aryan makes to another-with the
exception of the case when this gift ripens in the present existence-is
not useful to this Aryan, for the Aryan who is detached has definitively
passed beyond the sphere (i.e., Kāmadhātu) where the retribution of
the gift could have taken place in a later existence. This gift is only useful
to another.
The gift that a non-detached Äryan makes to another, to a detached
or non-detached Pṛthagjana, is useful both to himself and to another.
The gift that a detached Aryan makes to a Caitya-with the
exception of the case when this gift will ripen in the present existence-
is not useful either to himself, or to another. This gift has for its effect
only the expression of homage and recognition.
We have said, in a general manner, that giving produces great joys:Karma 697
114c-d. Giving is excellent by the excellence of the giver, of the
object given, and of the field, 515
115a. The giver is excellent through his faith, etc.
The giver is excellent when he is endowed with faith, with morality,
with learning, with generosity, with wisdon, with few desires, etc.
When the giver is excellent, the gift is excellent; when the gift is
excellent, its result is excellent.
115b. He gives with respect, etc. 516
Such a giver gives with respect, by his hand, at the right time,
without doing evil to anyone (paran anupahatya; compare Milinda,
115c-d. From whence he obtains honors, superior joys, at the
right time, sheltered from all loss.
The giver who gives with respect obtains honors; giving by his
hand, he will find satisfaction in superior joys; giving at the right time,
he will obtain these joys at a suitable time and not when he cannot enjoy
them; giving without doing any evil, these joys will be indestructible:
they will not be stolen, annihilated through fire, etc.
We have explained in what the excellence of the giver consists and
how the gift is excellent through the excellence of the giver. How is the
object given excellent?
116a. The object perfect in color, etc. $17
Add: "is excellent."
The object is excellent when that which one gives is perfect in color,
in odor, in taste, in contact.
What will one obtain through the giving of such an object?
116b-d. From whence beauty, glory, joy, great lightness of the
body and contacts corresponding to the season. 518
He who gives an object perfect in color will be beautiful.698 Chapter Four
He who gives an object perfect in odor will have his reputation
extend to all directions, in the same way that an odor spreads.
He who gives an object perfect in taste will be happy, like a sweet
taste.
The body of him who gives an object perfect to the touch, will be
very delicate, like the jewel-like wife of a Cakravartin king, and his limbs
will have only agreeable contacts, hot or cold according to the season.
How is the field excellent?
117a-b. The field is excellent through the realm of rebirth,
suffering, benefactors, and qualities.
A field is excellent through the realm of rebirth. The Blessed One
said, "If a person gives to an animal, the giver will receive a retribution
one hundred times greater than the gift made to the animal, but if this
person gives even to a human who has transgressed the precepts, he
will receive a retribution one thousand times greater than the gift made
to this human."519
A field is excellent through suffering. The Blessed One, among the
seven aupadhika puṇyakriyāvastus, enumerated giving to a sick person,
giving to a hospital attendant, giving during cold seasons, etc., 520 and he
continued: "One cannot enumerate the measure of the merits of a son or
daughter of good family who is endowed with these seven material
meritorious works."
A field is excellent through benefactors. This is giving to one's
father, to one's mother (Divya, p. 52), to one's master, or to other
benefactors. Example: the Jätakas of the bear, of the antelope, etc. 521
A field is excellent through its qualities. 522 The Blessed One said, "A
retribution one hundred thousand times greater than a gift made to a
person who upholds the necessities..." and so on.
Among all the gifts,
117c. The best is the gift from a delivered person to a deliveredKarma 699
person. 523
The Blessed One said that a gift given by a detached person to
another detached person is the best of material gifts.
117d. Or a gift from the Bodhisattva. 524
Or rather, the gift that a Bodhisattva gives for the welfare of all
beings; this gift, although given by a non-detached person to other
non-detached persons, is the best gift.
With the exception of the gift from the Bodhisattva,
117d. Or the eighth.
The eighth among the eight gifts that the Blessed One taught.
What are the eight gifts? 525 1. Anasadya gift; 2. a gift through fear;
3. a gift made "because he gave to me"; 4. a gift made "because he gives
to me"; 5. a gift made "because my fathers and my grandfathers gave
(dattapūrvaṁ me pitṛbhiś ca pitämahaiś ceti dānam, compare Jāpaka,
444.52, vol. iv, 34); 6. a gift made in order to obtain heaven; 7. a gift
made with an eye to one's reputation; 8. a gift made in order to adorn
one's mind (that is to say, in order to obtain rddhis, vii.48); in order to
fill the mind [with the parts of the Path, mārgānga, vi.67b]; in order to
equip it with a view to yoga; and in order to acquire the supreme goal
(that is to say, in order to obtain the quality of Arhat or Nirvāṇa).
What is an asadya gift?
Some ancient masters explain this as an immediate gift to those
who are near, who approach one. 526
A gift through fear is a gift that a person makes who sees that the
object is going to perish: "Better it should be given," he thinks. 527
The Sūtra (Madhyama, TD 1, p. 722b22) says, “An incalculable
retribution proceeds from a gift made to a srotaäpannaphalaprati-
pannaka; an even more incalculable retribution proceeds from a gift
made to a srotaäpanna."But there are also five persons who, even700 Chapter Four
though Pṛthagjanas, confer an incalculable retribution on the offering
that is made to them:
118. Even though they are not Āryans, offerings made to one's
father and mother, to a sick person, to a preacher, to the
Bodhisattva in his last birth are without measure. 528
These offerings are without measure from the point of view of their
retribution.
A "Bodhisattva in his last birth" means a "Bodhisattva in his last
existence."
To what category does a preacher belong? Among what field should
he be placed?
He forms part of the category of benefactors: he gives the eye of
wisdom to multitudes blinded by ignorance; he proclaims what is good
(sama = dharma) and bad (vişama = adharma); 529 he erects the pure
body of the Law; 530 in a word, he accomplishes all the work of a Buddha:
hence he is a great "spiritual friend."
In order to appreciate the lightness and the gravity of actions, one
should, in short, take into consideration six causes:
119. Accordingly as these causes-consecutive, field, adhiṣṭhāna,
preparation, volition, or intention-are small or large, action
also is small or large.
Consecutive: after having done the action, that is, consequential
action.
Field: the person to whom one does good or evil.
Adhisthana: the deed itself.
Preparation: bodily or vocal action with a view to the preceding.
Volition: that through which the deed is achieved. Intention: to
project the thought, "I shall do this or that to them; then I shall do this
or that."531
It happens that an action can be grave only by reason of its
consecutive action, for example, when this confers on the retribution
the character of necessity.Karma 701
It happens that an action can be grave by reason that, if the field is
the same, a certain adhiṣṭhāna renders an action grave while another
adhiṣṭhāna makes it light: for example, to kill one's father and mother is
a grave action but to steal from one's father and mother, to lie to them,
etc., is not grave by comparison. One can explain in this same way the
gravity resulting from the preparation, etc. 532
When all these causes are great, the action is very grave; when they
are small, the action is very light.
Action "done" (kṛta) is distinguished from "accumulated" (upacita)
action. 533 What are the characteristics and conditions of accumulated
action?
120. Action is termed "accumulated" by reason of its intentional
character, by its completion, by the absence of regret and
opposition, by its accompaniments, and by its retribution. 534
By reason of its intentional character:Action done voluntarily or
intentionally is accumulated action; 535 action done involuntarily or
unconsciously, 536 and action not done in haste, even if it is voluntary, is
action that is "done."
"By reason of its completion:" Some go to painful realms of rebirth
through misdeeds; some by two; some by three (bodily, vocal, and
mental misdeeds); some through one deed, through two, through three
through ten. Since it is a rule that a person goes to a painful realm of
rebirth through a certain quantity of actions, if this measure is not
completed, the action is done, but not accumulated; but when this
measure is completed, it is accumulated, 537
"By reason of the absence of regret and opposition:" When remorse
(vipratisāra, anutāpa, ii.28) is absent, or when opposition,-confession,
etc.,-is absent, action is then termed "accumulated." 538
"By reason of its accompaniments:" When an action is bad and has a
bad escort: [or when one rejoices at having committed it,] it is
"accumulated."
"By reason of its retribution:" Action is accumulated which
necessarily gives forth retribution (vipākadāne niyatam, iv.50).702
Chapter Four
The same for good action.
Action which does not present these characteristics is done, but is
not accumulated.
We have seen (iv.114a) that a gift made to a Caitya by a person not
detached from desire is a gift of benefit for him who made it. But no one
enjoys the thing given: how can this gift be meritorious?
The merits of the gift are of two types: 1. merit produced by
abandoning, that is, the merit which results from the sole fact of
abandoning; 2. merit produced by its enjoyment, 539 the merit which
results in joy in the object given, by the person who receives.
121a. The merit of a gift to a Caitya is merit produced by
abandoning. 540
How can the gift produce merit when no one receives it?
We would answer this objection by asking why would the gift
produce merit when someone receives it, and why it would not produce
merit when no one receives it?
Because, in the second case, no one is satisfied, or favored by the gift.
If the satisfaction of a person who receives is a condition for merit,
you then deny that the Immeasurable Mediations (Mediations of
Compassion, etc., viii.29) and the Meditation of Right View are
meritorious. The gift to a Caitya thus produces merit,
121b. Even though no one receives it, as is the case with
compassion, etc.
In the case of the Meditation on Compassion, no one receives, no
one is satisfied, and yet merit arises for the compassionate person,
through the very force of his thoughts of compassion. In the same way,
even though the Excellent Being has passed away, a gift to a Caitya
made with devotion to him is meritorious by reason of the thought of
the believer himself.
Should we conclude then that material offerings and worship are
superfluous?
No, for the devotion which produces these actions very muchKarma 703
outweighs the devotion of a person who worships and who gives in
mind only. When a person who has the intention of killing his enemy,
continues his bodily and vocal actions on the dead body of his enemy
which this intention provokes, thinking, "This is my enemy," that is to
say, he thinks, "This enemy is not yet dead," he obtains demerit very
much greater than he would have through merely the intention; 541 in
the same way, even though the Master has passed away, the person who
does actions of giving and worship inspired through devotion obtains a
much greater merit than he would have only through devotion.
If a seed given to a good field bears an agreeable result, should we
think that it bears a disagreeable result if given to a bad field?
121c-d. Even seeded into a bad field, the gift bears agreeable
results, for there is never opposition between the result and the
seed, 542
From the seed of the vine, 543 there arises solely the sweet fruit of the
vine; from the seed of the nimba (Azadirachta Indica) there arises only
the sour fruit of the nimba: even seeded into a bad field, the seed bears
the result which is appropriate to it. In the same way, this seed which is
the gift of a person who has the intention of being useful to another,
even if placed into a bad field, can only produce an agreeable result. But,
through the evil of the field, the result will be small or almost nil.
We have explained meritorious work which consists of Giving,
together with its related questions.
We must now explain meritorious work which consists of the
Precepts.
122a-b. Immorality is bad rūpa. Morality is the renouncing of
immorality. 544
Bad rūpa is called immorality. The renouncing of immorality, which
is morality, is704
Chapter Four
122b. Of two types.
Renouncing is vijñapti, the action by which one renounces, and
avijñapti, the fact of abstaining (see above, pp. 560, 562, 583).
Morality is not solely the renouncing of immorality.
122c. It is, further, the renouncing of that which is prohibited by
the Buddha.
To renounce that which is prohibited by the Buddha, the Blessed
One, without being in and of itself immoral, for example renouncing
meals at forbidden times,-is also morality. This renouncing is also
vijñapti and avijñapti. He who has undertaken to observe the rules and
who then violates them, commits immorality.
The morality that we have just described, in short, is
122d. Pure, when it is endowed with the four qualities.
Morality endowed with the four qualities is pure; it is impure in the
contrary case.
123a-b. Not troubled by immorality, by the causes of im-
morality; it takes as its support the opposite of immorality and
"peace."
"Not troubled by immorality" we have described; "not troubled by
the causes of immorality," that is, by the klefas and upakleśas (v.41), “it
takes as its support the opposites of immorality," because it relies on the
four smṛtyupasthānas (vi.14); and it relies on "peace," not on rebirth in
celestial realms, because it is directed to Nirvāṇa.
According to another opinion, five causes make morality pure: 1.
the purity of the deed itself [the renouncing of bad deeds]; 2. the purity
of their attendants [renouncing the preparation or the means of killing,
etc.]; 3. the absence of disturbance from the vitarkas [kāma, vyāpāda,
and vihimsävitarka]; 4. its supervision through mindfulness [Buddha,
Dharma, Sanghānusmṛti-which includes the renouncing of undefined
actions]; and 5. its application to Nirvāṇa. 545
According to another opinion, morality is of four types: 1. the
morality of fear, which one observes from the fear of the loss of the
resources necessary to life, from fear of a bad reputation, from fear ofKarma 705
chastisement, from fear of bad realms of rebirth; 546 2. mercenary
morality, which one observes from attachment to agreeable realms of
existence, to pleasures, to honors; 3. a morality suitable to the parts of
Bodhi, which persons who possess Right View possess, with a view to
their deliverance; and 4. pure morality, which, being free from stains, is
free from vices.
We have explained morality.
123c-d. "Good absorption" or good in absorption, is bhāvanā,
meditation, soaking in, or impregnation. 547
What do we understand by samāhita, absorbed? That which is
absorption (samādhi, ii.24, viii.1) by its nature, and that which coexists
with what is absorption by nature.
Why does "good absorption" receive the name of bhāvanā?
123d. Because it perfumes, impregnates the mind.
Good absorption impregnates the mind to an extreme degree,
because it (i.e., the mind) grasps the qualities of this good, in the same
way as sesame seeds are impregnated by flowers in their grasping the
odor of these flowers.
We have said (iv.113d) that the result of giving consists of joys.
What result does one obtain from the precepts and from meditation?
124a-b. Essentially, the precepts have heaven for their result;
meditation has disconnection for its result. 548
Giving also has heaven for its result, but the precepts are the
principle, normative cause of it. Disconnection, or Nirvāṇa, (ii. trans. p.
280) has meditation for its cause, which, in the path of abandoning
(prahāṇamārga, vi.60c-d) immediately produces disconnection from the
defilements; but the precepts contribute to it, since stilling (śamatha)
and insight (vipaśyanā) presuppose the precepts.706 Chapter Four
The Sūtra says that four persons produce "Brahmin” merit,
brāhmapunya. 549 What is this merit?
According to the Vaibhāṣikas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 425c13), this is
the merit which has been defined above in order that we might know
the measure of the action which has the marks of the Bodhisattva for its
result (iv.110). 550
The ancient masters 551 said:
124c-d. Four possess Brahmin merit, because they are happy in
the heavens for a kalpa. 552
The merit of such a measure that one is happy in heaven for a kalpa
is the Brahmin merit, for the lifespan of the Brahmapurohitas is a kalpa
(iii.80d). 553 And in another Canon, one reads, "He engenders Brahmin
merit, he is happy in the heavens for a kalpa."
We have studied material giving, 554
125a-b. The gift of the Dharmas is the correct teaching, not
defiled, of the Sūtras etc. 555
The gift of the Dharma is to teach, correctly and with a mind not
defiled, the Sūtra and the other parts of Scripture. Consequently, those
who teach the Dharma either falsely, or with a defiled mind, through a
desire for gain, for respect, and for reputation,556 destroy the great merit
which would otherwise fall to them.
We have explained the three types of good according to the
distinction of the three items of meritorious work. Furthermore,
125c-d. Good is threefold, merit, Nirvāṇa and penetration.
Good merit, or good "favorable to merit" is the good which leads to
an agreeable retribution. 557Karma 707
The good which is deliverance 558 is the good which, when it arises,
becomes a dharma of Parinirvāṇa. 559 It is recognized that whoever,
understanding the sermons concerning the defects of Samsāra, the
non-self, and the qualities of Nirvāṇa, has his hairs stand on end and
who pours forth tears, 560 possesses the mokṣabhāgiya root of good; in
this same way, one knows that there was a seed in the khalabila, 561
when, in the rain, one sees a plant put forth shoots.
The good of penetration is fourfold, ușmagatas, etc.; it will be
explained later (vi.17). 562
What is the nature of what is popularly called writing, carving
(mudrā), eloquence, poetry (kävya), and calculation?
126. An industrious action, of the body, of the voice or of the
mind, with that which gives rise to it, are such things as writing,
carving, eloquence, poetry, and calculation. 563
"Industrious," that is, due to a certain technique.
"Threefold action” is bodily, vocal, and mental action.
"Writing and carving” are bodily actions, industrious, together with
what gives rise to this action, namely the collection of the mind and its
mental states.
"Eloquence and poetry" are vocal actions.
Consequently, writing, carving, eloquence, and poetry, are by their
nature, the five skandhas.
"Calculation" is mental action: this refers to the mental enumera-
tion of the dharmas, 564
Now let us explain some synonyms:
127a-b. Defiled dharmas are savadya, nivṛta, and hina.
Some synonyms of "defiled" are: sävadya, associated with avadya, or
bad; nivṛta, that is, "covered" by the defilements: and the defilements
themselves are covered by other defilements; hina, or ignoble, because708 Chapter Four
they are low or abandoned by the Aryans.
127b-c. Good and pure dharmas are pranīta.
Praṇīta, “excellent," is a synonym for śubha, that is, kuśala, good, and
of amala, immaculate or anāsrava.
The dharmas which are neither ignoble nor excellent, are thus
median (madhya). 565
127c-d. Good conditioned dharmas are sevya.
Sevya, "to be cultivated" is synonymous with "good" and "con-
ditioned."
It then follows that other dharmas, some unconditioned, others
conditioned but defiled or non-defiled-neutral, are not to be cultivated.
In fact, unconditioned dharmas are not susceptible of being produced, or
cultivated, since the unconditioned has no result: now, it is with a view
to a result that one cultivates.
All the other dharmas are inferior. 566
127d. Deliverance is the highest.
These is nothing which outweighs Nirvāṇa. Nirvāṇa, being eternal
and good, outweighs all.
The Latent Defilements
Om. Homage to the Buddha.
We said that the world, in all its variety, arises from action
(iv.1).Now it is by reason of the anuśayas,¹ or latent defilements, that
actions accumulate:2 in the absence of the anusayas, actions are not
capable of producing a new existence. Consequently
1a. The roots of existence, that is, of rebirth or of action, are the
anuśayas³
When a klesa4 or defilement enters into action, it accomplishes ten
operations: 1. it makes solid its root, its prāpti-the possession that a
certain person already had of the kleśa (ii.36, 38a)—preventing it from
being broken; 2. it places itself in a series (that is, it continues to
reproduce itself); 3. it accommodates its field, rendering the person
(āśrava, ii.5, 6, 44d) fit for the arising of the kleśa; 4. it engenders its
offspring, that is, the upakleśas (v.46): hatred engenders anger, etc.; 5.
it leads to action; 6. it aggregates its causes, namely, incorrect
judgment; 7. it causes one to be mistaken with regard to the object of
consciousness; 8. it bends the mental series towards the object or
towards rebirth (iii.30); 9. it brings about a falling away of good; and
10. it becomes a bond (bandhana, v.45d) and prevents surmounting of
the sphere of existence to which it belongs.³
How many anusayas are there?
There are, in all, six.
What are they?768
Chapter Five
1c-d. Six: attachment, and then anger, pride, ignorance,
false views, and doubt.6
The words "and then (tathā)” serve to show that it is by reason
of attachment that the others "take up their abode" (anuśayana,
v.17) in the object. We shall explain this point later.
1d-2a. These six make seven through the division of
attachment.
There is the anusaya of attachment to pleasure or sensual
desire (kāmarāgānuśaya);7 the anusaya of anger; the anusaya of
attachment to existence; the anusaya of pride; the anusaya of
ignorance; the anuśaya of erroneous views; and the anusaya of
doubt (vicikitsā).8
What does the expression kamarāgānuśaya signify? Is there an
anuśaya called kämarāga? Or is there an anuśaya of kamarāga
distinct from kamarāga?
If one says that kāmarāga is an anuśaya, one then contradicts
the Sūtra which says, "The person who does not long dwell with
his mind in the prey of (paryavasthita) attachment to pleasure;
who, when the wrapping (paryavasthāna) of attachment is about
to be produced, knows well how to depart from it, for this person
the wrapping which is attachment, perfectly destroyed of its life
force, is abandoned along with its anusaya."9 To say that
attachment is abandoned at the same time as its anuśaya is to say
that attachment and its anuśaya are two distinct things.
If one explains kāmarāgānuśya as the anusaya of kāmarāga, one
must make the anusaya a thing not associated with the mind (ii.35)
(and consisting of the possession, prāpti, ii.36, of the kāmarāga).
But such a theory is in contradiction to the Abhidharma (Jñāna-
prasthāna, TD 26, p. 946b25 and following) which teaches that
"kāmarāgānuśaya is associated with (i.e., can be accompanied by)
three sensations, that of pleasure, satisfaction, and indifference
(ii.7)." Now a dharma not associated with the mind cannot be
accompanied by these sensations.10The Latent Defilements 769
According to the Vaibhāṣikas, kāmarāgānusaya is an anuśaya
called kamarāga; it is the attachment itself which is anusaya, and
the same for the other defilements: doubt (vicikitsā) is the anuśaya
of doubt.
But the Sūtra which we have just quoted says that one
abandons kāmarāga along with its anuśaya. Hence the anuśaya is
not kāmarāga.11
The Vaibhāṣikas answer: The expression "with its anuśaya”
should be explained as "with its anubandha”, that is, “with its
consequences."¹2 Or rather the Sutra uses the word anuśaya in the
sense of "possession" because possession is the cause of the
anuśaya (ii.35, trans. p. 208).¹3 But the Abhidharma, which always
expresses itself literally and not figuratively, says that the anusaya
is the klesa or defilement itself. Consequently the anusayas are
associated with the mind.
(Besides this argument from authority, there is an argument
from inference:)
"Because they defile the mind, because they hinder, because
they are in contradiction with good, and yet because good appears,
the anusayas are not disassociated from the mind."14
This means that because of the anusayas, the mind is defiled;
good which has not arisen is hindered from arising, and one falls
away from good already arisen; consequently the anuśayas are not
dharmas disassociated from the mind.
But, one would say, some dharmas disassociated from the mind
can have a similar effect.
No, for if the anusayas were disassociated from the mind, they
would always be present; and, consequently, if we suppose that
they have a similar effect, then good would never be able to arise.
Now it is a fact that it does arise. Thus the anusayas are not
disassociated from the mind.¹5
But again, the masters who consider the anuśayas as disasso-
ciated from the mind do not attribute this threefold activity770 Chapter Five
(defiling the mind, etc.) to the anusayas, but to the kleśa itself (that
is, to the paryavasthāna, the active defilement; and this is not
always present).
The Sauträntika theory is best.
Kāmarāgānuśaya means “anuśaya of kāmarāga". But the
anuśaya is neither associated with the mind, nor disassociated from
it: for it is not a separate thing (dravya). What is called anuśaya is
the klefa itself in a state of sleep, whereas the paryavasthana is the
kleśa in an awakened state. The sleeping kleśa is the non-manif-
ested klesa, in the state of being a seed; the awakened kleśa is the
manifested kleśa, the klesa in action. And by "seed" one should
understand a certain capacity to produce the klesa, a power
belonging to the person engendered by the previous klefa. In this
same way there exists in a certain person the capacity of producing
a consciousness of memory, a capacity engendered by a conscious-
ness of preception; in this same way the capacity to produce rice,
which belongs to the plant, the shoot, the stalk, etc., is engendered
by the rice seed.16
The masters ¹7 for whom the seed of the klefa is a certain
dharma distinct from the kleśa itself, disassocated from the mind
and called an anuśaya, must admit a dharma existing in and of itself,
disassociated from the mind and the cause of memory. And the
same would hold for the plant.
[The Sarvastivadins answer]. You do not have the right to
explain "anufaya of kamarāga," for the Sutra clearly teaches that
anuśaya is kāmarāga itself.
The Satsatkasutra says, "This person has agreeable sensation,
and rāgānuśaya" 18 [From all evidence, the Sūtra understands that,
at the moment of agreeable sensation, there is active desire (rāga):
and it designates this active desire by the name of anusaya].
But the Sūtra says, "He has rāgānuśaya;” it does not say, "HeThe Latent Defilements 771
then has rāgānuśaya." [At the moment of agreeable sensation, the
anusaya of desire (rāga) is in the process of arising, utpadyate; it
has not yet arisen, utpanna. In other words, at the moment of the
agreeable sensation, there is active rāga, awakened desire;] when
this sensation ends, desire becomes dormant: then there is only the
anuśaya of desire, dormant desire, the seed of future awakened
desire.
Or rather, we would say, when the Sütra says rāgānuśaya, it
means rāga: the first is the effect of the second, and the cause can
be designated by the name of its effect.
The examination of this chance problem is finished. Let us
return to our subject.
What is this division that the Sūtra sets up, attachment to
agreeable objects (kāmarāga) and attachment to existence
(bhavarāga)? What is attachment to existence?
2b. Attachment to existence arises from the two Dhātus.
Attachment to Rūpadhātu and to Ārūpyadhātu is called
bhavarāga, attachment to existence [in opposition to kāmarāga,
attachment to agreeable objects,—kāmas or kāmagunas, which is
attachment proper to Kāmadhātu, iii.3c-d].
Why is the name of attachment to existence (bhavarāga)
reserved for attachment to the two higher Dhātus?
2c-d. It is so called because it is turned within, and in order
to avoid the idea that these two Dhātus are deliverance.19
The School explains: In general, the attachment of the beings
in these two Dhātus is with regard to absorption (samāpatti), (or
more precisely, to “enjoyable” dhyāna, āsvādanasaṁprayuktadhyāna,
viii.6). One says "in general" because these beings also have
attachments with regard to their palaces, vimānas, etc.772 Chapter Five
This attachment, being an absorption, is turned within. This is
why it alone receives the name of attachment to existence.
Further, certain persons imagine that the two Dhātus consti-
tute deliverance: this is why the Blessed One gives the name
"attachment to existence" to the attachment which has these two
Dhātus for its object.
(According to us), existence (bhava) means the person. Beings
in absorption enjoy both the absorption itself and their own
persons. Being freed from attachment to pleasures, they only
enjoy their own persons and not external objects. This is why
attachment to the two higher Dhātus is called attachment to
existence (bhavarāga).
According to the Abhidharma (Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p.
943a27), these six anuśayas make ten. How is this?
3. There are five (erroneous) views: a belief in a self
(satkāyadṛṣṭi), false views (mithyādṛṣṭi), a belief in the
extremes (antagrāhadṛṣṭi), the esteeming of views (dṛṣṭipa-
rāmarśa), and the esteeming of morality and ascetic
practices (śīlavrataparāmarśa): thus there are ten anus-
ayas.20
By dividing views (dṛṣṭi) into five, there are six anuśayas, for a
total of ten anuśayas; five which are not views by nature, namely
desire, anger, pride, ignorance and doubt; and five which are views,
satkāyadṛṣṭi, etc.
In addition the Abhidharma (Jñānaprasthāna, ibid.) teaches
that these ten anuśayas make up thirty-six anuśayas in Kāmadhātu,
thirty-one anusayas in Rūpadhātu, and thirty-one anusayas in
Ārūpyadhātu: in all ninety-eight anuśayas.21
Thirty-two of the thirty-six anusayas of Kāmadhātu are
abandoned by Seeing the Truths (see i.40, iv.11-12).The Latent Defilements 773
4. With the exception of three or two views, ten, seven,
seven, eight anuśayas are abandoned in Kāmadhātu by the
Seeing of Suffering and the three other Truths respectively.22
All of the above mentioned anusayas are, in Kāmadhātu,
abandoned through the Seeing of Suffering.
Seven are abandoned through the Seeing of Arising and
through the Seeing of Extinction, with the exception of a belief in
a self, a belief in the extremes, and the esteeming of morality and
ascetic practices.
Eight are abandoned through the Seeing of the Path, with the
exception of satkāyadṛṣṭi and antagrābadṛṣṭi
This makes thirty-two anuśayas abandoned through Seeing,
because the mere Seeing of the Truths suffices to abandon them.
5a. Four are abandoned through Meditation.23
Namely desire, anger, ignorance and pride: because one who
has seen the Truths then abandons them through Meditation on
the Path.
In this way satkāyadṛṣṭi, the view of self and of things
pertaining to a self, is unique, being susceptible of being
abandoned through the Seeing of Suffering; and the same for
antagrāhadṛṣṭi, the belief in extremes.
False views is of four types, abandoned through the Seeing of
Suffering, Arising, Extinction, and the Path; the same for the
esteeming of bad views and doubt.
The esteeming of morality and ascetic practices is of two types,
being susceptible of being abandoned through 1.) the Seeing of
Suffering and 2.) the Path.
Desire, anger, pride, and ignorance are of five types, being
abandoned through the Seeing of each of the Truths, and through
Meditation.
What is the characteristic or definition of the anusayas774 Chapter Five
susceptible of being abandoned through the Seeing of Suffering?..
What is the definiton of the anufayas susceptible of being
abandoned through Meditation?
When it is possible to abandon the object (ālambana) of an
anuśaya through the Seeing of a certain Truth, it is said that this
anuśaya can be abandoned through the Seeing of this Truth.24 The
others are abandoned through Meditation.
There are thus twelve views, four doubts, five desires, five
angers,
five ignorances, and five prides: in all thirty-six anuśayas in
Kāmadhātu.
5b-c. The same, with the exception of the angers, for
Rūpadhātu.
The same sorts of anuśayas, with the exception of the five
angers, make up the thirty-one anusayas of Rūpadhātu.
5c. The same in Ārūpyadhātu.
The same thirty-one.
5d. In this way, there are ninety-eight.
The Abhidharmikas (Jñanaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 929c2) say
that the six anusayas make ninety-eight through the differences of
their aspect, their mode of expulsion (ii.52b), and their sphere of
existence (their Dhātu).
Among the ninety-eight anuśayas, eighty-eight are abandoned
through Seeing because they are struck, destroyed through theThe Latent Defilements 775
"patiences" (kṣāntis, vi.25d), and ten are abandoned through
Meditation because they are struck by the "knowledges” (jñānas). ² 25
Is this a strict rule with regard to abandoning through Seeing and
Meditation?
6a-c. When they arise in Bhavāgra (the highest state of
Ārūpyadhātu), the anusayas which are struck by the kṣāntis
are abandoned through Seeing and through Meditation.
The word "kṣāntis" refers to the dharmajñānakṣāntis and the
anvayajñānakṣāntis (vi.26c).
Among the anusayas which are struck by the kṣāntis, those which
are in Bhavagra are abandoned only by Seeing, for only anvayajñānak-
sāntis causes them to be abandoned. [Only the Aryans, through the
pure path, abandon these anusayas] (vi.45c).
Those in the eight bhūmis (i.e., Kāmadhātu, Rūpadhātu and
the first three stages of Ārūpyadhātu) are abandoned either
through Seeing or through Meditation: Aryans abandon them
solely through Seeing, and not through Meditation, by means of
the dharmajñānakṣāntis or the anvayajñānakṣāntis accordingly as
they belong to the anusayas of Kāmadhātu or of the higher
spheres, whereas Pṛthagjanas abandon them only through
Meditation, and not though Seeing, for these anuśayas can be
abandoned through a worldly knowledge (lokasamvṛtijñāna, vii.9).
6c-d. The anusayas which are not struck by the kṣāntis are
only abandoned through Meditation.
The anusayas which are struck by the "knowledges” (jñānas),
at whichever stage they belong, are only abandoned through
Meditation, whether they belong to an Aryan or to a Pṛthagjana. In
fact, an Āryan abandons them through anāsrava jñāna meditation,
or pure knowledge, whereas a Pṛthagjana abandons them through
a worldly knowledge (lokasamvṛtijñāna).776 Chapter Five
Some other masters maintain that non-Buddhists (bāhyaka)
cannot abandon the anuśayas abandoned through Seeing. For the
Mahākarmavibhāgasūtra teaches that erroneous views are active
among the non-Buddhists in Kāmadhātu, although they may be
"detached” (vītarāga, that is, having abandoned the attachments of
Kāmadhātu, attachments that one abandons through Meditati-
on.) And the Brahmajālasūtra says that some non-Buddhists are
entirely detached from all sorts of views (drṛṣṭi) of Kāmadhātu:
there are among them some persons who conjure up systems
concerning the past, eternalists, partial eternalists, or followers of
chance. (As one could object: "the 'views' of these persons
detached from Kāmadhātu are of the sphere of Rūpadhātu," we
would say that) Kāmadhātu cannot be, with regard to that which
concerns it, the object of defilements (kleśa) of Rūpadhātu, because
such persons are detached from Kāmadhātu. But they have not
abandoned the views of Kāmadhātu.
The Vaibhāṣikas explain this difficulty by saying that those
who are detached lose (this detachement) when they produce a
view, in the manner that Devadatta (Rockhill, p. 85) lost his ṛddhi
(vii.48a).
We have seen that view is divided into five categories by reason
of its aspect. What are the five views?
7. The view of self and things pertaining to self, the view of
eternity and annihilation, the view of negation, the view
that holds as high that which is low, and that which holds
for cause and Path that which is not cause and Path: theseare the five views.
The Latent Defilements 777
1. To believe in a self and in things pertaining to self
(ātmātmīyagrāha) is satkāyadṛṣṭi;²6 it is termed sat ("existence")
because it perishes, and kaya because it is an accumulation or
multiplicity. Satkāya means "an accumulation of perishing things,"
that is, the five upādānaskandhas²8 (i.8a-b).
The expression satkāya is put forth in order to discard the idea
of permanence this is why one says sat-and in order to discard
the notion of a unity-this is why one says kāya. In fact, if one
believes that the skandhas are a self, this is because one first and
foremost attributes a permanence and unity to them.
Satkāyadṛṣṭi means, then, "a view with regard to the satkāya.”
By this, all the views whose object is an impure belief in
extremes (antagrāhadṛṣṭi), etc., are views of the satkāya, that is, of
the five skandhas. But even though they are views of the satkaya,
they are not "views of the self or of things pertaining to self."28
Also it is only the belief in a self or in things pertaining to a
self that receives the name of satkayadṛṣṭi, for according to a
declaration of the Blessed One, “Oh monk, any monk or Brahmin
who in this world believes in a self, what he considers to be a self is
only the five upādānaskandhas.”29
2. To believe in the eternity or in the annihiliation of what one
believes to be a self, is antagrāhadṛṣṭi, "a view that grasps
extremes," for this is to falsely believe in the extreme (anta) thesis
of eternity or annihilation.
3. The view that consists of negating (apavāda) that which
really exists, the Truth of Suffering, etc. and which consists of
saying nästi, "that is not," is mithyadṛṣṭi or false view.30 All falsely
conceived views are "false views", but only mithyadṛṣṭi receives
this name because it is the most false of all, as the worst odor is
called the bad odor. It is a negation, whereas the other views are an778 Chapter Five
affirmation or erroneous attribution (samāropikā).³1
4. The view which considers that which is bad, low, abandoned
(hīna, iv.127) as good, or "high," is called drstiparāmarśa, "the
esteeming of bad views."
What does hina mean? It refers to everything that is impure,
because the Saints abandon it (prahīņa). And the view that consist
of esteeming this is called simply "consideration" (parāmarśa).
It would be best to say dṛṣṭyādiparāmarśa, "esteeming that
which is low, beginning with erroneous views." But the word ādi is
omitted here.32
5. The view which considers as cause that which is not cause, or
as the path that which is not the Path, is called filavrataparāmarśa:
namely, to consider Maheśvara, Prajāpati, or any other entity
which is not a cause of the world as a cause of the world; to
consider the rituals of suicide,-entering into fire or drowning-as
a cause of a heavenly rebirth when they do not in fact procure
heaven; or to consider morality and ascetic practices as the only
path to deliverance when they are themselves not the only path to
deliverance, nor the "knowledges" (jñāna) of the Sammkhyas and
the Yogins which are not a path to deliverance; and so too the rest.
Here too, [according to the Vaibhāṣikas,] the word ādi is
omitted.33
These are the five erroneous views.
[Objection:] You have said that the erroneous view that
regards as a cause of the world that which is not a cause of the
world is the esteeming of morality and ascetic practices (filavr-
ataparāmaría). In this hypothesis, the esteeming of morality and
ascetic practices is abandoned through the Seeing of the Truth of
Arising, since it admits of error with regard to cause (=arising).
We would answer that those who consider the Lord (Ïśvara) orThe Latent Defilements 779
Prajāpati as a cause of the world regard the Lord and Prajapati as
eternal beings, one, personal, and active (atman, kartar). It then
follows that:
8. If one clings to the idea that the Lord, etc., is the cause of
the world, this is by reason of false conceptions of
permanence and personality. Thus this clinging is to be
abandoned through Seeing (the Truth) of Suffering.34
The belief in the eternity or in the personality of the Lord or
Prajāpati is abandoned through Seeing the single Truth of
Suffering; as a consequence the belief in their causality, which
results from this first belief, is abandoned in the same way as this
same first belief is abandoned.
[Objection:] The erroneous view that suicide through fire or
drowning produces a heavenly rebirth, and the erroneous view that
morality and ascetic practices produce by themselves purity, have
nothing to do with the false conceptions of permanence and
personality. Why do you say that one abandons them through
Seeing the Truth of Suffering? It is through the Seeing of the
Truth of Arising that one should abandon them.
The Mülaśāstra (Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 1029a12) says,
"There are some non-Buddhists who give rise to this view, who
posit this theory: a person who adopts the habits of bulls (gośīla),
the habits of deer, or the habits of dogs, shall obtain purity,
deliverance, and escape; he shall obtain the absolute going beyond
of the happiness and suffering (of the three spheres of existence),
and he shall reach the place beyond happiness and suffering. One
should know that all these types of considering as cause that which
is not truly cause is the esteeming of morality and ascetic practices,
which is abandoned through Seeing the Truth of Suffering." The
doctrine of the Vaibhāṣikas is thus that these two opinions are to
be abandoned through the Seeing the Truth of Suffering, because
they allow error with regard to suffering.780 Chapter Five
But his argument is carried too far! All the defilements (klesas)
which have the impure for their object embrace error with regard
to suffering. (In fact, all impurity is suffering).
Furthermore, we would ask what is the esteeming of morality
and ascetic practices which is abandoned through Seeing the Truth
of the Path? If the Vaibhāṣikas answer, “The esteeming of
morality and ascetic practices relative to the dharma which is
abandoned through Seeing the Path, namely relative to one of the
eight anuśayas the first of which is wrong views,” we would then
answer that this esteeming of morality and ascetic practices also
supposes error relative to suffering.
Moreover we do not see how the esteeming of morality and
ascetic practices could be relative to a dharma to be abandoned
through the Truth of the Path: 1. How could a person who
entertains wrong views or doubt relative to the Path, thinking
"There is no Path," or "Is there, or is there not, a Path?," imagine
to obtain purification through this wrong view or through this
doubt? 2. If this person, taking up the path of deliverance imagined
by the Sāṁkhyas, etc., says, “This is the path; the Buddhist Path is
not the path," then this non-Buddhist imagines that he obtains
purification through the path of the Sāṁkhyas, and not through
wrong views relative to the Path. Furthermore, when a person
imagines that he obtains purification through a wrong view
abandoned through the Seeing of Arising or Extinction, why is his
esteeming of morality and ascetic practices not abandoned through
the Seeing of these same two Truths?
This point remains to be examined.35
We have spoken (v.8) of the two erroneous views of permanence
(or eternity) and personality. Are there only two errors?
There are four errors: to hold that which is impermanent to be
permanent, that which is suffering to be happiness, that which isThe Latent Defilements 781
impure to be pure, and that which is not a "soul" to be a soul or
self.
What is the nature of these four errors?
9a-b. One distinguishes four errors within the three
views.36
That part of the belief in extremes which is a view of
permanence constitutes one error; two parts of the esteeming of
bad views constitute the errors of happiness and purity; and that
part of the belief in a self and of things pertaining to a self which is
a view of self constitutes one error.
Some other masters maintain that all satkāyadṛṣṭi, that is, not
simply the idea of self but also the idea of things pertaining to self,
constitutes ātmaviparyāsa, "error with regard to the self."
[The Vaibhāṣikas say:] How could the idea of things pertaining
to a self be part of error with regard to the self? In fact the Sutra of
the Viparyāsas does not indicate this. (It says simply, “It is an error
to say that anātman is ātman”) and the following: "He who sees a
self prevailing within the five upādānaskandhas sees 'mine"" [Thus
the view of "mine" differs from the view of “self," a view from
whence it derives.]
But we think that the view of self has two parts: to say "I" and
to say "mine." If the idea of "mine" were a view different from the
idea of "I," then the ideas expressed by other grammatical cases,
such as mayā (by me) or mahyam (to me) would thus consititute so
many new views. Thus all belief in a self and in things pertaining
to a self is totally included in the error of self.
***782 Chapter Five
Are not the other defilements errors because, in order for there
to be error, a combination of three characteristics is indispensable?
What are these three characteristics?
9b-c. Reflective judgment and affirmation because they
allow complete error.
The view of annihilation (ucchedadṛṣṭi, a part of the belief in
extremes, (antagrāhadṛṣṭi) and false views are not affirmations or
erroneous attributions (samāropa), since they are directed towards
the absence of existence.
The esteeming of morality and ascetic practices affirms that
morality and practices suffice for purification: there is no total
error in this, since morality and practices do contribute to
purification.
The other defilements do not admit of reflective judgment, and
as a consequence are not complete errors (viparyāsa).
But the Blessed One said, "To consider the impermanent as
permanent is an error of idea (saṁjñāviparyāsa), an error of
thought (cittaviparyāsa), and an error of view (dṛṣṭiviparyāsa),”
and thus following for happiness, purity, and the self.³7Now
neither ideas nor thoughts admit of reflective judgment. Thus the
definition proposed for error (viparyāsa) is inexact.
9d. Thought and idea are termed “error” by reason of view.
Only view is error, but by virtue of the esteeming of bad views
(dṛṣṭiviparyāsa), ideas and thoughts associated with view and
having its same aspect are also termed "errors."The Latent Defilements 783
Why does not the same hold for sensation and the other
mental states associated with view?
Because one says in worldly language "error of idea," and
"error of thought," but not "error of sensation."
A Srotaāpanna abandons all these errors (Jñanaprasthāna, TD
26, p. 957a294); for the Seeing of the Truths which brings about
the abandonment of views also brings about the abandoning of the
ideas and thoughts associated with these views.
1. Another School ³8 says: The error which consists of holding
as permanent that which is impermanent contains three errors:
error of idea, of thought and of view; and the rest. We then have
twelve errors instead of four errors.
Among these twelve, eight are abandoned through the Seeing
of the Truths. Four, namely the errors of idea and thought relative
to happiness and purity, are abandoned through the Seeing of the
Truths through Meditation.
In fact the Āryans, who by definition have abandoned all the
anusayas that one abandons through Seeing the Truths, certainly
possess ideas of happiness and purity, since, when they are not
detached, they produce an attachment to pleasure.
2. The Vaibhāṣikas do not consider this reasoning as conclusive.
From the fact that these Āryans have ideas of happiness and
purity, you conclude that they have error relative to happiness and
purity. You should say that they also have the error relative to self,
since they certainly have the idea and thought of a living being:
attachment to pleasure relative to a woman or relative to
themselves evidently presupposses the idea and the thought of a
being.
Moreover one reads in the Sūtras, “The Āryan Śrāvaka teaches
true seeing and knowing:39 this is the Truth of Suffering... At this
moment the errors of idea, of thought and of view relative to the
impermanent taken for the permanent, are abandoned by them,"
and the rest. As a consequence, only the ideas and thoughts
provoked by erroneous views, or associated with erroneous views,784 Chapter Five
are errors, and not the others, which are abandoned through
Meditation.
In fact, it happens that the Aryan, through an illusion which
lasts only as long as he first sees an object, produces attachment to
pleasure, such as the illusion caused by the circle of a fire-brand or
by a painted Yakṣa. There is no error in the Aryan, but only a
mistaken idea and thought (samjñācittaviabhrama, vi.60).4⁰
3. But4¹ the Sthavira Ānanda said to the Āryan Vāgīśa, “Your
mind is burned by the error of your ideas."42How do we explain
these words if one admits the thesis of the Vaibhāṣikas?
4. 43 As a consequence the Śaikṣa has not completely abandoned
the eight errors of idea and thought. It is true that these errors are
abandoned by means of correct knowledge of the Truths, and not
without this knowledge.
The Sūtra that the Vaibhāṣikas quote (p. 783, line 29) thus
indicates the means (upāya) of abandoning these said errors; there
is no contradiction here with the Sūtra of Vāgīśa.44
The anusaya of erroneous view is subdivided in this manner. Is
it the same for the other anuśśayas?
It is the same for pride.
10a. There are seven types of pride (māna):45
These are mana, adhimāna, mānātmāna, asmimāna, abhimāna,
ūnamāna, and mithyāmāna.
In general, arrogance of the mind (ii.33b) is called māna. Māna
is subdivided on the basis of its different modes: 1. Māna: when the
mind makes itself lofty or develops pride by thinking, “I am
superior" or "I am equal"relative to an inferior or to an equal. 2.The Latent Defilements 785
Adhimāna: to think, “I am superior,” “I am equal," relative to an
equal, or to a superior. 3. Mānātimāna: to think, “I am superior"
relative to a superior. 4. Asmimāna: when the mind prides itself by
taking the five upādānaskandhas for its "self” and “mine.” 5.
Abhimana to think that one possessess distinctions, that is, some
dharmas, pure or impure, which abide in absorption, when one
does not possess them (v.27b-c). 6. Ūnamāna: to think, "I am
slightly inferior” relative to that which is greatly superior. 7.
Mithyāmāna: to attribute to oneself spiritual qualities which one
does not possess.
Abhimana has a substantial basis: it is savastuka, this is the
pride of someone who has some qualities resembling the visesas.
Mithyāmāna has no substantial basis: this is the pride of someone
who has no qualities whatsoever but who believes that he has
some.
Yet the Šāstra (Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 1028b26) teaches
nine types of pride, mānavidhā, or simply vidhā, namely, 1. “I am
superior;” 2. “I am equal;” 3. "I am less good;" 4. “Another is
better than I;" 5. "He is equal to me;" 6. "He is worse than I;" 7.
"Another is not better than I;" 8. “He is not my equal;" and 9. “He
is not worse than I.”
Which of the seven types of pride make up these nine types?
10a-b. Three make nine types.
These nine types come from three manas, namely māna,
adhimāna and ūnamāna.
The first three are the three mānas which reside in the
erroneous view of self. One first thinks "me." Then there arises in
order adhimana, māna, and ūnamāna. One has a type of māna786 Chapter Five
which consists of saying, "I am better," adhimāna which resides in
erroneous views, and the rest. The second three are, in their order,
ūnamāna, māna, and adhimāna. The third three are, in their order,
māna, adhimāna, and ūnamāna.
We see that although we think "I am a bit inferior" relative to
some one greatly superior, this is indeed ūnamāna, for the mind
prides itself in this thought; but how can this type of mana "He is
not worse that I" be a locus of pride?
This is indeed a locus of pride, since one esteems oneself
relative to a group of excellent persons which one regards as
superior, even though one is really vastly inferior to them.
We have reproduced the explanation of the Jñānaprasthāna:
but, according to the Prakaraṇapāda (TD 26, p. 693a29), the first
type of pride, "I am better," comes from three of the seven types of
pride, namely māna, adhimāna, mānātimāna, accordingly as
one judges oneself better than an inferior, better than an equal, or
better than a superior.
How are the seven types of pride abandoned?
10b. They perish through Seeing and Meditation.
All, including asmimāna, perish, that is, are abandoned,
through Seeing and Meditation.
Must we believe that, among the Āryans, the anusayas whichThe Latent Defilements 787
are abandoned though Meditation and which have not yet been
abandoned, are presently active? 46
Not necessarily.
10c-11a. The paryavasthāna of killing, etc., is abandoned
through Meditation; [the thirst for non-existence, etc.]47
The paryavasthana of killing (see v.47), refers to the defile-
ment, klesa, by which one voluntarily commits murder. "Of killing,
etc.,” refers to killing, stealing, adultry, and lying. These
paryavasthānas have the dharmas abandoned through Meditation
for their object.48
11a. The thirst for non-existence, etc.
Vibhavatṛṣṇā,4⁹ "the thirst for non-existence," is also aban-
doned through Meditation. By vibhava (“non-existence") we mean
the impermance of the three Dhātus, Kāmadhātu, etc. Desire
(tṛṣṇā) which is directed to impermanence is called vibhavatṛṣṇā.50
The word "et cetera" (tatha) shows that one should add a part
of bhavatṛṣṇā, the thirst for existence, to vibhavatṛṣṇā, for
example the desire “Would that I could become Airāvaṇa, King of
the Nāgas!" [The same for the desire to become Kuvera, the desire
to become a woman; but not the desire to become Indra].
lla-d. Among the Aryans the various types of pride, etc., and
egotism, [-because they are nourished by views-] and
bad regret, are impossible.51
The types of pride, etc. are not produced, and do not become
active among the Āryans, nor is there any longer "egotism" among
them.
"Et cetera" signifies the anuśayas enumerated above, the788 Chapter Five
paryavasthānas of killing, the desire for non-existence and part
of
the desire for existence.
Why is this?
11b. Because they are nourished by views.
Because all these anuśayas are nourished by erroneous views:
when their nourishment is burned up,52 they no longer have the
power to arise (or: the Aryans no longer produce them).
Māna and asmitā, "egotism," are nourished through wrong
views; the desire for non-existence is nourished through the view
of annihilation; and a part of the desire for existence is nourished
through the view of eternalism.
Even though "bad regret” (ii.28) is abandoned through
Meditation, it does not become active among the Aryans, because it
is nourished by doubt.
Among the ninety-eight anuśayas, how many are universal?
How many are not universal?
12. Universal anuśayas are 1. the erroneous views and
doubts which are abandoned through the Seeing of Suffer-
ing and Arising, 2. the ignorance which is associated with
them, and 3. independent ignorance.53
This makes eleven anuśayas: the five erroneous views which
are abandoned by the Seeing of Suffering; wrong views and the
esteeming of views abandoned through Seeing of Arising; and two
doubts and two ignorances abandoned through the Seeing of
Suffering and the Seeing of Arising.The Latent Defilements 789
These eleven anuśayas are called "universal," "going every-
where," because they grasp the entire Dhātu as their object. (See
p. 790, line 1).54
1. Objection: Do these universals grasp their entire Dhātu
succesively or all at once?
In the first hypothesis, the definition would apply to the other
anusayas as well; and the second hypothesis is inadmissible: in fact
no one considers the totality of the Dhātu as a means of
purification; it is only certain practices which are the object of the
esteeming of morality and ascetic practices. In the same way, no
one considers the totality of the Dhātus as the cause of the world,
but only iśvara, Prajāpati, etc.
2. [Answer of the Vaibhāṣikas:] We do not say that the
universals have the entire Dhātu for their object all at once, but
rather they have the Dhātu in its five categories for their object:
"entire" refers to the totality of types.
3. But, if we understand universality in this way, desire and
pride (tṛṣṇā and māna) would also be universals.
There is atmadṛṣṭi, “a view that there is the self," relative to
the five upādānaskandhas: there will be atmatṛṣṇā, “desire for a
self" relative to the same skandhas. There is agradṛṣṭi, "opinion
that this is better” (a dṛṣṭiparāmarśa), and śuddhidṛṣṭi, “opinion
that this is a means of purification" relative to a certain object: and
there will be desire relative to this same object. And there will also
be pride, māna, relative to the same objects.
In this hypothesis of their univerality, how are thirst and pride
abandoned?
Like a belief in a self (satkāyadṛṣṭi), etc., their object is
abandoned through Seeing and Meditation. Or should we think
that they are to be abandoned through Seeing (like satkāyadṛṣṭi) or
through Meditation.
The author answers: As their object is mixed, they are
abandoned through Meditation. Or rather, they are abandoned
through Seeing, for they exist through the efficacy of the view.790 Chapter Five
4. [The Vaibhāṣikas reply:] thirst and pride are special
defilements and not general defilements (v.23). This is why they
are not universal. (There is thirst and pride related to an object
relative to which there is ātmadṛṣṭi, but not relative to the whole of
this object at once.)
We have seen that eleven anuśayas are universal (that is,
bearing on all the categories) in their Dhātu, in the sphere of
existence wherein the person is born in whom they are found:
13a-b. Among them, nine, with the exception of the two
views, bear on the superior.55
With the exception of a belief in a self (satkāyadṛṣṭi) and a
belief in extremes (antagrāhadṛṣṭai), the nine other universals are
also universals in a different Dhātu; they sometimes bear on a
different Dhātu, sometimes on two, for it is said (in the Prakaraṇ-
apāda, TD 26, p. 711a24), "There are some anusayas of the realm
of Kāmadhātu (that is, produced among the beings of Kāmadhātu)
which bear on the dharmas of the realm of Rūpadhātu, on the
dharmas of the realm of Ārūpyadhātu, or on the dharmas of both
the realms of Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu. (And there are some
anusayas of the realm of Rūpadhātu which bear on the dharmas of
the realm of Ārūpyadhātu).”
[Objection:] When some beings in Kāmadhātu produce the
opinion that Brahmā is a being, the opinion that he is permanent,
they then entertain a belief in a self and a belief in extremes with
regard to a thing belonging to a different, superior Dhātu. Thus
you are wrong to exclude these two erroneous views from the list
of the universal anuśayas in a different Dhātu.
But one does not have the idea of a self and of things
pertaining to a self with regard to Brahmä: thus the idea that he isThe Latent Defilements 791
a being is not a belief in a self. And a belief in extremes is created
by a belief in a self; thus the idea of the permanence of Brahmă is
not a belief in extremes (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 93a4ff).
What sort of views would a belief in a living being and a belief
in permanence be with respect to Brahmă?
The Abhidhārmikas say that there are no erroneous views
here, but only "false knowledge." (All speculative knowledge
which errs, viparītālambana is not considered as views).
But why are the other false opinions which have Brahmā for
their object (the esteeming of morality and ascetic practices, etc.)
considered as erroneous views, and not the two opinions of being
and permanence?
The Siddhānta serves as authority (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 93a).
Are only the anuśayas universals?
13c-d. With the exception of the prāptis, dharmas coexist-
ant with the universal anuśayas are also universals.
"Coexistant dharmas" refer to sensation, etc. Not the praptis,
because the prāpti (adherence) and the prāpya (the thing adhered
to) do not have the same result (ii.36c).
Are universal anuśayas universal causes (ii.54c-d)?
1. Future universal anuśayas are not universal causes. 2.
Coexistents of past and present universal anuśayas are universal
causes, but not universal anuśayas. 3. Past and present universal
anusayas are universal causes. 4. Future coexistents of universal
anusayas are neither universal anuśayas nor universal causes.792 Chapter Five
Among the ninety-eight anusayas, how many have a pure
dharma for their object, that is, the Third and Fourth Truth, the
Truth of Extinction and the Path? How many have an impure
dharma?
14. Wrong views, doubt, and the ignorance which is bound
(yukta) to them, and independent ignorance, abandoned
through the Seeing of Extinction and the Path, make six
anusayas whose object is pure.56
Except for the six,—that is, the three anuśayas abandoned
through the Seeing of Extinction, namely wrong views, doubt, and
the ignorance associated with them or independent of them, and
these same three anusayas abandoned through Seeing the
Path, all the other anusayas have impure dharmas for their
object.
15. The extinction of their own bhūmi is the object of the
anuśayas which have extinction for their sphere; the Path
with its six or nine bhūmis, is the object of the anusayas
which have the Path for their sphere, for the Paths depend
on one another.57
The three anusayas (wrong views, doubt, and ignorance) which
are abandoned through the Seeing of Extinction and which have
Extinction for their object, do not have Extinction for their total
object: when they belong to Kāmadhātu, they bear on Extinction in
Kāmadhātu, and so on from bhūmi to bhūmi, until: when they
belong to Bhavāgra (naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñānāyatana) they bear on
Extinction in Bhavagra.
When they are in the realm of Kāmadhātu, the three anusayas
which have the Path for their object bear on the totality of the
Path as well as on a portion of the dharmajñāna (vi.26), with its
six bhūmis (namely anāgamya, dhyānāntara, and the fourThe Latent Defilements
Dhyānas) (see ii.52c, vii.9).
When they are of the realm of Rūpadhātu or Ārūpyadhātu
(four Dhyānas, four Ārūpyas), these same anusayas bear on the
totality of the Path, and on a part of the anvayajñāna (vi.26), with
its nine bhūmis (namely the preceeding six and the first three
Ārūpyas). In fact the Paths are mutually dependent. (ii.52).
Although dharmajñāna and anvayajñāna are mutually depend-
ent, because anvayajñāna is not opposed to Kāmadhātu, the three
anuśayas of the realm of Kāmadhātu which have the Path for their
object do not have the Path which forms part of the anvayajñāna
for their object.
But the dharmajñāna which is opposed to Kāmadhātu is also
opposed to Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu (vii.9): consequently it
will also be the object of the three anusayas of these two Dhātus
which have the Path for their object.
Dharmajñāna in its entirety is not opposed to Rūpadhātu and
Ārūpyadhātu, for the dharmajñāna of Suffering and Arising are
not opposed to these two Dhātus. [Thus it is not the object of the
three anusayas of these two Dhātus.]
And dharmajñāna is not opposed to Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyad-
hātu in their entirety [for it is not opposed to the dharmas
abandoned through Seeing. Thus it is not the object of the three
anusayas of these two Dhātus], because the first two dharmajñānas
are not opposed to these Dhātus, and because the first category of
the anusayas of these two Dhātus, namely those which one
abandons through Seeing, are not opposed by any dharmajñāna.
Why do not lust (rāga), anger (pratigha), egotism (māna), the
esteeming of bad views (marśa), and the esteeming of morality and
ascetic practices (parāmarśa) 58 bear on pure dharmas, on the
Extinction of Suffering or on the Path?794
Chapter Five
16a. Lust does not bear on pure dharmas, because lust
should be rejected.
The latent defilement of lust (rāgānuśaya) should be aban-
doned; but if it has pure dharmas for its object, it will not be
rejected; in the same manner, the aspiration after good dharmas
[which takes the form of desire, but which is Right View] should
not be rejected.5⁹
16b. Anger does not, because pure dharmas do not do evil.
Anger arises with regard to a thing which does evil, and pure
dharmas, the Extinction of Suffering or the Path, do not do evil.
16c. Egotism and the two esteemings do not, because pure
dharmas are calm, pure, and excellent.
One cannot pride oneself on Extinction or the Path, for they
are calm.60
The esteeming of morality and ascetic practices is to hold as a
cause of purification that which is not such: the pure dharmas are
really purification, so one cannot have a false conception of purity
(śuddhigrāha), with regard to them.
The esteeming of bad views is to hold as excellent that which is
vile: now the pure dharmas are what are best, so one cannot have a
false conception of excellence (agragrāha), with regard to them.
Among the ninety-eight anusayas, how many become anusaya
from the fact of being an object?6¹ How many become anuśayana
solely through association, (solely by reason of being dharmasassociated with the mind, sensation, etc.)?
The Latent Defilements 795
17. Universal anuśayas, relative to the object, become
anuśayana in all their spheres; the non-universals, in their
one category. 62
From the point of view of the object, the universal anuśayas
(v.12) become anuśayana, that is, "become lodged in" the five
categories of their sphere; the other in one category: the anusayas
that one abandons through the Seeing of Suffering become
anuśayana in the dharmas that one abandons through the Seeing of
Suffering ... the anuśayas that one abandons through Meditation
become anuśayana in the dharmas that one abandons through
Meditation.
This general rule calls for more precision.
18a-b. Not the anusayas that bear on the pure dharmas or a
higher sphere, because their object is not "made one's own"
and opposes the anusayas.63
The six anuśayas which have the pure dharmas—Nirvāņa or
the Path (v.14)-for their object, and the nine anusayas which
have a higher sphere (v.13a-b) for their object do not become
anuśayana in the object, because one does not do this thing by
oneself either through the "view of self" or through desire.
Other anusayas would apply (anusi) to the thing which one
considers (through a belief in a self) as the self, or which one
makes one's own through desire, and they become anuśayana, as
dust is applied to a wet piece of cloth (see Vyakhyā ad i.4, p. 14.2).
But the pure dharmas and the higher bhūmis are not susceptible of
being considered as "self" or as "pertaining to self": thus the
anusayas which have them for their object do not become
anuśayana in their object, because of the nature of their object.796 Chapter Five
We would remark in fact that the desire that seeks either the
pure dharmas or a higher sphere is not the anusaya called “desire,”
but rather "an aspiration for good dharmas" (p. 32, 1.8).
Further, the pure dharmas, Nirvāṇa or the Path, are opposed
to the kleśas which take them as their object; the dharmas of a
higher bhūmi are opposed to the klefas of a lower bhūmi: as a
consequence the kleśas cannot become anuśayana there, that is,
install themselves there; in the same way that the sole of the foot
cannot install itself on a rock which is red hot with fire.
We have up to now understood the word anuśayana, anuśete, as
"to become anuśayana,” in the sense of "to install," or "to become
lodged in."
According to some other masters, anuśayana should be
understood as ānuguṇya. Nirvāṇa, etc., is not favorable (anuguṇa)
to the arising and development of wrong views: in the same way
that one says that if a person who has a cold takes a bitter
medicine, there is no increase (anuśayana) in the cold due to the
medicine (Vyākhyā i.4, p. 13).
18c-d. Any anuśaya which is associated with a certain
dharma becomes anuśayana through association with this
dharma.64
"With a certain dharma,” that is, with sensation, etc.
The word eva indicates reservation: "as long as the anufaya is
not abandoned.”
Are there any anusayas which do not have the pure dharmasThe Latent Defilements 797
for their object, which do not have a superior Dhātu for their
object yet which become anusayana solely through association with
and not from the fact of the object?
Yes, universal anuśayas which have a superior bhūmi for their
object (namely the universal anusayas of the First Dhyāna which
have the three higher Dhyānas for their object).
Among the ninety-eight dhyānas, how many are bad (akuśala),
and how many are morally neutral, that is, without retribution
(avyākṛta)?
19. All the "higher" dhyānas are morally neutral. [The
belief in a self, a belief in extremes, and ignorance are
neutral in Kāmadhātu. The other anuśayas, here, are bad.]65
All the anusayas belonging to Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu are
neutral. In fact, all defiled dharmas, when they bear retribution,
bear painful retribution. Now suffering does exist in these two
spheres, for no causes (anger, etc.) for doing evil to others are
present there.
19b. The belief in a self, a belief in extremes, and ignorance
are neutral in Kāmadhātu.
In Kāmadhātu, a belief in a self, a belief in the extremes, and
the ignorance which is associated with them, are neutral.
In fact, these anuśayas are not in contradiction to giving and
other good deeds. One thinks, "May I be happy in the future!," and
one give gifts and observes the precepts.66
The erroneous view of annihilation is favorable to deliverance.798 Chapter Five
This is why the Bleesed One said, “Among the doctrines of the
Tirthikas, the best is that which says, 'I do not exist, things of mine
do not exist; I shall not exist, things pertaining to me shall not
exist."
These two views-a belief in a self and a belief in the
extremes are only aberrations relative to things which constitute
the pseudoperson; they do not being about harm to another: thus
they are morally neutral.
But these different reasons-because they are not in contradic-
tion to giving, etc.—could be applied to the "desire for heaven"
and to egotism (asmimāna, v. 10), which should thus also be
neutral; but the School does not admit this. Some ancient masters67
also say, "An innate belief in a self, which is to be found among the
savage animals and birds, is neutral. But a cogitated belief in a self
is bad."68 (The same holds for an innate and cogitated belief in the
extremes).
19c. The other anusayas, here, are bad.
The other anusayas of Kāmadhātu are impure (aśubha), that is,
bad (akusala).
Among the ninety-eight anusayas, how many are roots of evil
(akuśalamūla)? How many are not?
20a-b. Lust, anger and mūḍi, in Kāmadhātu, are roots of
evil.69
All lust (râga), all anger (pratigha), and all mūḍi (that is, all
delusion or moha)70 belonging to Kāmadhātu-with theThe Latent Defilements 799
exception of the delusion which is a belief in a self and the belief in
the extremes-are, in this order, the three roots of evil, greed,
anger, and ignorance.
A belief in a self and a belief in the extremes are not roots of
evil, for a root of evil is only that which is bad and is only a root of
evil.71
The other anusayas are not roots of evil.
How many dharmas are neutral roots? How many are not?
20c. Three roots, desire, ignorance, and mati (that is,
prajñā) are neutral.72
The Vaibhāṣikas of Kāśmīr hold that desire, ignorance, and
prajñā which are neutral, of whatever type they are up to and
including the prajñā which arises from retribution,73 are neutral
roots.74
20d. The others are not roots, because their modality is of
duality and elevation.
Doubt (vicikitsa) cannot be regarded as a root, being twofold
and mobile by nature. Egotism (māna), being “an elevation" of the
mind, is not a root, since it consists of elevation, the opposite of a
root. For in this world roots are firm and reach downward.
21b-d. Four, [say the Aparantakas]: desire, views, egotism,
and delusion which are neutral; in fact there are three
contemplations based on ignorance.75800 Chapter Five
One can distinguish "absorption of desire" (trsnottaradhyayin),
"absorption of (wrong) views" (dṛṣṭyuttaradhyāyin), and "absorp-
tion of pride” (mānottaradhyāyin). Now these contemplations are
such by reason of delusion or ignorance.76
Are the fourteen "undefined points" (avyākṛtavastu) of which
Scripture77 speaks so called because they are neutral (avyākṛta) in
the sense that we have just studied?
No. In the Sūtra a neutral question is a question which should
be set aside: that is, this type of question is called neutral, not
answered, because it should be set aside, or rejected. The object of
such a question is termed "an undefined point."
There are four types of questions: 1. a question to which one
responds in a categorical manner; 2. a question to which one
responds by distinguishing; 3. a question to which one responds by
another question; and 4. a question which one should not answer.
22. Categorical response, as for death; a distinguishing
response, as for rebirth; a response by a question, as for
superiority; and a response by rejecting the question, as for
non-identity.78
1. If one asks, “Do all beings die," one should answer in a
categorical manner, "They do."
2. If one asks, "Will all being be reborn?" one should answer by
distinguishing, "Beings endowed with defilements will be reborn;
being freed from defilements will not be reborn."
3. If one asks, “Is a person"⁹ superior or inferior?," one should
answer by the question, "In comparison with whom?" If he
answers, "In comparison with the gods," one should answer, "He
is inferior." If one answers, "In comparison with beings in theThe Latent Defilements 801
painful realms of rebirth,"one should answer, “He is superior."
4. If one asks, "Are the skandhas the same thing as a sattva or
living being, or are they different?," this is a question that is to be
rejected because the thing called a "living being" does not exist. In
the same way one would reject the question, "Is the child of a
sterile woman white or black?"
How can you say (in Kārikā 22) that one has responded to this
fourth question, since one did not answer whether the skandhas
are, yes or no, identical to a living being?
This question is answered by saying, "This question is to be
rejected": thus there is a response to it.8⁰
Another says that the second question, like the first question,
calls for a categorical response, "All beings do not arise."
But the author says that in order to justify the example given
[by the Vaibhāṣikas] to the second type of question, to someone
who asks, "Will those who die be reborn?,"81 one should answer by
distinguishing, ["All will not be reborn; those who are endowed
with the defilements will be reborn, but not those who are freed
from them.]
[He says again that the third question also calls for a
categorical response.] A human being in fact is at one and the same
time superior and inferior according to the point of comparison. In
the same manner as if one were to ask, "Is consciousness (vijñāna)
a cause, or is it a result?," [one should answer, "It is a cause with
respect to its result, and it is a result with respect to its cause."]But,
says the author, to someone who asks in a categorical manner "Is a
person superior or inferior?," it is not suitable to respond802 Chapter Five
categorically, "He is superior" or "He is inferior;" one should thus
respond by distinguishing: one must first be assured of the
intention of the questioner.
The Ābhidhārmikas8² say: 1. A categorical response: If
someone asks, "Is the Blessed One the Arhat Samyaksambuddha?
Is the Dharma that he speaks well spoken? Is the Samgha of the
Śrāvakas well instructed? Is physical matter (rūpa) impermanent?
. . . Is consciousness (vijñāna) impermanent? Can Suffering be
known... Can the Path be known?," then to these questions one
should answer in a categorical manner, by reason of the superior
benefit (of such an answer).83
2. An answer by distinguishing: If a person asks, "I desire that
the Venerable One teaches me the dharmas," one should distin-
guish, "The dharmas are numerous, past, present, and future:
which do you desire that I should teach you?." If he answers,
"Teach me the past dharmas," one should distinguish, "The past
dharmas are numerous: rūpa, vedanā, saṁjñā, saṁskāras, and
vijñāna." If he asks, "Teach me concerning rūpa," one should
distinguish, "There are three rūpas, the good, the bad, and the
neutral." If one asks, “Teach me concerning the good," one should
distinguish, "There are seven types of good rūpa: abstention from
killing... and abstention from idle words." If one asks, “Teach me
abstention from killing," one should distinguish, "It is of three
types, arisen from the three roots of good, non-greed (alobha),
non-anger (adveşa), and non-ignorance (amoha)." If one asks,
"Teach me the abstention from killing arisen from non-greed,"
one should distinguish, “It is twofold, vijñapti and avijñapti.
Which do you desire that I teach you?"
3. A response by a question: The same question, put by a
false-hearted person, is a question to which one should respond by
another question. If such a person asks, "I desire that the VenerableThe Latent Defilements 803
One teach me the dharmas," one should counter-interrogate him,
"The dharmas are numerous: which do you desire that I teach
you?" But one need not establish the distinctions (past, present,
and future dharmas); one should continue to counter-interrogate
him until the questioner remains silent or he himself explains.84
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 76a15ff).
But if a good-hearted person and a false-hearted person do not
question you, but content themselves with expressing a desire,
"Teach me the dharmas;" and if, on the other hand, one does not
answer them, if one does not explain to them, and if one is content
to interrogate them, "Which dharmas shall I teach you?," how can
you say that there is a question and a response?
The author answers: He who says, “Teach me the Path,” asks
concerning the Path, exactly as if he has said, “Which is the Path?"
One the other hand, through this counter-interrogation, one
explains to the questioner concerning his questions: is the Path
then not explained (vyäkṛta)?
If this is the case, then is there an answer by means of a
question in the second and third type of question?
No, the responses differ, for sometimes there is distinction,
and sometimes there is no distinction.85
4. A question to be rejected: If one asks "Are the number of
persons finite or infinite, etc.?," then this question should be
rejected.
One may find in the Sūtra itself the definition of these four
questions and answers: the venerable Mahāsāṁghikas read a Sūtra
(Dirgha, TD 1, p. 51bl, Madhyama, TD 1, p. 609a24) which says,
"Bhikṣus, there are four responses to questions. What are these
four? There are some questions which one should reply categori-
cally . . .; there are some questions which one should reject. What is804 Chapter Five
the question to which one should respond categorically? When one
asks if all the skandhas are impermanent. What is the question to
which one should respond by distinguishing? When someone asks
what retribution in sensation a voluntary action requires. What is
the question to which one should repsond by a question? When
someone asks if samjñā is the soul of a person,84 one should
counter-interrogate, “My friend, what do you think of the soul?,"
and if he answers, “My friend, I think that the soul is coarse," one
should respond that the samjñā is other than the soul (Digha,
i.195). What is the question to be rejected? When someone asks if
the world is eternal, non-eternal, eternal and non-eternal, neither
eternal nor non-eternal; if the number of persons is finite, infinite,
finite and infinite, neither finite and infinite; if the Tathāgata87
exists after death . . . ; or if the vital principle is other than the
body. These questions, Oh Bhikṣus, are to be rejected."
Within a certain person, an anuśaya or latent defilement
attaches itself to a certain object; this person is bound to this object
by this anusaya.
We must examine to what object a person is bound by a past,
present, or future anusaya.
From this point of view the anusayas or kleśas are of two types:
specific kleśas, namely lust, anger, egotism;88 and general klesas,
namely views, doubt, and ignorance.
23. One is bound by lust, anger, and egotism, past and
present, to the object from whence they have been
produced without their having been abandoned.
When the specific kleśas have arisen with respect to a certain
object-an object past, present or future, an object abandoned
through Seeing, etc.-and is thus found in the past or in theThe Latent Defilements 805
present, when they have not been abandoned, the person in whom
they are produced is bound to this object by these specific klesas.
For, being specific, they are not necessarily produced within all
persons with respect to all things, but rather within a certain
person with respect to a certain thing.
24a-b. One is bound to all objects by the same future kleśas,
since they are mental states.
One is bound to any and all objects, past, present, and future,
[and of the five categories: to be abandoned through Seeing, etc.,
according to the case], by these same specific future kleśas, since
they belong to the manovijñāna. For the sphere of the mānas is
tritemporal.
them.
24b. One is bound to the object of their time period by the
same future kleśas, since they are not mental states.
One is bound to future objects through future lust and anger
which differ from the preceeding—that is, non-mental states in a
relationship with the five sense consciousnesses. The five
consciousnesses, in fact, cognize only objects contemporaneous to
Sometimes this rule concerns only future lust and anger of the
utpattidharmin or "destined to arise" category. It is otherwise
when they are not destined to arise.
24c. Not destined to arise, one is bound everywhere by the
same.
"Everywhere," this is, to all objects, past, present, and future.
24c-d. One is bound everywhere by the others, whatever
they are.806 Chapter Five
One is bound to all the objects of the three time periods and the
five categories, according to the case, by the other, general
klesas-which, having for their object the five upādānaskandhas,
are produced within all and relative to all-in whatever period the
said klesas belong.
[The Sautrāntikas criticize this theory.⁹⁹] Do the kleśas, and
past and future objects, really exist?
If one says that they really exist, one admits that conditioned
things always exist and are thus eternal; if they do not exist, how is
it possible to say that a person is bound to these objects by the
klesas, or that he is liberated from them?
The Vaibhāṣikas maintain that past and future dharmas really
exist; conditioned things nevertheless are not eternal for they are
endowed with the characteristics (lakṣaṇas, ii.45c-d) of conditioned
things. In order to better illustrate their position we present, in
summary fashion, their doctrine:
25a. The dharmas exist in the three time periods.
Why is this?
25a. Because the Blessed One has said it.9⁰
1. The Blessed One taught in his own words the existence of
the past and the future, "Monks, if past rūpa did not exist, the
learned holy Śrāvakas would 'not take into consideration' past rūpa
. . If future rūpa did not exist, the learned holy Śrāvakas would
'not delight in' future rupa. It is because future rupa exists that the
learned holy Śrāvakas... "9125b. Because mental consciousness preceeds from two.
The Latent Defilements 807
2. The Blessed One implicitly teaches the same doctrine when
he says, "Consciousness is produced by reason of two. What are
these two? The organ of sight and a visible thing... the manas and
the dharmas.”⁹² Now if the past and future dharmas do not exist,
mental consciousness which has them for its object would not arise
by reason of these two.
[These are the proofs taken from Scripture. As for proofs
taken from reasoning:]
25c. Because it has an object.
3. A consciousness can arise given an object, but not if an object
is not present. If past and future things do not exist, there would be
consciousness without an object; thus there is no conciousness
without an object.
25d. And because the past bears a result.
4. If the past does not exist, how can good and bad action give
forth a result? In fact, at the moment when the result is produced,
the retributive cause (ii.54c-d) is past.
Therefore, because of the proofs from Scripture and reasoning
quoted above, the Vaibhāṣikas affirm the existence of both the past
and the future.
The masters who call themselves Sarvāstivādins, "belivers in
the existence of all," maintain that the past and the future exist.808
Chapter Five
25c-d. He who affirms the existence of the dharmas of the
three time periods is held to be a Sarvästivādin.
The masters who affirms the existence of all things, past,
present and future, are Sarvästivādins. Those who affirm the
existence of the present and a part of the past, namely the
existence of action which has not given forth its result; and the
non-existence of the future and a part of the past, namely the
non-existence of action which has given forth its result, are
regarded as Vibhajyavādins; [they do not belong to the Sarvasti-
vādin School.]⁹⁹
How many systems are there in this School? [How many ways
are there of understanding the doctrine of the existence of all
(sarvāstivāda)? which is the best?]
25d. There are four types of Sarvästivādins accordingly as
they teach a difference in existence (bhāva), a difference in
characteristic, a difference in condition, and mutual
difference.94
1. The Bhadanta Dharmaträta defends bhāvānyathātva, that is,
he affirms that the three time periods, past, present, and future,
are differenciated by their non-identity of existence (bhāva).
When a dharma goes from one time period to another its
nature is not modified, but its existence is. A gold vase which one
breaks is an example which shows the difference of figure: its
figure (samsthāna, i.10a) is modified, but not its color. An example
which shows difference in qualities: milk becomes whey; its taste,
force, and digestibility change, but not its color. In the same way,
when a future dharma passes from the future into the present, itsThe Latent Defilements 809
future existence is abandoned, and its present existence is acquired,
but its nature remains the same. When it passes from the present
into the past, its present existence is abandoned, and its past
existence is acquired, but its nature remains the same.
2. The Bhadanta Ghoşaka defends lakṣaṇānyathātva, that is,
the time periods differ through the difference in their characteris-
tics.
A dharma goes through the time periods. When it is past, it is
endowed with past characteristics (lakṣaṇa),but it is not deprived
of its present and future characteristics; when it is future, it is
endowed with its future characteristics, but it is not deprived of its
present and past characteristics; and when it is present, it is
endowed with its present characteristics, but it is not deprived of
its past and future characteristics." Example: a man attached to
one woman is not detached with respect to other women.
3. The Bhadanta Vasumitra defends avasthānyathātva, that is,
the time periods differ through the difference of condition
(avasthā). A dharma, going through the time periods, having
taken up a certain condition, becomes different through the
difference of its condition, not through a difference in its
substance. Example: a token placed on the square of ones, is called
one; placed on the square of tens, ten; and placed on the square of
hundreds, one hundred.
4. The Bhadanta Buddhadeva defends anyonyathātva, that is,
the time periods are established through their mutual relation-
ships.
A dharma, going throughout the time periods, takes different
names through different relationships, that is, it is called past,
future, or present, through a relationship with what preceeds and
with what follows. For example, the same woman is both a
daughter and a mother.⁹6
***810 Chapter Five
It is in this manner that these four masters maintain the
existence of all.98
The first, professing "transformation” (pariņāma) may be
refuted along with the Samkhyas.⁹8
In the thesis of the second master, the time periods, past,
present, and future, are confounded, since the three characteristics
are found everywhere. The example moreover is lacking any
similarity to the problem, for, within the man in question, there is
active lust with respect to one woman, but there is only the
"possession of lust" (ii.36) with respect to other women.
In the thesis of the fourth master, the three time periods exist
at the same time: a past dharma, for example, is past in relation to
that whch preceeds it, future in relation to that which follows, and
present in relation to what preceeds and what follows.
26a. The third is the best.
Consequently the best system is that of Vasumitra,
26b. The three time periods are proven by reason of their
activity,
According to which the time periods and the conditions are
established through the operation of the activity of a dharma:
when a dharma does not accomplish its operation, it is future;
when it is accomplishing it, it is present; and when its operation
has come to an end, it is past.
[The Sautrāntikas criticize:] If the past and the future exist as
things, they are present: why are they thus qualified as past and
future?The Latent Defilements 811
It is action not yet completed, in the act of being completed, or
already completed, which determine the time period of a dharma.⁹⁹
Good enough. But what action would you assign to a tatsabhāga
eye? The action of an eye is to see, and a tatsabhäga eye does not
now see (i.42). Would you say that its action is to project and to
give forth a result (phaladānaparigraha, ii.59)? But then if giving
forth a result is an "action," then sabhägahetu causes, etc. (ii.59c)
give forth their result when they are past, and so one arrives at the
conclusion that they accomplish their action in the past and so
would be as a consequence in the present. Or if an action, in order
to be complete, calls for a projection and a giving forth of a result,
these past causes would be at least semi-present. Thus the time
periods are confounded.
27a. What is opposed [to the activity of a dharma?]
But, if it always exists, why doesn't a dharma always exercise its
activity? What obstacle causes it to sometimes produce and
sometimes not to produce its action? One cannot say that its
inaction results from the non-presence of certain causes, since
these causes also always exist.
27a. How can activity be past, etc.?
And how can activity itself be past, etc.? Would you imagine a
second activity of activity? That would be absurd. But if the
activity, in and of itself (svarūpasattāpekṣaya), is past, etc., why not
admit that the same holds for the dharma? And who says that the
time periods depend on past activity, etc.? Would you say that
activity is neither past, present, nor future, but that, nevertheless,
it exists? Then, being unconditioned (asamskṛta), it is eternal
(nitya), and how can you then say that a dharma is future when it
does not exercise its activity, or past when it not longer exercises
it?812 Chapter Five
These objections would hold, [answer the Sarvāstivādins,] if
activity were other than the dharma itself. 100
27b. But it is not other than the dharma.
Thus this error does not exist. Therefore
27b. The time periods are no longer justified.
If activity is the same as the dharma, and if the dharma always
exist, its activity would also always exist. Why and how does one
say that sometimes it is past, sometimes future? The distinction of
the time periods is not justified.
[The Sarvāstivādins answer:]How is it not justified? In fact a
conditioned dharma which has not arisen is called future; that
which, having arisen, is not destroyed, is called present; and that
which is destroyed is called past.
[The Sautrāntikas answer:] If, in the past and future, a dharma
exists with the same nature (tenaivātmanā) as when it is present,
27b-c. Existing in the same manner, how can it be non-ari-
sen or destroyed?
If the unique self-nature of a dharma continues to exist, how
can this dharma be non-arisen or destroyed? What is it that it is
lacking now, through the absence of which it is qualified as
non-arisen? What is it that it is lacking later, through the absence
of which it is qualified as destroyed? Consequently, if one does not
admit that the dharma exists after having been non-existent and
no longer exists after having existed, the three time periods cannot
be established or proved to exist.101The Latent Defilements 813
[It is useful to examine the reasoning of the Sarvāstivādins.]
1. The argument that, possessing the characteristics of
conditioned things (arising, etc., ii.452), conditioned things are not
eternal even though they exist both in the past and in the future, is
pure verbiage, for, if it always exists, a dharma is not susceptible
either of arising or of perishing. "A dharma is eternal, and it is not
eternal:" to speak in this manner is to contradict oneself through
one's own words.
This is what the stanza explains when it says, "Self nature
always exists, but this does not mean that being is eternal, nor that
being is different from its self nature: this is clearly stated by the
Lord."102
2. With regard to the argument that the Blessed One taught the
existence of the past and the future since he said "Past action
exists, and future results exist",103 we would also say that the past
exists, and that the future exists. Past is that which was existent;
future is that which, given its cause, will exist: it is in this sense
that we say that the past and the future exists. But they do not exist
as substantial entities (dravyatas) as does the present.
[The Sarvāstivādins protest:] Who says that they exist like the
present?
If they don't exist like the present, how do they exist?
The Sarvāstivādins answer: They exist with the nature of the
past and the future.
But, if they now.exist, how can one attribute the nature of past
and future to them? In fact, the Blessed One, in a text quoted by the
Sarvāstivādins, had the intention of condemning the view that
negates cause and effect (iv.79, v.7). He said “the past exists" in
the sense of "the past was;" he said "the future exists" in the sense
of "the future will be." The word "is" (asti) is a nipāta,104 in the
same sense as the expressions, “There is (asti) previous non-exist-
ence of the lamp," "there is later non-existence of the lamp," and
again, "This lamp is extinguished, but it was not extinguished by814 Chapter Five
me." It is in this same way that the text says "the past exists, and
the future exists." To understand otherwise, being in the past, the
past would not now be the past.
[The Sarvästivādins answer:] We see that the Blessed One,
addressing the Lāguḍaśikhīyaka¹05 ascetics, expressed himself in
this way, "Past action, which has been destroyed, which has
perished, and which has ceased, does exist." According to the
proposed explanation, the sense would be, "This action was." Now
can we suppose that the ascetics would not admit that past action
has already passed away?
[The Sautrāntikas reply:]When the Blessed One says that past
action exists, he had in view its power of giving forth a result, a
power which was placed in the series of the agent through action
which has now passed away. To understand otherwise, that is, if
past action actually exists now in and of itself, how can it be
considered as past?
Of the rest, Scripture contains a formal declaration. The
Blessed One said in the Paramarthaśūnyatāsūtra, "The eye, Oh
Bhikṣus, arising, does not come from any place; perishing, it does
not remain in any place. In this way, Oh Bhikṣus, the eye exists
after having been non-existent and, after having existed, disap-
pears. "106 If a future eye existed, the Blessed One would not have
said that the eye exists only after having been non-existent.
[The Sarvästivādins would perhaps say:] The expression, "It
exists after having been non-existent” signifies “after having been
non-existent in the present" (vartamāne'dhvany abhūtvā), that is,
"after having been non-existent as present” (vartamānabhāvena
abhūtvā).
This is inadmissible, for the time periods do not differ from the
eye.
Does this mean that one should understand this as, "After
having been non-existent in its own nature (svalakṣaṇatas)?” But
this is to explicitely acknowledge that a future eye does not nowThe Latent Defilements 815
exist.
3. As for the argument that "the past and the future exist, since
the consciousness arises by reason of two things," should one
understand that since the mental consciousness arises by reason of
a mental organ and past, present, or future dharmas, these
dharmas are a necessary condition for the mental consciousness to
arise to the same extent as is the mental organ, that is, in the
quality of "generating condition" (janakapratyaya)? Or are they
solely "conditions in a quality of object" (ālambanamātra, ii.62c)?
Evidently future dharmas, which will be produced after thousands
of years or which will never be produced, are not the generating
causes of a present mental consciousness. Evidently Nirvāṇa,
which is contradictory to all arising, cannot be a generating cause.
It is enough that the dharmas are a condition for the arising of a
consciousness in their qualtiy of being an object: let us admit that it
is thus for future and past dharmas.
[The Sarvāstivādins ask:] If the past and future dharmas do not
exist, how can they be the objects of consciousness?
They exist in the manner in which they are taken as objects.
And in what manner are they taken as objects?
[They are taken as objects with the mark of the past and the
future,¹07 as having existed or as coming into existence.] In fact, a
person who remembers a past visible object of a past sensation,
does not see "this is;” but he remembers “this was;" the man who
foresees the future does not see the future as existing, but he
foresees it as coming into existence (bhavisyat).
Another point. Memory (which is a certain mental conscious-
ness) grasps a visible thing that has been seen, a sensation that has
been felt, that is, a visible object and a sensation in a present state
of being. If a dharma which one remembers is, in fact, the one
grasped by the memory, it is presently manifested; if it is not one
that one grasps through the memory, then the memory conscious-
ness certainly has a non-existent object.816 Chapter Five
Would one say that past and future visible objects exist without
being present, because past or future visible objects are nothing
other than atoms (paramāņu) in a state of dispersion (viprakīrṇa)?
But we would say: (1) when the consciousness takes as its object,
through memory or prevision, a past or future visible object, it
does not take it as an object in a state of dispersion, but on the
contrary, as an assembled collection (samcita) of atoms; (2) if a
past or future visible object is the visible object of the present with
this small difference that the atoms are dispersed, then the atoms
are thus eternal; there is never either production (utpäda) nor
destruction of them; there is only association and dispersion of the
atoms. To maintain such a thesis is to adopt the doctrine of the
Ājivikas and to reject the Sūtras of the Sugata: "The eye, Oh
Bhikṣus, arising, does not come from any place . . . ;" (3) the
argument does not hold for sensation and other “non-solid"
(amūrta) dharmas: not being combinations of atoms (aparamāņu-
samcita), we do not see how they can be, in the past or in the
future, atoms in a state of dispersion. In fact, moreover, one
remembers the sensation as it was experienced when it was
present; one foresees it as it will be experienced when it will be
present. If, past and future, it is such that one grasps it through
memory or prevision, it would be eternal. Thus the mental
consciousness termed "memory" has a non-existent object, namely
a sensation that does not now presently exist.
[The Vaibhāṣikas say:] If that which does not absolutely exist
can be the object of consciousness, then a thirteenth āyatana (i.14)
could be the object of consciousness.
[The author answers:] Then what is, according to you, the
object of a consciousness which says, "There is no thirteenth
āyatana?"
It is its name, "thirteenth ayatana.”The Latent Defilements 817
Then this object is only a name; the thing designated, the
object, does not exist. Furthermore, what will be the presently
existing object upon which the consciousness of the previous
non-existence of sound bears?
[The Vaibhāṣikas answer:] The object of this consciousness is
the sound itself [and not its non-existence.]
Then, anyone who is in quest of the non-existence of sound
should make a noise!
[The Vaibhāṣikas answer:] No, for the sound of which there is
previous non-existence, exists in a future state, and it is this sound
in its future state which is the object of the previously non-existent
consciousness.
But if future sound, of which there is previous non-existence,
exists in fact, how can there be the idea that it does not now exist?
[The Vaibhāṣikas answer:] It does not presently exist (varta-
māno nāsti); from whence there is the idea, “it does not now
exist."
You do not have the right to speak in this manner, for it is the
same dharma which is past, present, and future. Or, if there is a
difference between future and present sound, and the idea "it does
not now exist" bears on this difference, then you recognize that the
distinctive characteristic of the present exists after not having
existed. We will therefore have to prove that existence (bhava)
and non-existence (abhāva) can be an object of consciousness.
[The Vaibhāṣikas say:] If a non-existent thing can be an object
of consciousness, how could the Bodhisattva in his last existence
say, "It is impossible that I know, that I see that which does not
exist in this world?"
The meaning of this text is clear: “I am not like other prideful
(ābhimānika, v. 10a) ascetics who attribute to themselves a818 Chapter Five
non-existent 'illumination': 108 as for me, I only see as existing that
which is." Moreover, to admit your thesis, the object of any idea
(buddhi) would be real: if all that one thinks is real, there is no
longer any place for doubt or examination (vimarsa); there would
be no difference between the Bodhisattva and others.
Let us add moreover that ideas certainly have existent and
non-existent things for their object, for the Blessed One explicitly
said, "From the moment when I said to him, 'Come, Oh Bhikṣus!'
(iv.26c), my
Śrāvaka is instructed from evening until morning: he
will know that which is as is (sacca satto jñāsyati) and that which is
not as not, that which is not the highest (sa-uttara) as not the
highest, and that which is the highest (anuttara-Nirvāṇa) as the
highest." (iv.127d) 109
Consequently the reason that the Sarvāstivādins gave in favor
of the existence of the past and the future, that is, "because the
object of the consciousness is existent" does not hold.
4. The Sarvāstivādins also deduce an argument from the result
of action. But the Sautrāntikas do not admit that a result arises
directly from a past action. A result arises from a special state of
the series (cittasaṁtānavišeṣāt), a state which proceeds from the
action, as one shall see at the end of this work wherein we refute
the doctrine of the Vätsiputriyas (ātmavādapratiṣedha, see iv.85a).
But the masters who affirm the real existence (dravyatas) of
the
past and the future should also admit the eternity of the result:
what efficacy (samarthya) can they attribute to the action? An
efficacy with regard to production (utpāda)? An efficacy with
regard to the action of making something present (vartamānīka-
raṇa)?
a. This is to admit that arising exists after having been
non-existent (abhūtvā bhavati). If you say that arising itself
pre-exists, how can you attribute the efficacy of a thing to that
same thing? You cannot but join the School of the Vārṣagaṇyas,
"That which is, solely is; that which is not, solely is not; that which
is not, does not arise; and that which is, is not destroyed."110The Latent Defilements 819
b. What should we understand by "the action of making
something present?"
Will this be the fact of drawing something to another place?
We see three difficulties in this: (1) the result will thus be eternal;
(2) how could the result, when it is non-material (arūūpin), be
achieved?; and (3) movement would exist after having been
non-existent.
Would this be the fact of modifying the unique or self nature of
a pre-existent result (svabhāvavišeṣaṇa)? But is there not, in this
thesis, the appearance of a modification previously non-existent?
Consequently, the sarvāstivāda, "the doctrine of the existence
of all," of the Sarvāstivādins who affirm the real existence of the
past and the future, is not good within Buddhism. It is not in this
sense that one should understand sarvāstivāda. Good sarvāstivāda
consists in affirming the existence of "all" by understanding the
word "all" as Scripture understands it. How do the Sūtras affirm
that all exists? "When one says, 'all exists,' Oh Brahmins, this
refers to the twelve āyatanas: these are equivalent terms."¹11
Or rather, the "all" that exists is the three time periods. And it
has been said how they exist: "That which has previously been, is
the past..." (see above, p. 813).
But if the past and future do not exist, how can one be bound
(samyukta) by a past or future kleśa to a thing (vastu) which is past
or future?
One is bound by a past kleśa by reason of the existence, in the
series, of an anuśaya which has arisen from a past kleśa; one is
bound by a future kleśa by reason of the existence of an anuśaya
which is the cause of the future anuśaya of a kleśa which has had or
will have this thing for its object.
The Vaibhāṣikas say: "The past and the future truly exist. As820 Chapter Five
regards that which cannot be explained, one should know that
27d. The nature of things is indeed profound;
certainly, it cannot be proven through reasoning."112
[Thus one need not deny the past and the future].113
One can say that that which arises perishes: for example a
visible. One can say that that which arises differes from that which
perishes: in fact, that which arises is the future; that which
perishes is the present. Time also arises, for that which is arising is
embraced within time, it has time for its nature;1¹4 and a dharma
arises from time, by reason of the multiplicity of the moments of
future time.115
We have thus finished with the problem presented to us by the
theory of the anusayas.
When a person abandons an object¹¹6 through the disappear-
ance of the possession that he had of this object, is there for him
"disconnection" from this object through the cutting off of the
possession of the defilements which bears on this object? And
inversely, when there is disconnection, is there abandoning?
When there is disconnection from an object, there is always an
abandoning of this object; but one can have abandoning without
disconnection.
28. When that which is to be abandoned through the Seeing
of Suffering is abandoned, the ascetic remains in connectionThe Latent Defilements 821
with it from the fact of the other universal defilements;
when the first category is abandoned, he remains in
connection with it from the fact of the other defilements
which have it as their object.117
Let us suppose a person enters on to the path of the Seeing of
Truths; the Seeing of Suffering has arisen in him, but not yet the
Seeing of Arising. He has abandoned the things (vastu)¹¹8 which
are abandoned through the Seeing of Suffering, but he is not yet
disjoined from these things by this: for he continues to be bound to
these first things¹19 through the universal defilements (v.12)
whose abandoning depends on the Seeing of Arising and which
are relative to these first things.
In the Path of Meditation wherein one sucessively expells nine
categories (strong-strong, etc.) of defilements, when the first
category is abandoned and not the others, these other categories of
defilements, which bear upon the first category, continue to bind.
(vi.33)
How many anuśayas attach themselves (anuśerate) to each
object?
We would never finish were we to examine this problem in
detail. The Vaibhāṣikas (in Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 449a16) give a
summary exposition of this.
In general one can say that there are sixteen types of dharmas,
objects to which the anusayas attach themselves: for each sphere
there are five categories (categories to be abandoned through the
Seeing of Suffering, etc.); plus the pure dharmas. The conscious-
nesses are of the same sixteen types.
When we know which dharmas are the objects of which
consciousness, we are then able to calculate how many anuśayas822 Chapter Five
attach themselves to these dharmas.
29. Abandoned through the Seeing of Suffering and
Arising, abandoned through Meditation, the dharmas in
Kāmadhātu are the sphere of three consciousnesses of this
sphere, of one consciousness of Rūpadhātu and the pure
consciousness.120
In all, these dharmas are the object of five consciousnesses. The
three consciousnesses of Kāmadhātu are abandoned through the
Seeing of Suffering, through the Seeing of Arising, and through
Meditation (abhyāsa = bhāvanā). One consciousness of Rūpadhātu
is abandoned through Meditation.
30a-b. The same three categories of dharmas in Rūpadhātu
are the object of three consciousnesses of Rūpadhātu, three
of Kāmadhātu, one of Arūpyadhātu and the pure con-
sciousness. 121
The three consciousnesses of Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu are
the same as above: they are abandoned through the Seeing of
Suffering and its Arsing, and through Meditation. Consciousness
in Ārūpyadhātu is abandoned through Meditation. In all, these
dharmas are the objects of eight consciousnesses.
30c-d. The same categories of dharmas in Ārūpyadhātu are
the objects of three consciousnesses of the three spheres
and pure conscousness.
The same three consciousnesses. In all, these dharmas are the
object of ten consciousnesses.
31a-b. The dharmas abandoned through the Seeing ofThe Latent Defilements 823
Extinction and the Path are all the objects of the same
consciousnesses with the addition of the consciousness of
their own category.
(a)The dharmas of Kāmadhātu abandoned through the Seeing
of Extinction are objects of the five consciousnesses as above, plus
the consciousness abandoned through the Seeing of Extinction: in
all six consciousnesses.
(b) The dharmas of Kāmadhātu abandoned through the Seeing
of the Path are objects of the five consciousnesses as above, plus
the consciousness abandoned through Seeing the Path: in all six
consciousnesses.
(c) The dharmas of Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu are abandoned
through the Seeing of Extinction and the Path: they are the
objects, respectively, of nine and eleven consciousnesses.
31c-d. The pure dharmas are the object of the last three
consciousnesses of the three spheres and of pure conscious-
ness.
They are the objects of ten consciousnesses, the conscious-
nesses of the three spheres abandoned through the Seeing of
Extinction and the Path, through Meditation, and the pure
consciousness.
Here are two summarizing ślokas: "The dharmas of the three
spheres abandoned through the Seeing of Suffering and the
Arising of Suffering and through Meditation, are, in the order of
the spheres, the domain of five, of eight, of ten consciousnesses."
"To the abandoning through Seeing the Extinction of Suffering
and the Path, add the mind of their class. The pure dharmas are
the object of ten consciousnesses."
Such are the sixteen types of dharmas, objects of sixteen types
of consciousness. We shall now examine what anuśaya attaches824 Chapter Five
itself to what dharma.
A complete analysis would take us too far afield; we will
content ourselves with studying a typical case.
1. Let us choose, among the objects of attachment, agreeable
sensation, and let us see how many anuśayas attach themselves to
it.
Agreeable sensation is of seven types: (1) belonging to
Kāmadhātu, to be abandoned through Meditation; (2-6) belonging
to Rūpadhātu, of five categories; and (7) pure.
When it is pure, the anuśayas do not attach themselves to it, as
we have shown.
When they belong to Kāmadhātu, the anuśayas abandoned
through Meditation and all the universal anuśayas attach them-
selves to it.
When they belong to Rūpadhātu, all the universal anuśayas
attach themselves to it.
2. How many anuśayas attach themselves to the consciousness
which has agreeable sensation for its object?
The consciousness which has agreeable sensation for its object
is of twelve types: (1-4) belong to Kāmadhātu, for categories of
consciousness (excepting the consciousness abandoned through
the Seeing of the Extinction of Suffering); (5-9) belong to
Rūpadhātu, five categories; (10-11) belong to Ārūpyadhātu, the
consciousness abandoned through Seeing the Path and the one
abandoned through Meditation; and (12) the pure consciousness.
Attaching themselves to it are, according to their types: 1. four
categories of Meditation; anufaya of the sphere of Kāmadhātu; 2.
the anusayas of the sphere of Rūpadhātu which have conditioned
things for their object; 3. two categories of anuśayas of the sphere
of Ārūpyadhātu; and 4. the universal anuśayas (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
452c20).
3. How many anusayas attach themselves to the consciousnessThe Latent Defilements
which has for its object the consciousness having an agreeable
sensation for its object?
The consciousness which has an agreeable sensation for its
object, and which is of twelve types, is itself the object of a
consciousness which can be of fourteen types, namely the twelve
aforementioned types with the addition (13-14) of the conscious-
nesses of the sphere of Arūpyadhātu abandoned through the
Seeing of Suffering and the Seeing of the Arising of Suffering.
Attaching themselves to this consciousness are, according to
their types, the anusayas described above in the first two spheres,
plus four categories in Ārūpyadhātu (by excluding the anusaya
abandoned through the Seeing of the Extinction of Suffering).
The other dharmas (the twenty-two indriyas, i.48c-d, etc.) will
be examined on the basis of this example.¹22
The mind is termed sānuśaya, “having anuśaya,” from the fact
of the anusayas. Should we think that, necessarily, the anuśayas
nourish themselves, and lodge in (anuśerate)¹23 the sānusaya
mind?
Those which lodge in it are the non-abandoned anusayas,
whose object is not abandoned (v.61c-d), and which are associated
with the mind in question.
Those which do not lodge in it are the abandoned anusayas
which are associated with the mind in question.
32a-b. The defiled mind is sānuśaya in two ways; the
non-defiled mind solely from the fact of the anusayas which
lodge therein. 124
The defiled mind is sānuśaya from the fact of the anuśayas826 Chapter Five
which lodge therein: the anusayas with which it is associated,
whose object is not abandoned, which takes an object; and (2) from
the fact of the anusayas which are not therein: the abandoned
anusayas and that to which it is associated: for this mind continues
to have them as companions.
The non-defiled mind is sānuśaya from the fact of the anusayas
which lodge therein: the non-abandoned anusayas which are
associated with the mind.
In what order are the ten anuśayas produced (Vibhāṣā, TD 27,
p. 245b28 and following)?
Any one can arise after any one: there is thus no rule which
applies to all of them. Nevertheless, for the order of their
production:
32c. From moha, there is doubt.
At first, bound by ignorance (moha-avidyā), a person is in
confusion with respect to the Truths: he does not take pleasure in
the Truth of Suffering; he does not admit it.
From this state of confusion, there arises doubt; he undertands
the two thesis; he doubts whether suffering is true, or if
non-suffering is true.
32d. From whence false views;
From doubt there arises false views: by reason of false teaching
and false reflection, he comes to the judgement "This is not
suffering."
32e. From whence a belief in a self;The Latent Defilements 827
From false view there arises the view of personality; for, not
recognizing the skandhas as suffering, he considers these skandhas
as constituting a "self."
33a. From whence a belief in the extremes;
From whence there is the view of the two extremes, for a
person, believing in a self, becomes attached to the idea of the
eternity or the annihilation of the self.
33b. From whence the esteeming of morality and ascetic
practices;
From this there is an esteeming of morality and practices
considered to be a means of purification.
33c. From whence the esteeming of bad views;
From this, there is an esteeming of that which is inferior, the
esteeming of what he considers as a means of purification.
33d. From whence lust and pride relative to one's own
views;
From this there is attachment to one's own views, and pride
and pleasure in these views.
33e. And hatred with respect to another:
From this there is dislike: for, quite full of his own views, he
detests the views of others which are contrary to his own.828 Chapter Five
According to other masters, there is hatred for one's own
opinions when one changes them; for lust and the other anusayas
which are abandoned through the Seeing of the Truths are those
which have for their object the person himself and his own views.
33f. Such is the order.
This is the order of the arising of the ten klesas.
How many causes give rise to the klefas?
34. Kleśas [with complete causes] arise from the non-aban-
doning of the anuśaya, from the presence of their object,
and from erroneous judgment. 125
For example, lust arises (1) when the anuśaya of lust is
non-abandoned-not-completely-known (aparijñāta)-its opposi-
tion not having arisen (v.64); (2) when the dharmas which
provoke the manifestation of lust, namely visible things, etc., are
found in the field of experience (abhāsagata=viṣayarūpatā-āpanna);
and (3) when there is erroneous judgment.
The anusaya is cause; the dharmas are its object; and incorrect
judgment is its immediate preparation: three distinct forces.
The same holds for the other klesas
34a. With complete causes.
This is the case for the klefas which proceed from all causes.
For, according to the School, a kleśa can arise through the mere
force of its object; as in the case of the Arhat who is subject toThe Latent Defilements 829
falling away (vi.58b).
In a Sūtra, the Blessed One said that the ninety-eight anusayas,
with the ten wrappings of attachment (the paryavasthānas), are
made up of three cankerous influences (asravas), the cankerous
influence of objects of pleasure (kāmāsrava), the cankerous
influence of existence (bhavāsrava), and the cankerous influence of
ignorance (avidyāsrava); four floods (oghas), the flood of the
objects of pleasure (kāmaugha), the flood of existence (bha-
vaugha), the flood of views (dṛṣṭyogha), and the flood of ignorance
(avidhaugha); four yokes (yogas), the yoke of the objects of
pleasure (kāmayoga), the yoke of existence (bhavayoga), the yoke
of views (dṛṣṭiyoga), and the yoke of ignorance (avidyāyoga); and
four clingings (upādānas), clinging to the objects of pleasure
(kāmopādāna), the clinging to views (dṛṣṭyupādāna), the clinging
to morality and ascetic practices (śīlavratopādāna), and the
clinging to a belief in a self (ātmavādopādāna).
What is the definition of the cankerous influences (āsravas)?
35a. In Kāmadhātu, the defilements, with the exception of
ignorance, but with the wrappings of attachment, consti-
tute ásravas;
The klesas of Kāmadhātu, with the exception of the five
ignorances, plus the ten wrappings (paryavasthānas, v.47) make
up forty-one things: this is the cankerous influence of the objects
of pleasure.
35b. In Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu, only the anuśayas
themselves constitute the cankerous influence of existen-
ce. 126830 Chapter Five
But there are, in the two higher spheres, two wrappings,
namely torpor and dissipation (ii.26a-c, v.47). The Prakaraṇa¹27
says, "What is the cankerous influence of existence? With the
exception of ignorance, it is the other connections (samyojanas),
bonds (bandhanas), anuśayas, upakleśas and wrappings (paryavas-
thānas) of Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu."
The Vaibhāṣikas of Kāśmir say that the wrappings of attach-
ment are not mentioned as forming part of the cankerous
influence of existence because, in the two higher spheres, they are
not independent.128
Why are the anuśayas of the two higher spheres placed
together in order to make one single cankerous influence of
existence?
36a-b. They are morally neutral, proceed inwards, and
belong to the stage of absorption: this is why they are put
together.
They both present the threefold common characteristics of
being morally neutral, of being turned inward (that is, of not
depending on objects), and of belonging to the spheres of
absorption: they are thus united into a single cankerous influence.
And again they are called the cankerous influence of existence
for the same reason that one distinguishes the cankerous influence
of existence (v.2).
From the above, it results that the avidyās, “the ignorances," of
the three spheres,-in all fifteen things,—(v.4) constitute the
cankerous influence of ignorance.
Why do the ignorances constitute a separate cankerous
influence?The Latent Defilements 831
36c d. Ignorance is the root: it is thus said to constitute a
separate cankerous influence.129
In the manner in which the cankerous influences are explained,
37a-b. So too for the floods and the yokes. But views
constitute a separate flood and a separate yoke by reason of
their acuteness.
The "floods" and the "yokes" are explained in the same
manner. The cankerous influence of the objects of sensual pleasure
(kāma-ogha) without views, is both the flood of the objects of
sensual pleasure and the yoke of the objects of sensual pleasure; so
too the cankerous influence of existence, without views, is both the
flood of existence and the yoke of existence.
According to the Schoo1,130 it is by reason of their characteris-
tic of sharpness that views constitute a separate flood and a
separate yoke.
[Why are they not a separate cankerous influence?]
37c-d. They are not a separate cankerous influence, because,
without companions, they are not favorable to installation.
[We shall explain below, v.40, the etymology of the word
āsrava or cankerous influence.]The āsravas are so called because
they seat themselves (āsayantīty āsravāṇāṁ nirvacanam). Isolated
(asahāya) views are not favorable to installation (asana), being
acute. Thus one does not make a separate place among the asravas
or cankerous influences for them; they figure in the category of the
cankerous influences, but are not mixed with the other anusayas.
Therefore we have:
a. The flood of the objects of sensual pleasure is made up of five832 Chapter Five
lusts, five hatreds, five egotisms, four doubts, and ten wrappings:
in all twenty-nine things.
b. The flood of existence is made up of ten lusts, ten egotisms,
eight doubts: in all twenty-eight things.
c. The flood of views is made up of the twelve views of the
three Dhātus: in all thirty-six things.
d. The flood of ignorance is made up of the five ignorances of
the three Dhātus: in all fifteen things.
The same for the yokes.
38a-c. So too the upādānas (the clingings), by placing
ignorance [with the first two] and by dividing the drstis
into two.
We have five clingings:
a. Clinging to the objects of sensual pleasure (kāmayoga) is
made up of the yoke of the objects of sensual pleasure plus the
ignorances of Kāmadhātu, that is, five lusts, five hatreds, five
egotisms, five ignorances, four doubts, and ten wrappings: in all
thirty-four things.
b. Clinging to the belief in a soul (ātmavadopādāna)¹3¹ is made
up
of the yoke of existence plus the ignorances of the two higher
spheres, that is, ten lusts, ten egotisms, ten ignorances, and eight
doubts: in all thirty-eight things.
c. The clinging to views is made up of the yoke of views
without the esteeming of morality and ascetic practices: in all
thirty things.
d. Clinging to morality and ascetic practices is made up of the
six remaining things.
Why distinguish "the presumption of morality and of ascetic
practices" from the other views and make it a separate clinging?The Latent Defilements 833
Because it is in opposition to the Path and deludes the two
classes of devotees: holding as path that which is not Path, the laity
are deluded with expectations of obtaining heaven through
abstinence, etc.,132 and clerics are deluded with expectations of
obtaining purity through the renouncing of agreeable things. 133
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 284a4).¹34
But why doesn't ignorance constitute a separate clinging?
38c-d. Ignorance is not the grasper; like clinging, it is mixed
with the other anusayas.135
Ignorance has non-intellection for its characteristic; it is not at
all sharp; thus it does not grasp; therefore, say the School, it is only
mixed with the other defilements as is clinging.
But, we would say, 136 the Blessed One said in the Sūtra, "What
is the yoke of the object of sensual pleasure (kāmayoga)? With
regard to the objects of pleasure (kāmas), within the person who
does not know the origin of the object of pleasure, it is kāmarāga,
kāmaprema, kāmecchā, kāmamūrchā, kāmagṛddha, kāmaparigard-
dha, kāmanandī, kāmaniyanti, and kāmādhyavasāna which
overpowers the mind: these are the yokes of the objects of sensual
pleasure."137 The Blessed One defines the other yokes in the same
way. In another Sutra, he says that chandarāga is a clinging. 138
Thus chandarāga with respect to the objects of pleasure, views,
etc., is what is called clinging to the objects of pleasure (kamopā-
dāna), etc.139
What is the meaning of the words anuśaya (latent defilement),
āsrava (cankerous influence), ogha (flood), yoga (yoke) and
upādāna (clinging)?834
Chapter Five
39. They are atomic; they adhere; they nourish themselves
in two ways; they continually bind: this is why they are
termed anusayas, 140
They are atomic, for their mode of existences is subtle, being
difficult to know. They adhere through the adhesion of their
praptis; they nourish themselves (anuferate) in two ways, both
from the object and from the dharmas with which they are
associated; and they continually bind, for, unless one makes an
effort, and even when one creates an obstacle to them, they will
appear and reappear. 141
40. They fix and they flow, they carry away, they attach,
they seize: such is the etymology of the words asravas, etc.
The anusayas fix, “seat” (āsayanti) beings in transmigration;
they flow (asravanti) from the highest heaven (Bhavägra =
Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana, iii.3, 81) to Avīci (iii.58); they flow
out (ksar) by the six organs which are as wounds. They are thus
called cankerous influences, or asravas. 142
The anuśayas carry away (haranti); ¹43 they are thus called
oghas or floods.
The anusayas cause beings to be attached (fleṣayanti);¹44 they
are thus called yogas or yokes.
The anusayas seize (upagṛhṇanti); they are thus called
upādānas or clingings. 145
The best explanation is the following.146
1. By means of the anusayas, the mental series flows into the
objects; the anuśayas are thus äsravas or cankerous influences. In
conformity with the comparison of the Sutra "In the same way that
one makes great efforts in order to steer a boat against the current
but when these efforts begin to weaken, the boat is carriedThe Latent Defilements 835
(haryate) with the stream; [so too, it is with great pains that the
mental series is freed from its objects through the good dhar-
mas]."147
2. When they are very violent, the anuśayas are called oghas; in
fact they carry away, as in a flood, those who are bound to them,
and who necessarily yield to their impulses.
3. When they do not enter into activity with an extreme
violence, the anuśayas are called yogas, because they yoke one to
the very many sufferings of transmigration; or rather because they
adhere with obstinance.
4. The anusayas are called upādānas, because, through their
action, one clings to things of the senses, etc. (kāmādhyupādā-
na). 148
These same anuśayas or latent defilements which make up four
categories-cankerous influences, floods, yokes, and clingings,—
also make up five categories: samyojanas or connections (v.41-45),
bandhanas or bonds (v.45d), anuśayas, upakleśas (v.46), and
paryavasthanas or wrappings (v.47-49b).149
41a-b. There are said to be five types by reason of their
division into connections, etc. 150
The nine samyojanas ¹51 or connections are: 1) affection, 2)
aversion, 3) pride, 4) ignorance, 5) view, 6) unjustified estimation,
7) doubt, 8) envy, and 9) avarice.
Anunaya-samyojana or the attachment of affection is lust of
the three Dhātus. One should understand the other connections in
the same way, each according to its type: the second, the eighth,
and ninth belong exclusively to Kāmadhātu.836 Chapter Five
Drsti-samyojana or the attachment to views is made up of the
first three views (a belief in a self, a belief in the extremes, and
false views); parāmarśa-saṁyojana, the attachment to esteeming,
is made up of the last two (namely, the esteeming of views and the
esteeming of morality and ascetic practices). The question is thus
posed: Does it happen that a person is attached through the
connection of affection, and not through the connection of views,
to the dharmas associated with views (that is, to the sensations,
etc., associated with existence), while dṛṣṭyanusaya, the latent
defilement of views, is not active with respect to these dharmas?
Yes. Let us consider a person who has produced the knowledge
of the Arising of Suffering but not the knowledge of the Extinction
of Suffering. Within him arises a connection of affection with
respect to the dharmas associated with the views of esteeming
views and esteeming of morality and ascetic practices, dharmas
which are abandoned through the Truth of Extinction and the
Path. This person will be attached to these dharmas through the
connection of affection, but not through the connection of views;
for he has abandoned the universal connection of views which is
abandoned through the Truths of Suffering and the Arising of
Suffering, and there does not exist in him any non-universal
connection of views which bears on these dharmas or which is
associated with them.152 Nevertheless latent defilement of views is
active with respect to these dharmas, for the two dṛṣṭis which are
esteeming (the connection of esteeming) and which have not yet
been abandoned, are active through association.
Why does one makes one connection-the connection of
views-out of the first three views, and another connection, the
connection of esteeming-out of the last two?
41c-d. Two views constitute separate connection by reason
of their equal number of things, and by reason of theircommon characteristic of esteeming. 153
The Latent Defilements 837
The first three views make up eighteen distinct things: false
views of Kāmadhātu are abandoned by each one of the four Truths,
etc. (v.4,5); the same for the last two (twelve esteeming of views
and six esteeming of morality and ascetic practices).
The last two views are, by their nature, esteeming, but not the
first three. They take the first ones as their object, but the opposite
is not true.
Why do envy and avarice make up two connections, while the
other wrappings (paryavasthānas, v.47) are not distinct connec-
tions (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 258c21)?
42. Envy and avarice are each a connection because, among
the wrappings, they are at one and the same time com-
pletely bad and independent.
"Independent" means bound to a single ignorance (v.14).
These two characteristics are not encountered in the other
wrappings.
According to another opinion-[according to the author]-
this reason is good for the master who admits only eight
wrappings; but for the master who admits ten wrappings (below,
p. 841), the reason proposed raises no difficulties, for anger and
hypocrisy also present the twofold characteristic of being bad and
independent: they are also classified as connections. 154
***838 Chapter Five
The Blessed One said moreover,155 that, among the connec-
tions,
43a. Five are inferior.
Namely a belief in a self, the esteeming of morality and ascetic
practices, doubt, desire for the objects of sensual pleasure
(kāmacchanda) and anger.
"Inferior" (avarabhāgīya) means that which is in relation to,
that which is favorable to the "inferior part" (avarabhāga), that is,
to Kāmadhātu¹56 (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 252b25). Now, among these
five connections:
43b-c. Two cause one not to get out of Kāmadhāātu; three
cause one to return there.
Desire for the objects of sensual pleasure and anger obstruct
leaving Kāmadhātu; a belief in a self and the two remaining
connections cause one, once he has left Kāmadhātu, to return
there: as the jailor of a prison and his helpers.
According to another opinion,¹57 it is by reason of the three
that one does not leave the state of being inferior, namely a
Prthagjana; and it is by reason of the two that one does not get out
of the inferior sphere, that is, out of Kāmadhātu. This is why these
five connections are termed "inferior."
The Blessed One said, in fact, that one becomes a Srotaäpanna
by the complete abandoning of the three connections in questi-
on. 158 But, on the other hand, the Srotaāpanna has also abandoned
three desires: a belief in the extremes, false views, and the
esteeming of views. It appears that the Blessed One should term
these views connections favorable to the quality of Prthagjana.
43c-d. Three, because they make up the gate and the root.The Latent Defilements 839
There are three categories of klesa: 159 1. simple, to be
abandoned through the Seeing of Suffering, namely a belief in a
self and a belief in the extremes; 2. twofold, to be abandoned
through the Seeing of Suffering and the Path, namely the
esteeming of morality and ascetic practices; and 3. fourfold, to be
abandoned through Seeing the Four Noble Truths, namely doubt,
false views, and the esteeming of views. By indicating the first
three as connections, the Blessed One indicates the gate to the
other klesas, the beginning of each category.
He also indicates the root, for a belief in the extremes is set
into motion by a belief in a self, the esteeming of views by the
esteeming of morality and ascetic practices, and false views by
doubt.
Others 160 say:
44. Three are indicated because three things create an
obstacle to arriving at deliverance: a non-desire to go, error
with respect to the Path, and doubt with respect to the
Path.
In the same way that, in the world, these three things form an
obstacle to progress to another place, in this same way they form
an obstacle to progress towards deliverance: a. a belief in a self,
which inspires a fear of deliverance and causes one not to desire to
arrive at it; b. the esteeming of morality and ascetic practices
through which, having recourse to another path, one becomes
deluded about the Path; and c. doubts, doubt about the Path. The
Blessed One, wishing to teach that the Srotaäpanna has completely
abandoned these three obstacles, says that he has abandoned three
connections.840
Chapter Five
In the same way that the Blessed One characterized five
connections as “inferior," in this same way¹61
45a-c. Five are "superior," namely two lusts, those which
arise from Rūpadhātu and from Ārūpyadhātu, namely
dissipation, pride and ignorance.
They are "superior," which means that one cannot pass beyond
the higher spheres when one has not abandoned them.
This exposition of the connections is finished.
How many bandhanas or bonds are there?
Three, namely all lust, all hatred, and all ignorance.162
Why are only these three called bonds?
45d. There are three bonds by reason of sensation. 163
There are three bonds by reason of the three sensations. Lust
creates anuśayana, that is, "becomes lodged in and grows" in
agreeable sensation, both by taking it as its object and by
association; hatred in disagreeable sensation; and ignorance,
and-but not in the same manner-lust and hatred, in the
sensation of indifference (ii.8c). 164
Or rather the preceeding rule refers to the sensation of
personality.***
The anusayas have been explained above. 165
The Latent Defilements 841
We must now explain the upakleśas. The kleśas are upakleśas
because they defile the mind.
46. Defiled mental states, forming part of the saṁskāras-
kandha, but different from the klefas, are also upaklesas
without being kleśas.
Dharmas different from the kleśas, defiled mental states,
included within the samskāraskandha (i.15), are solely upaklesas.
Upakleśas means that which is found near (upa) the klesa, or close
to which the kleśa is found, (i.e., which is produced following the
klesa). Not being roots, they are not klesas,:166 the upaklefas are
enumerated in the Ksudravastuka.167
Let us now explain the relationship of the klefas with the
wrappings and the kleśamalas (see p. 846, line 13).
What are the paryavasthānas or wrappings?
A kleśa is also a wrapping, as we can see from the text: “One
experiences a suffering which proceeds from the wrapping which
is lust."168
The Prakaraṇapādaśāstra (TD 26, p. 693c20) teaches that there
are eight wrappings:842
Chapter Five
47. There are eight types of wrappings: disrespect, absence
of fear, envy, avarice, dissipation, regret, torpor, and
languor.
The system
of the Vaibhäşikas admits ten, by adding
48a. Also anger and hypocrisy.
1-2. Disrespect and absence of fear, ii.32.
3. Envy or mental dissatisfaction concerns the prosperity of
another.
4. Avarice is "tenacity" (ägraha, Mahāvyutpatti, 109.29) of the
mind, which is opposed to either spiritual or material giving
(iv.113) (Atthasālinī, 373).
5. Dissipation, ii.26.
6. Regret, ii.28. Regret is good or bad, but only defiled regret is
a wrapping.
7. Torpor, ii.26.
8. Languor (ii.27, vii.lld) is a compression of the mind which
rends it incapable of commanding the body. 169 Languor can be
good, bad, or neutral, but only defiled languor is a wrapping
(ii.30c-d).
9. Anger (ii.27) is irritation of the mind with respect to living
beings and to things (sattva and asattva), an irritation distinct
from that of regret, anger or hostility.170
10. Hypocrisy is hiding one's faults (ii.27).171
***The Latent Defilements 843
What is the origin of the wrappings?
48b. From out of lust there proceeds disrespect, dissipation,
and avarice.
These three upakleśas proceed from lust ("to proceed" means
to be an outflowing, nişyanda, ii.57c).
48c. There is no agreement with regard to hypocrisy.
There is no agreement with regard to hypocrisy: according to
some, it proceeds from out of desire ("thirst"); according to others,
from out of ignorance; according to others, from out of one or the
other accordingly as it refers to persons who are knowledgeable or
who are ignorant. ¹72
48d. From out of ignorance there proceeds torpor, languor,
and absence of fear.
These three proceed from ignorance.
49a-b. From out of doubt there proceeds regret and anger;
from out of hatred there proceeds envy.
It is thus that these ten upakleśas are an outflowing of the
kleśas.173
(In the same way that foul things, mala, leave the body, so too
the kleśamalas, "filth of the kleśas," come out of the klesas). What844 Chapter Five
are the kleśamalas?
49c-50b. (The other upakleśas are the six kleśamalas:)
cheating, crookedness, drunkenness of pride, esteeming
evil, enmity, and hostility.
1. Cheating is the dharma that causes one to delude another.
2. Double-dealing or crookedness of mind causes one not to say
things as one should, not to deny when one should,¹74 or to explain
something in a confused manner.
3. The drunkenness of pride, as ii.34c-d.
4. Esteeming evil is what which causes one not to accept
remonstrances.
5. Enmity is aversion.
6. Hostility is what is translated into deeds and words harmful
to another (see note 170).
50b-51b. From out of lust there proceeds cheating and the
drunkenness of pride; from anger enmity and hostility;
esteeming evil from out of the esteeming of views; and
crookedness from out of view.
Crookedness is an outflowing of view, for it is said in a stanza,
"What is crookedness? It is transgressing views."175
[The wrappings and the malas arise from the kleśas; they are
thus upakleśas.]
How are they abandoned?
***51c. Disrespect, absence of fear, torpor, languor, and
dissipation are abandoned through Seeing and Meditation.
The Latent Defilements 845
Five wrappings-namely the five the first of which is
disrespect-being associated with two klesas, are twofold:
abandoned through Seeing and Meditation. They are abandoned
through Seeing the Truth through which the kleśa to which they
are associated is abandoned.
52a. The other wrappings are solely abandoned through
Meditation.
The other wrappings, envy and the rest, are abandoned only by
Meditation: in fact they are of the so-called "autonomous
category,¹76 being associated with a single ignorance which is
abandoned through Meditation.
52b. And so too the malas, being autonomous.
The same holds for the kleśamalas.
(Are the upaklesas all bad?)
52c. In Kāmadhātu, they are of two types; the others are
bad;
Torpor, dissipation, and languor are both bad and neutral.
52d. Above, the upakleśas are neutral.846 Chapter Five
Above Kāmadhātu, the upakleśas-to the extent that they exist
there-are neutral.
53a. Cheating and crookedness exist in Kāmadhātu and in
the First Dhyāna.
These two upakleśas exist in two spheres, Kāmadhātu and
Rūpadhātu.
53b. Since Brahmã tried to deceive.
We cannot doubt this, for Mahābrahmā attempted to deceive
the Āyuşman Aśvajit by giving him an inexact definition of
himself. 177
53c. Torpor, dissipation, and pridefulness exist in all three
spheres. The others in Kāmadhātu.
Of the sixteen upakleśas, ten wrappings and six malas, eleven
exist only in Kāmadhātu, with the exception of cheating,
crookedness, torpor, dissipation, and pridefulness.
54a. Those that are abandoned through Seeing the Truths
are of the spheres of the manovijñāna, plus pride and
languor.
Kleśas and upakleśas which are abandoned through Seeing are
supported by the manovijñāna alone; so too pride and languor
which are abandoned through Meditation; for these two, in their
totality (in the three spheres), are of the sphere of the manas.
54b. Plus the autonomous upakleśas.In the same way, the autonomous upakleśas (envy, avarice, etc.)
are abandoned through Meditation.
The Latent Defilements 847
54c. The others have the six consciousnesses for their
support.
The others are supported by the six consciousnesses: lust is
abandoned through Meditation, as are hatred and ignorance, as
well as the upakleśas which are associated with them, disrespect,
absence of fear, torpor, and dissipation, and those which are
included in the kleśamahābhūmikas (disbelief, idleness, and
non-diligence) (ii.26a-v).
With which sense organs (sukhendriya, etc., ii.7) are the klesas
and the upaklesas associated?
I. First, with respect to the kleśas of Kāmadhātu:
55a. Lust is associated with two agreeable sensations.
Lust is associated with pleasure and satisfaction.
55b. Hatred with the contrary, 178
Hatred is associated with displeasure and dissatisfaction, for
lust and hatred have respectively happiness and dejection for their
aspect, for both of them belong to the six consciousnesses.
55c. Moha (or avidyā) with all.
Being associated with all the kleśas, ignorance is associated
with the five sensations. 179848
Chapter Five
55c-d. The view of negation with dissatisfaction and
sensation. 180
False view is associated with dissatisfaction among those
persons who have done meritorious actions and who regret that
their actions are without result; it is associated with satisfaction
among transgressors.
56a. Doubt with dissatisfaction.
If one who aspires to certitude doubts, then he is dissatisfied.
56b. The others with satisfaction.
The others, that is, the views with the exception of false views
and egotism-are associated with satisfaction, for they have the
aspect of happiness.
Which anusayas have we considered up to now?
56b. Those arisen in Kāmadhātu.
Having indicates the difference of these anusayas, the author
notes a common characteristic:
56c. All are associated with indifference.
All these anusayas are associated with the indriya of indiffer-
ence, for, says the School, there is necessarily indifference when
the series of the kleśa is going to be broken.***
The Latent Defilements
II. With respect to the klesas of the higher spheres:
56c-d. In the higher stages, they are associated with their
own sensations, to be determined according to the stage.
In the higher stages, the anusayas are associated with the
sensation which are proper to them, to the extent that these
sensations exist there (see ii.12, viii.12).
In the stage-the First Dhyāna—where there are four
consciousnesses, seeing, hearing, touch, and mental consciousness,
the anusayas which are produced with each of these conscious-
nesses are associated with the sensations proper to this conscious-
ness: there one finds (1) the sensation of pleasure corresponding
to the consciousnesses of seeing, hearing, and touch; (2) the
sensation of satisfaction corresponding to the mental conscious-
ness; and (3) the sensation of indifference corresponding to the
four consciousnesses. 180
In the stages-the Second Dhyāna, etc.-where only the
mental consciousness is found, the anusayas which are produced
with this consciousness are associated with the sensations proper
to this consciousness in the state in question: 182 Second Dhyāna,
satisfaction and indifference: Third Dhyāna, pleasure and
indifference; Fourth Dhyāna and Ārūpyas, indifference.
III. With respect to the upaklesas:
57a-c. Regret, envy, anger, hostility, aversion, and the
esteeming of evil are associated with dissatisfaction.
These upaklefas are associated with the indriya of dissatisfac-
tion because they have dejection for their mode and they belong to850 Chapter Five
the sphere of the manas.
57d. Avarice, with the contrary.
Avarice is assocated with the indriya of satisfaction; it has
happiness for its mode, for it proceeds greed.
58a-b. Crookedness, cheating, hyprcrisy, and languor are
associated with one and the other.
"Associated with the indriya of satisfaction and with the
indriya of dissatisfaction:" it happens that one deceives another
with satisfaction, and one deceives with dissatisfaction.
58b-c. Pridefulness is associated with the two agreeable
sensations.
In the Third Dhyāna, pridefulness is associated with the
indriya of pleasure; below, with the indriya of satisfaction; 183
above, with the indriya of indifference. Thus
58c. Indifference is everywhere.
All are associated with indifference. In the way that there is no
restriction in the association of the kleśa and the upakleśas with
ignorance, so too with indifference.
58d. The four others with five.
Four wrappings-namely disrespect, absence of fear, torpor,
and dissipation-are associated with the five sensations, because
the first two are akuśalamahābhūmikas, and the last two arekleśamahābhūmikas (ii.26).
The Latent Defilements 851
From another point of view, the Sūtra ¹84 declares that there are
five "hindrances" or "obstacles” (nīvaraṇas), among the kleśas and
upakleśas: 1. kāmacchanda, 2. anger, 3. torpor-languor, 4.
dissipation-regret, and 5. doubt.
Does this refer to the torpor, dissipation, and doubt of all the
three Dhātus, or only of Kāmadhātu?
The Sūtra says that the hindrances are exclusively bad;¹
consequently
59a.The hindrances exist in Kāmadhātu.186
But in none of the other Dhātus.
Why do torpor-and-languor and dissipation-and-regret
constitute, as groups, two hindrances?
59b-c. Two make up a single hindrance, because they have
the same opposites, the same nourishment, and the same
result, 187
"Opposite," that is, opposition or counter-nourishment.
The Sūtra teaches that torpor and languor have the same
nourishment, and the same counter-nourishment: "What is the
nourishment of torpor-languor? Five dharmas, namely tandrī (bad
omens seen in dreams), arati(unhappiness), vijṛmbhikā (physical
exhaustion), bhakte'samatā (uneven consumption of food), and
cetaso linatva (mental depression). What is the counter-nourish-
ment? Alokasamjñā."188852 Chapter Five
Torpor and languor have the same action or task of rendering
the mind languid.
In this same way dissipation and regret have the same
nourishment, the same counter-nourishment, and the same effect.
Its nourishment is four dharmas: preoccupation relative to one's
relatives (jñātivitarka), preoccupation relative to one's land
(janapadavitarka), preoccupation relative to the deathless ones
(amaravitarka), and remembrance of one's former merry-making
and companions (paurāṇasya ca hasitakrīḍitaramitaparibhāvitasyā-
nusmartā). 189 Its counter-nourishment is calmness. Its effect is to
agitate the mind.190
But all the kleśas are a “hindrance." Why does the Sūtra
distinguish five hindrances?
59c-d. Only five, be reason of the destruction of a skandha,
by reason of doubt.191
Kāmacchanda and anger destroy the element of morality,
torpor-languor destroy the element of discrimination, and
dissipation-regret destroy the element of absorption. And in the
absence of discrimination and absorption, there is doubt concern-
ing the Truths.192
But, one would say,193 if this explanation is correct, dissipation-
regret, which hinders absorption, should be listed, in the list of the
hindrances, before torpor-languor. Thus these two hindrances
desroy, in the order in which they are named, the two elements of
absorption and discrimination: the danger to the person who
applies himself to absorption is in torpor-languor; the danger to
him who applies himself to discrimination of the dharmas is in
dissipation-regret.194
Other masters ¹95 give another explanation. How do they
explain this? The monk on his rounds perceives an agreeable or
disagreeable object, and considers it as such; when he returns to
the monastery the enjoyment and the aversion which proceedThe Latent Defilements 853
from this agreeable-disagreeable impression, first hinder his entry
into absorption. Then, when the monk has entered into absorp-
tion, as he does not correctly cultivate calm and insight (samatha
and vipaśyanā), there is then produced torpor-languor and
dissipation-regret which, in this order, hinder his absorption
(samadhi = śamatha) and his discrmination (prajñā = vipaśyanā).
Finally, when he has left the absorption, doubt hinders his
reflection on the dharmas. It is in this way that there are the five
hinderances.
There is one point to be examined.
Let us consider the klesas "universal in a different sphere"
(visabhāgadhātusarvatraga, v.13)-that is, those that form the
group of false views, etc., and are abandoned through the Seeing of
Suffering and of the Arising of Suffering-which have for their
object the two higher spheres. This object is "completely known"
by the anvayajñānas of Suffering and the Arising of Suffering
which bear on the higher spheres (v.14, vi.26, vii.3c): but it is not
at the moment when these anvayajñānas are produced that the
klesas in question are abandoned, for, also having Kāmadhātu for
their sphere, these kleśas have been formerly destroyed by the
dharmajñānas of Suffering and the Arising of Suffering the
production of which is before that of the anvayajñānas.
Conversely, with respect to the kleśas having an impure object
(sāsravālambana, v.16) and to be abandoned through the Seeing
the Extinction of Suffering and the Path-those which form the
esteeming of false views group-it is not when their object (the
group of false views to be abandoned through the Seeing of the
Extinction of Suffering and of the Path) is "completely known" (by
the dharmajñānas and anvayajñānas of Suffering and the Arising
of Suffering) that they are abandoned. Rather they are abandoned
only later by the Seeing of the Extinction of Suffering and by the
Path.
Thus how can one say that these two categories of kleśas are
abandoned by a knowledge of their object?854 Chapter Five
It is not an absolute principle that the kleśas are abandoned by
a knowledge of their object. They are abandoned in four ways.
With respect to the kleśas abandoned through Seeing:
60a-c. Destruction by a knowledge of the object, by the
destruction of the klesas of which they are the object, and by
the abandoning of the object.196
1. The kleśas (1) bearing on the bhūmi to which they belong,
abandoned through the Seeing of Suffering and the Arising of
Suffering, or (2) having a pure object, abandoned through the
Seeing of the Extinction of Suffering and the Path (v.14), are
abandoned through a knowledge of their object.
2. The universal kleśas in another sphere, abandoned through
the Seeing of Suffering and the Arising of Suffering, are aban-
doned through the destruction of the klefa of which they are the
object. These kleśas (v.12) are of the object of a universal kleśa in
its own sphere: by the destruction of those, these are also
destroyed. 197
3. The klesas having an impure object, abandoned through the
Seeing of the Extinction of Suffering and the Path are abandoned
through the abandoning of their object. These klesas have for their
object the klesa which has a pure object (v.14). By the destruction
of those, these are also destroyed. 198
With respect to the kleśas abandoned through Meditation,
60d. There is destruction through the arising of the
opposition.The Latent Defilements 855
When a path is opposed to one category of kleśa, this path, by
arising, causes this category of defilement to be abandoned.
Which path is opposed to which category?
This will be taught in detail (vi.33): "The weak-weak path is
opposed to the strong-strong category. . . The strong-strong path
is opposed to the weak-weak category."
How many types of oppositions are there?
61a-c. Opposition is fourfold: abandoning, maintaining,
removal, and disgust.
1. The Uninterrupted Path (ānantaryamārga, vi.28, 65) is a
prahāṇa-pratipaksa, "an opposition which results in abandoning."
2. The next path, the Path of Deliverance (vimuktimārga), is
an adhāra-pratipakṣa, “opposition through which the abandoning
obtained by the proceeding path, is found to be maintained,
affirmed."
3. The next path, višeṣamārga is the dūrībhāva-pratipakṣa,
"opposition by which the possession of the klesa previously cut off,
is found to be removed."
According to others, the Path of Deliverance is itself the
opposition of removal (dūrībhāva-pratipakṣa), for the possession
of the kleśa is also removed from it.
4. The path which consists of considering a sphere of existence
as bad (impermanent, etc.) and which finds disgust in it is the path
of opposition through disgust (vidūṣaṇā-pratipakṣa, see vi.50).
But we say, here is the correct order: 1. opposition through
disgust is the Preparatory Path ( prayogamārga);199 2. opposition
through abandoning is the whole of the Uninterrupted Path; 3.
opposition through which the proceeding path is maintained is the
Path of Deliverance; and 4. opposition by which the possession of
the kleśa previously cut off, is removed is the Distinguished Path856 Chapter Five
(v.63).200
When one abandons the kleśas, through separation from what
are they abandoned?
61c-d. The kleśa is supposed to become abandoned through
separation from its object.201
The kleśa, in fact, cannot be separated from its saṁprayoga,
(that is, from the dharmas associated with the mind, sensations,
etc. ii.24); 202 but it can be separated from its object in such a
manner that it no longer re-arises bearing on this object.
So be it. A future kleśa can be separated from its object, but
how can a past kleśa be? [The thing that it has taken as its object
remains having been taken as object]. Would you say that the
expression ālambanāt prahātavyaḥ, "to be abandoned through
separation from its object," signifies ālambanaparijñānāt prahāta-
vyaḥ, "to be abandoned through perfect knowledge of the object?"
But the rule that the kleśa is abandoned through knowledge of the
object is not absolute (see above, p. 854); consequently there is a
difficulty to be resolved here. 203
What does one do in order that the kleśas may be termed
prahina, or "abandoned?"
A personal klefa is abandoned through the cutting off of prapti
or the possession of this klesa (ii.36b) which exists in the personal
series. As for the kleśa of another, or for rūpa in its totality (kuśala,
etc.), or for the undefiled dharmas, these diverse things are
abandoned through the abandoning of the personal klesa which
takes them as its object (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 274c21, p. 411a27, etc.)
***The Latent Defilements 857
How many types of separation are there?
There are four, say the School:
62. Separation through difference of nature, through
opposition, through separation of place, and through time;
as, for example, the primary elements, the precepts, places,
and the two time periods.204
1. Separation through difference of nature: although the
primary elements (mahābhūta) arise together (sahaja, ii.65), they
are separated one from the other by the fact of their different
natures.
2. Separation by opposition: one is separated from immorality
by the precepts.
3. Separation of place by difference of place: the oceans of the
East and the West.
4. Separation by time: as the past and the future. One says that
the past and the future are separated: from what are they
separated?
They are separated from the present.
How can the past which has just perished and the future which
is about to arise be separated from the present?
It is by reason of the difference of time period that, according
to us, the past and the future are separated; not by reason of the
fact that they will be distant in the past or in the future. For if this
were the case, the present would also be separate, for it constitutes
a different time period. We say that the past and the future are
seperated through their activity (käritra, see v.25).
But how can an unconditioned thing, which is always inactive,
be considered as near?205
Because, universally, they possess the two extinctions858 Chapter Five
(nirodha, ii.36).
This argument would hold for the past and the future (one
possesses past and future good dharmas, etc.); but how can space,
which one cannot possess (iii.36), be near?
We say that the past and the future are separated from one
another because they are separated by the present; the present is
near because it is near to the past and future; an unconditioned
thing is near because it is not separated or hindered by anything.
But then the past and the future will be at one and the same
time far and near, being far from each other and near to the
present.
Here is the correct explanation. 206 The future is separated from
the unique, self characteristics of the dharmas, because it has not
attained them; the past is separated from them because it has
fallen away from them.
It has been said that the klesas are not destroyed through the
arising of their opposition or opposites (v.60d). We would ask if,
through the Distinguished Path (višeṣamārga, vi.65b-d), there is a
"progressive abandoning (višeşa-prahāṇa)" of the klesas?
No. Of all the kleśas, there is
63a. Destruction all at once.
The kleśa is destroyed through the Path which is its "path of
abandoning." But
63a-b. The acquisition of disconnection from the klefas
takes place many times. 207In how many moments?
In six moments:
63c-d. There is arising of the opposition, the acquisition of
results, and the perfection of the faculties.
The Latent Defilements 859
"Opposition" here means the "Path of Deliverance (vimukti-
mārga)." "Results" means the four results of the religious life, the
result of Srotaāpanna, etc. (vi.51). "Perfection of the faculties"
refers to indriyasaṁcāra (vi.60c).208
Disconnection from the kleśas is acquired in these moments:
for certain kleśas, according to the case, in six moments; but in
decreasing number down to two for others.209
Under certain conditions, disconnection (visamyoga) receives
the name of parijñā, “perfect knowledge" (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
406b9). There are two types of perfect knowledge: jñānaparijñā,
"perfect knowledge consisting of knowledge," which is pure
knowledge; and prahāṇaparijñā, “perfect knowledge which
produces abandoning," which is abandoning itself, for the effect is
designated by the name of its cause.210
Does all abandoning constitute one perfect knowledge?
No.
Why is this?860 Chapter Five
64a. There are nine perfect knowledges.211
That is,
64b-c. The destruction of the first two types of Kāma
consititute one perfect knowledge.
That is, the destruction of the first two types of klesa of
Kāmadhātu, the kleśas abandoned through the Seeing of Suffering
and the Arising of Suffering.
64c. The destruction of the two types consists of two.
The abandoning of the klesas of Kāmadhātu abandoned
through the Seeing of the Extinction of Suffering consitiutes one
perfect knowledge; the same for the abandoning of the klesas of
Kāmadhātu abandoned through the Seeing of the Path.
As the abandoning of the klesas of Kāmadhātu abandoned
through the Seeing of the Truths constitutes three perfect
knowledges,
64d. In that same way, above, there are three perfect
knowledges.
The same for the two higher spheres taken together, the
abandoning of the klesas abandoned through the Seeing of
Suffering and the Arising of Suffering consitutes one perfect
knowledge; the abandoning of the klefas abandoned through the
Seeing of the Extinction of Suffering constitutes the second perfect
knowledge; and the abandoning of the klesas abandoned through
the Seeing of the Path constitutes one perfect knowledge. Thus
there are six perfect knowledges for the abandoning of the klesasThe Latent Defilements 861
which belong to the three spheres and which are abandoned by the
Seeing of the Truths.
65a-c. There are three other perfect knowledges: the
destruction of the avarabhāgīya cankerous influences, the
cankerous influences of Rūpadhātu, and of all the cankerous
influences.
The abandoning of the avarabhāgiya cankerous influences
(v.43a), that is, the cankerous influences of Kāmadhātu, constitute
one perfect knowledge.
The abandoning of the cankerous influences of Rūpadhātu,
which is called rūparāgakṣayaparijñā "perfect knowledge consist-
ing of the destruction of attachment to Rūpadhātu” (Vibhāṣā, TD
27, p. 322a15) constitutes one perfect knowledge.
The third perfect knowledge is the total abandoning of the
cankerous influences of Arūpyadhātu, which is called sarvasamy-
ojanaparyādānaparijñā, “perfect knowledge consisting of the
annihilation of all the bonds” (v.41).
[These three perfect knowledges are the abandoning of the
types of klesa abandoned though Meditation.]
Rūpadhātu is distinguished from Ārūpyadhātu with respect to
the abandoning of the klesas abandoned through Meditation; one
does not establish this distinction with respect to the abandoning
of the klesas abandoned through the Seeing of the Truths: the
opposition is the same for these (anvayajñāna, vii.2c-d), but not for
those. Thus three are nine perfect knowledges.
65c. Six are the result of the patiences (see above p. 775).
The first six perefect knowledges, which consist of the
abandoning of the kleśas abandoned through Seeing the Truths,
are the result of the "patiences" (kṣāntis, vi.25c).862
Chapter Five
65d. The others, the results of the knowledges.
The three perfect knowledges, the first of which is the perfect
knowledge which consists of the abandoning (of the cankerous
influences) of Kāmadhātu, are obtained through the Path of
Meditation; thus they are the result of the "knowledges."
How can a perfect knowledge be the result of a patience
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 321a21)?
Because the patiences are the associates of the jñānas or
knowledges: in the manner in which the associates of a king
improperly receive the name of king; or rather, because a patience
and a knowledge have the same result.
(In what stage of absorption does one obtain the perfect
knowledges?)
66a-b. All are the result of anagamya; five or eight are the
result of the dhyānas.212
According to the Vaibhāṣikas, five are the result of the
mauladhyānas or the "principal absorptions" (in opposition to the
samantakas or absorptions preparatory to the Dhyānas, viii.6,
22a), namely, those which consist of the abandoning of the klesas
of the sphere of Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu (perfect knowledges
four, five, six, eight and nine). The abandoning of the klesas of the
sphere of Kāmadhātu (perfect knowledges one, two, three, and
seven) is the result of only anāgamya, that is, of the absorption
preparatory to the First Dhyāna.
According to the Bhadanta Ghoşaka, eight are the result of the
principal absorptions (namely one to six, eight, and nine). Let usThe Latent Defilements 863
suppose, he says, a person detached from Kamadhātu by the
mundane or impure path (säsrava, laukikamārga, vi.49) enters into
the Seeing of the Truths or the Path of Seeing (which is always
pure) being supported by (i.e., in) the Dhyānas: his abandoning of
the kleśas of Kāmadhātu abandoned by Seeing, and his taking of
possession of disconnection from these klesas, should be consid-
ered as the result of the path of Seeing, for it is pure. The single
perfect knowledge which consists of the abandoning of the
cankerous influence of Kamadhātu (perfect knowledge number
seven) is solely the result of anagamya.
This holds as well for dhyānāntara (viii.22d) as for the
principle Dhyānas.
66c. One is the result of a sāmantaka.213
The perfect knowledge consisting of the destructin of attach-
ment to Rūpadhātu (perfect knowledge number eight) is the result
of the samantaka, or preparatory stage (viii.22a) of Ākāśānan-
tyāyatana.
(In order to enter into the First Ārūpya, one should disengage
oneself from the defilements of Rūpadhātu: this is what one does
in this preparatory stage).
66d. One is also the result of three maulārūpys.214
The perfect knowledge which consists of the annihilation of all
the bonds is the result of the three principle Ārūpyas.
67a. All are the result of the Aryan Path.
The nine perfect knowledges are obtained through the pure
path.864
Chapter Five
67b. Two of the worldly path.
Perfect knowledges numbers seven and eight are also obtained
through the impure path.
67c. Two also through anvaya;
The last two perfect knowledges are the result of anvayajñāna
(vii.3c: a knowledge of Suffering etc., of the two higher spheres)
included in the Path of Meditation.
67d. Three through dharmajñāna;
The last three are the result of dharmajñāna (knowledge of
Suffering, etc., of Kāmadhātu) included in the Path of Meditation,
for this knowledge is opposed to the klesas of the three spheres
abandoned through Meditation.
67e. Five or six, from one and the other groups.
Six are the result of the dharmajñāna group, namely those
which are the result of the dharmakṣāntis and the dharmajñānas;
five are the result of the anvayajñāna group, namely those which
are the result of anvayakṣāntis and the anvayajñānas. The
expression "group" is to be understood for the ksantis and the
jñānas.
Why is not all abandoning (prahāṇa) considered a perfect
knowledge (parijñā)?The Latent Defilements 865
With regard to abandoning,—the result of the patiences (Path
of Seeing the Truths)-:
68a-c. There is perfect knowledge by reason of the pure
acquisition of disconnection, the partial abandoning of
Bhavagra, and the destruction of two causes.215
The abandoning which includes these three characteristics
receives the name of perfect knowledge.
The abandoning of a Pṛthagjana (ii.40b-c) can include the
abandoning of two causes (“universal” kleśas); but a Pṛthagjana
can never obtain the pure acquisition of disconnection (ii.38b); he
never "mutilates" Bhavagra.
After his entry into the Path of Seeing until the third moment
(duḥkhe'nvayajñānakṣānti, vi.25c), the Āryan's abandonings
include the pure acquisition of disconnection, but not the
"mutilation" of Bhavāgra, nor the destruction of the two universal
causes (sarvatragahetu, ii.54a, v.12) abandoned through the Seeing
of Suffering and the Arising of Suffering. In the fourth moment
(duḥkhe'nvayajñāna), Bhavāgra is "mutilated," and so too in the
fifth (samudaye dharmajñānakṣānti): but the two causes are not
destroyed. But in the other dharmajñānas (moments six, ten, and
fourteen) and in the other anvayajñānas (moments eight, twelve,
and sixteen), the abandoning includes these three characteristics
and receives the name of perfect knowledge.
With respect to the three perfect knowledges which consist of
the abandonings, the results of knowledge (Path of Meditation on
the Truths), they are thus called by reason of these three
characteristics and by reason of a fourth:
68d. By the reason of the fact that one passes over a sphere.
That is, because the ascetic detaches himself from a sphereChapter Five
(Kāmadhātu in the seventh perfect knowledge, etc.) in its totality.
Other masters formulate a fifth cause: 216 the fact of being
disjoined from a twofold bond. It does not suffice to abandon a
kleśa (abandoned through Seeing): one must also abandon the
klesas (abandoned through Seeing or Meditation) which grasp this
first klesa as their object.
But this reason is included in "destruction of two causes" and in
"the passing over a sphere." Thus we do not make it a separate
cause 217
How many perfect knowledges can one possess?
69a-b. One who is to be found in the Path of Seeing of the
Truths is either not endowed with perfect knowledge, or is
endowed with from one to five perfect knowledges.
A Prthagjana has no perfect knowledges.
In the Path of Seeing, the Aryan is not endowed with any
perfect knowledge until samudaye dharmajñānakṣānti (vi.25c and
foll.); he is endowed with one perfect knowledge in samudaye'na-
vayajñāna and samudaye'nvayajñānakṣānti, with two in samu-
daye'nvayajñāna and nirodhe dharmajñānakṣānti; with three in
nirodhe dharmajñāna and nirodhe’nvayajñānakṣānti; with four in
nirodheʼnvayajñāna and mārge dharmajñānakṣānti; with five in
mārge dharmajñāna and mārge'nvayajñānakṣānti.218
69c-d. Abiding in Meditation, with six, with one, or with
two.
As long as one has not obtained detachment from Kämadhātu,The Latent Defilements 867
the Āryan, after mārge’nvayajñāna—or when, having obtained it,
one has fallen away from it-possesses six perfect knowledges in
the Path of Meditation.
When one has obtained this detachment-either before or
after the comprehension of the Truths (abhisamaya=Path of
Seeing, vi.25c)-one is endowed with a single perfect knowledge
of the abandoning of the cankerous influences of Kāmadhātu. 219
The Arhat who obtains the qualtiy of Arhat is endowed with a
single perfect knowledge of the annihilation of all the bonds.
The Arhat who falls away (vi.56a) from the quality of Arhat
through a wrapping (paryavasthāna, v.47) of Rūpadhātu finds
himself again in the condition of an Aryan who is detached from
Kāmadhātu: one is thus endowed with a single perfect knowledge
of the abandoning of the cankerous influences of Kāmadhātu.
Falling away through one defilement of Kāmadhātu, he finds
himself again in the condition of an Aryan not detached from this
sphere: six perfect knowledges. Falling away through one
defilement of Ārūpyadhātu, he finds himself in the condition of an
Aryan who obtains detachemnt from Rūpadhātu: he is endowed
with two perfect knowledges: the perfect knowledge of the
abandoning of the cankerous influences of Kāmadhātu and the
perfect knowledge of the destruction of attachment to Rūpadhā-
tu, 220
Why is there only a single perfect knowledge attributed to the
Anāgāmin and to the Arhat?
70a-b. One reduces the perfect knowledges to a single unit
where there is detachment from one sphere and the
acquisition of a result.868 Chapter Five
"To add up" (samkalana) means to total, to count together as a
unit.
The acquisition of the last two results coincides with the
detachment from a sphere.
How many perfect knowledges can one lose and obtain
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 324b6)?
70c-d. One loses one, two, five, or six perfect knowledges;
in this same way one obtains them, but never five.
The saint who falls away from the quality of Arhat or from the
detachment of Kāmadhātu loses one perfect knowledge.
The Anāgāmin detached from Rūpadhātu who falls away from
the detachment of Kāmadhātu loses two perfect knowledges.
When the saint who has arrived at the sixteenth moment
(mārge'nvayajñāna) is detached from Kāmadhātu before entering
into the path of Seeing, he loses five perfect knowledges, for at this
moment he obtains the perfect knowledge that he has abandoned
the cankerous influences of Kāmadhātu.
When one is not detached from Kāmadhātu before entering
into the path of Seeing, that is, when he is an ānupūrvaka (ii.16d)
he then obtains the sixth perfect knowledge which he will lose,
with the five others, when he acquires detachment from Kāma-
dhātu.
One who, in the two paths, obtains one perfect knowledge not
previously possessed, obtains one perfect knowledge.
One who falls away from a single detachment of Ārūpyadhātu,
obtains two perfect knowledges (the sixth and the seventh).
One who falls away from the result of Anägāmin obtains six
perfect knowledges.221
Om. Homage to the Buddha.
We have said (v.64) how the abandoning (prahāṇa) of the
defilements receives the name of "perfect knowledge" (parijñā). As for
abandoning,
la-b. It has been said that the defilements are abandoned
through Seeing the Truths and through Meditation.²
We have explained in detail that some of the defilements are to be
abandoned through Seeing, and others through Meditation (v.3c-5a,
etc.). Is the path of Seeing and the Path of Meditation pure (anāsrava)
or impure (sāsrava)?
Ic-d. The Path of Meditation is of two types; the Path of Seeing
is pure.³
The Path of Meditation is worldly or impure as well as trans-
worldly or pure.
The Path of Seeing is opposed to the defilements of the Three
Dhātus; it eliminates in one single stroke the nine categories
(strong-strong, etc.) of the defilements to be abandoned through
Seeing: it is thus exclusively transworldly; now such a power does not
belong to a worldly path.896 Chapter Six
We have said (lb), "through Seeing the Truths." What are the
Truths?
2a. The Four Truths have been mentioned.4
Where?
In the First Chapter. By saying "The pure dharmas are the
Truth of the Path ... “ (i.5), we have designated the Truth of the
Path by its name. By saying "Pratisaṁkhyānirodha is disconnec-
tion,” (i.6) we have designated the Truth of Extinction. By saying
"Suffering, origin, world we have designated the Truths of
Suffering and Origin (i.8).
Is that the order of the Truths?
No. Rather:
2b-c. Namely suffering, origin, extinction, and path.
The word "namely" (tathā) indicates that the nature of the
Truths is indeed as has been mentioned in the First Chapter.
2c-d. Their order is that in which they are understood.³
The Truth that is understood first is mentioned first. Other-
wise there would be the occurance of first mentioning the cause
(Origin and Path) and then the result (Suffering and Extinction).
Sometimes dharmas are arranged in the order in which they
arise: this is the case for the applications of mindfulness, the
smrtyupasthānas, and for the Dhyānas.
Sometimes they are arranged in an order favorable for
teaching: this is the case for the right abandonings, the samyak-
prahāṇas,7 --existent dharmas and the black dharmas are easier toThe Path and the Saints
understand than non-arisen dharmas and the white dharmas,--for
it is not a fixed rule that one should make an effort to abandon the
existent dharmas before making an effort for the non-arising of
non-arisen dharmas.
The Truths are mentioned in the order in which they are
comprehended (abhisamaya).
Why are they comprehended in this order?
Because, in the period preparatory to the Path proper, that is,
the period of examination, the ascetic first creates an idea of that
to which he is attached, of that by which he is tormented, of that
from which he seeks to be delivered, namely, suffering. Then he
asks what is its cause, and he creates an idea of its origin. Then he
asks what does extinction consist of, and he creates an idea of
extinction. Then he asks what is the Path to extinction, and he
creates an idea of the path. (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 404bll).
So too, having seen a disease, one searches out its origin, its
disappearance, and its remedy. This illustration of the Truths is
also given in the Sūtra.
In which Sūtra? In the Sūtra which says, "Endowed with the
four qualities, the doctor . . . "9
In the order in which, in the course of the period of examina-
tion, he creates an idea of the Truths, in this same order, having
reached the period of comprehension, he understands the Truths,
because comprehension is projected by the preparatory exercises,
the same way that a horse gallops without obstacle over familiar
terrain.
What is the meaning of the word abhisamaya (comprehen-
sion)? This word signifies abhisambodha, “understanding,
comprehension." The root i signifies "to understand."898 Chapter Six
Why is comprehension only pure? Because it is a knowledge
(aya) turned towards (abhi) Nirvāṇa and the true (sam, samyak).
Samyak means conforming to reality. 10
To the extent that they are a result, the five upādānaskandhas
(i.8a-b) are the Truth of Suffering, that which one should see in
truth as being suffering. To the extent that they are a cause they
are the Truth of Origin or arising, because suffering arises from
them¹¹ (1.8c). Consequently suffering and arising differ in name,
but do not differ in fact, since they are the same upādānaskandhas
considered as result or as cause. But Extinction and the Path differ
in fact as well as in name.
The Sūtra gives the name of aryasatya, truth of the Aryans, to
the Truths. What is the meaning of this expression?
They are truth for the Āryans, truths of the Āryans: this is why
they are called āryasatya.12
Does this mean that they are false for the non-Ãryans? Not
being erroneous (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 397a26), they are true for
everyone. [But the Āryans see them as they are, that is to say,
under sixteen aspects (vii.13): they see suffering, that is, the
upādānaksandhas as suffering, impermanent, etc. Others do not.
Therefore, the Truths are called "truths of the Āryans” and not
truths of others, because the seeing of these latter is incorrect. In
fact, they see what is suffering as being not suffering.] As the
stanza says,
"What the Āryans call happy (i.e., Nirvāṇa) others call painful;
what others call happy, the Āryans call painful."13
According to other masters,14 two are Aryan truths, and two
are truths of both Aryans and others.***
The Path and the Saints 899
Since only a part of sensation (vedanā) is painful by its nature
(duḥkhā vedanā, i.14). how can one say that all impure, conditi-
oned things are suffering?
3. Impure dharmas, whether they are agreeable, disagreea-
ble, or otherwise, are, without exception, suffering, by
reason of the three types of suffering, each according to its
type, 15
There are three types of suffering: suffering which is suffering
in and of itself (duḥkhaduḥkhatā), suffering through the fact of
being conditioned (saṁskāraduḥkhatā), and suffering which is
change or transformation (pariņāmaduḥkhatā).
By reason of these three, all impure conditioned things,
without exception, are suffering: agreeable things are suffering
because they are subject to transformation; disagreeable things are
suffering in and of themselves; and neither-disagreeable-nor-a-
greeable things are suffering because they are conditioned. What
are the agreeable, disagreeable, and neither-disagreeable-nor-a-
greeable dharmas?
The three sensations, in this order; and, by reason of the three
sensations, all the saṁskāras which result in agreeable sensation,
etc., receive the name of agreeable, etc.
Agreeable sensation is suffering through transformation, as
the Sūtra says, "Agreeable sensation is agreeable when it arises,
agreeable while it lasts, but suffering in its change."
Disagreeable sensation is suffering by nature, as the Sūtra says,
"Suffering sensation is suffering when it arises, and suffering
while it lasts."
Neither-disagreeable-nor-agreeable sensation is suffering900 Chapter Six
because it is so decreed by its causes, as the Sūtra says, "That which
is impermanent is suffering."
The same holds true for the saṁskāras which result in these
sensations as for these sensations themselves.16
According to other masters, the expressions duḥkhaduḥkhatā,
etc., should be analysed: duḥkham eva duḥkhatā (“suffering is itself
suffering"), vipariņāma eva duḥkhatā (“transformation is itself
suffering”), and saṁskāra eva duḥkhatā (“conditioned things are
themselves suffering"). The meaning is the same.
Agreeable dharmas do not participate in suffering which is
suffering in and of itself, nor do the disagreeable dharmas
participate in suffering which is transformation: the second state
of suffering belongs to the first ones, and the first to the second
ones. But all conditioned things are suffering from the fact of
suffering through the fact of being conditioned, and they are seen
under this aspect only by the Aryans. Therefore it is said, "One
does not feel a hair placed on the palm of the hand; but the same
hair, in the eye, causes suffering and injury. So too the ignorant,
resembling the hand, do not feel the hair which is suffering
through the fact of being conditioned: but the Āryans, resembling
the eye, are tortured by it."17
The Āryans make of existence in the most sublime heaven
(Bhavägra) an idea more painful than do fools make of existence in
the most dreadful hell (Avici).
***But, one would say, the Path is conditioned; it should thus be
suffering from the fact of suffering through the fact of being
conditioned. 18
The Path and the Saints 901
The Path is not suffering, because the definition of suffering is
to be hateful. Now the Path is not hateful to the Aryans because it
produces the extinction of all of the sufferings of arising; when
they consider Nirvāṇa as peaceful, what they consider as peaceful
is the extinction of what they consider as suffering [namely impure
conditioned things, and not the extinction of the Path].
But, since the agreeable or happiness does exist, why is only
suffering, and not the agreeable, a truth of the Aryans?
1. According to one explanation,¹9 it is because of the slightness
of happiness. In the same way that one calls a pile in which some
peas are to be found “a pile of beans,” so too no one with any
intelligence would consider a wound as agreeable because one
experiences a very small agreeable sensation when one washes this
wound.
2. And further, "Because it is a cause of suffering, because it is
produced by many sufferings, because one desires it when one
suffers (see p. 903), the agreeable, they conclude, is suffering.”
3. But, even if accompanied by happiness,2¹ existence in its
totality has the same flavor of suffering through the fact of being
conditioned: Āryans thus consider it as suffering. This is why
suffering and not happiness is an Āryan Truth.
i. But how can Āryans regard sensations which are agreeable by
nature as suffering?902 Chapter Six
They are hateful by reason of their impermanence in the same
way that they consider the rūpas, saṁjñās, etc., as suffering, even
though the rūpas, saṁjñās, etc., are not suffering in the same way
as is disagreeable sensation.
ii. With regard to the proposed argument "The agreeable is
suffering because it is a cause of suffering": (1) to be a cause of
suffering is its aspect (ākāra) or origin (vii.13a); to see things as a
cause of suffering is not to see them as suffering; (2) how could the
Āryans born in Rūpadhātu and in Ārūpyadhātu have an idea of
suffering? For the skandhas of these spheres are not a cause of
suffering; (3) why would the Sūtra mention suffering through the
fact of being conditioned? If Aryans see the agreeable as suffering
because it is a cause of suffering, then suffering through the fact of
being conditioned [that is, "What is impermanent is suffering"]
would be useless.
iii. But if Āryans see the agreeable as suffering because it is
impermanent, then what is the difference between the aspects of
suffering and of impermanence? There would be confusion
between "seeing things as suffering" and "seeing things as
impermanent.”
One sees things as impermanent because their nature is to arise
and perish; one sees them as suffering because they are hateful.
When one has seen them as impermanent, they become hateful.
The characteristic of impermanence implies the characteristic of
suffering, but it is not subsumed in this characteristic.
iv. Certain masters 22 deny any agreeable sensation, affirming
that all is suffering. They prove this thesis by Scripture and by
reasoning.
Scripture: The Blessed One said, "Suffering is to be found in
any and all sensation"; "Agreeable sensation should be regarded as
suffering"; and "It is an error to regard what is suffering as
agreeable."23
Reasoning: 1. Because the causes of pleasure are not always the
causes of pleasure. The things that one pretends to be causes ofThe Path and the Saints 903
pleasure,--food, drink, cold, warmth, etc.,--when they are grasped
or experienced to excess or out of season become causes of
suffering. Now it is inadmissible that a cause of pleasure, because it
has increased, or presents itself at a different moment,--even if it
remains completely the same,--would produce suffering. Conse-
quently these pretended causes of pleasure are, from their origins,
the causes of suffering and not the causes of pleasure: for later
suffering will grow and become felt. The same holds for the four
positions (īryāpatha), the position of lying down, sitting down, etc.
(p. 907).
2. Because the idea of pleasure has for its object, not a real
pleasure, but sometime a remedy for suffering or a modification of
suffering. (a) As long as a person is not tormented by sufferings
which are caused by hunger, thirst, cold, heat, fatigue, or desire, he
will not have any sensation which he will feel to be agreeable.
Consequently the ignorant have the idea of pleasure, not with
regard to true pleasure, but with regard to the relief of suffering.
(b) Fools also have the idea of pleasure with regard to the
modification of suffering: for example to pass a burden from one
shoulder to another.24
Consequently agreeable things do not exist.
v. They exist, say the Ābhidhārmikas; and we would say, this is
well proved.
1. We would ask him who denies the existence of pleasure,
What is suffering? If he answers, "That which is painful,"25 we
would then ask, "How is it painful?" If he answers, "Because it
does evil," we would say that "that which does good" is agreeable.
If he answers, "Because it is not desired," we would say that "that
which is desired" is agreeable.26
2. But, one would say, this same "desire" is no longer cherished
by the Āryans when they obtain detachment. Thus the quality of
"desirable" is not proved.
This objection is useless, for if Āryans, once they become904 Chapter Six
detached, no longer cherish it, it is then from another point of
view that it is undesirable to them.
The sensation which, in itself, is desirable, will never become,
in itself, undesirable. Consequently, it is not from the point of view
of its intrinsic nature, but from another point of view that Āryans
do not cherish agreeable sensation. Rather, they hate it for its
defects: it is the occasion for the loss of good dharmas, it is
acquired only at great effort, it is directed toward suffering, and it
is impermanent. If this sensation were undesirable in and of itself,
who would ever be able to become attached to it? From the fact
that, with a view to detaching themselves from it, Aryans consider
it in its defects by placing themselves in a point of view distinct
from that of its intrinsic nature, it then follows that agreeable
sensation does exist in and of itself.
3. The meaning of the declaration of the Blessed One,
"Suffering is to be found in any and all sensation" has been fixed by
the Blessed One himself: "Oh Ananda, it is with regard to
impermanence, it is with regard to the transformation of the
saṁskāras that I said that 'Suffering is to be found in any and all
sensation.""27 Consequently it is proved that this declaration was
not made with regard to the suffering which is suffering in and of
itself.
If all sensation were, by its nature, suffering, then the Ārya
Ananda would not have asked, “The Blessed One taught that there
are three types of sensation, agreeable, suffering, and neither-suf-
fering-nor-agreeable. The Blessed One taught that any and all
sensation is suffering. With what intention, from what point of
view did the Blessed One teach that any and all sensation is
suffering?" Ananda would have asked, "From what point of view
did the Blessed One teach that there are three types of sensation?"
And the Blessed One would have responded, "It was intentional,
with a definite motive, that I taught that there are three types of
sensation."
Therefore if the Blessed One said, "I have declared, with a
definite motive, that any and all sensation is suffering," this is
because, by its nature, sensation is of three types.The Path and the Saints 905
4. As for the declaration "Agreeable sensation should be
regarded as suffering," agreeable sensation is, on the one hand,
agreeable in and of itself, being pleasant; but on the other hand, it
is in a certain sense suffering, since it changes and as such is
impermanent. Persons not free from desire are bound to regard it
as agreeable, because they savor its taste; Aryans are free from
regarding it as agreeable, because they are free from desire with
regard to it. This is why the Buddha enjoined one to regard
agreeable sensation in a manner which would lead one to obtain
deliverance.
How do we know that agreeable sensation is agreeable in and
of itself? It is said, “The perfect, omniscient Buddha, knowing the
impermanence and the transformation of the samskaras, declares
that sensation is suffering." (Samyukta, TD 2, p. 121a8).
5. The declaration "It is an error to regard what is suffering as
agreeable" (v.9a) is also made with a certain intention. The world
attaches the idea of agreeable to agreeable sensation, to delectable
objects, to existence. Now agreeable sensation is in a certain sense
suffering: to consider it as absolutely agreeable is an error.
Delectable objects contain much suffering, but little pleasure; to
consider them as absolutely agreeable is an error. The same with
regard to existence.
Consequently this text does not demonstrate the non-existence
of agreeable sensation.
6. If all sensation is suffering in and of itself, how does one
explain that the Buddha taught the existence of three types of
sensation?
Perhaps the Buddha, in this teaching, is conforming to the
views of the world.
This hypothesis is inadmissible: a. The Buddha said, “If I said
that all sensation is suffering, then this is with a certain intention"
(see above, p. 904).
b. The Buddha, on the subject of the three types of sensation
(ii.7 and foll.), uses the expression, "conforming to reality." In fact,906 Chapter Six
after having said, “The organ of pleasure and the organ of
satisfaction are agreeable sensation," he then said "He who,
conforming to reality and through correct discernment sees the
five organs [or sensations], abandons the three bonds... "28
c. Furthermore, how would the world arrive at the conclusion
that sensation is of three types if it were exclusively suffering?
Would you say that one has the idea or impression of agreeable
sensation with regard to a weak sensation of suffering, the idea of
neutral sensation with regard to a medium sensation of suffering,
and the idea of a suffering sensation with regard to a strong
sensation of suffering? But pleasure also presents three degrees,
and it then follows that one would have the idea of great pleasure
with regard to a weak sensation of suffering, the idea of medium
pleasure with regard to a medium sensation of suffering, and the
idea of little pleasure with regard to strong sensation of suffe-
ring.29
Furthermore, when one experiences pleasure arisen from some
excellent smell, taste or tangible thing, what is then the weak
suffering through a relationship to which the idea of pleasure is
produced? 30
[And if you maintain that the idea of pleasure is produced
through a relationship with a weak sensation of suffering,] then
this weak sensation of suffering has not arisen or when it has
disappeared, one will all the more have the idea of pleasure,
suffering having completely disappeared.
The same for smells, etc., and the same for the pleasure of
desire.
Furthermore, in your system, a weak sensation of suffering is
transmitted by a clear and strong sensation [of pleasure]; a
sensation of medium force is transmitted by an indistinct sensation
[a sensation neither-disagreeable-nor-agreeable]: and this would
appear to be inconsistent. So too the Sūtra teaches that the first
three Dhyānas are accompanied by pleasure: there one will find,
according to you, some weak suffering. The Sütra teaches that, inThe Path and the Saints
the Fourth Dhyana and above, sensation is neither-disagreeable-
nor-agreeable: there one will find, according to you, medium
suffering. Consequently your theory that agreeable sensation, etc.,
correspond to weak suffering, etc., is not admissible.
Finally, the Blessed One said, "Oh Mahānāman, if physical
matter were exclusively suffering, not agreeable nor accompanied
by pleasure, . . . there would be no reason why one would become
attached to physical matter ... "3¹ We are thus assured that
agreeable sensation exists at least a little.
Consequently the alleged scriptural arguments do not hold.
7. The first logical reason presented by our adversary, "because
the causes of pleasure are not always the causes of pleasure" is
worthless. Our adversary does not take into account what is the
cause of pleasure.
A given object is the cause of pleasure or suffering through the
function of the state of the person who experiences it; it is not a
cause of pleasure or suffering in an absolute manner. If a given
object is a cause of pleasure when it is in a relationship with a body
found in a certain state, then it will always be a cause of pleasure
when it is again in a relationship with this body in the same state.
A cause of pleasure is thus always a cause of pleasure.
A comparison: The same fire will give forth different results of
cooking according to the state of the rice which one is cooking: the
food will be edible or not. But when the rice is in a certain state, the
fire will always produce the same result.
Furthermore, how can one dispute that, in the Dhyānas, the
causes of pleasure are always causes of pleasure?
8. As for the argument that “the idea of pleasure has for its
object, not a real pleasure, but a remedy of suffering or a
modification of suffering," we would say:
i.a. When one experiences the pleasure of a smell, a taste, etc.,
what is the suffering whose remedy is the object of the idea of
pleasure? b. Before this suffering has arisen or when it is908 Chapter Six
destroyed, in the absence of any remedy, one will all the more
experience pleasure. c. The pleasure of the Dhyānas certainly
cannot consist of a remedy of suffering, since suffering does not
exist in the Dhyānas.
ii. When one moves a burden to another shoulder, this is truly a
pleasure that arises from a new bodily state and which continues to
arise as long as this bodily state does not disappear. If it were
otherwise, then the idea or impression of pleasure would become
stronger. 32 The same explanation holds for the impression of
pleasure brought about by the changing of bodily position which
has caused fatigue.
9. You ask, "If suffering does not begin from its beginning,
how could there be, at its end, an impression of suffering?"
We would answer: By reason of a certain transformation of the
body [consecutive to the absorption of food, etc.: suffering will not
appear while the state favorable to pleasure lasts]; so too, in the
case of alcohol, etc., sweetness and tartness succeed one another.
It is thus proved that there is agreeable sensation, and that all
impure conditioned things are suffering from the fact of the three
types of suffering.
This thesis of the Abhidharma that the Truth of Suffering is
the Truth of Origin, that is, that the upādānaskandhas, which are
suffering, are at the same time the origin of suffering (see above p.
898), comes from the teaching of the Sūtra.³3 For, according to the
Sūtra, it is only thirst or desire (tṛṣṇa) which is the origin of
suffering. 34
The Sūtra says that desire is the origin by reason of the capital
importance of desire. But all the other impure dharmas are also a
cause or origin of suffering.
In fact, some other dharmas are named in other Sutras.KA
The Path and the Saints 909
The Blessed One said, "Action, desire and ignorance are the cause
of future saṁskāras";35 he also said, "Five types of seeds, that is,
the vijñāna associated with upādāna; the earth element, that is, the
four vijñānasthitis."36
Thus the definition of the Sūtra, "Desire is the origin of
suffering", is conceived from a particular point of view (ābhiprāyi-
ka),37 whereas the definition given in the Abhidharma is in strict
conformity to the characteristics of the thing defined.
Furthermore, when the Buddha said, "It is desire which is the
origin," he intended to define the cause of re-existence (abhi-
nirvṛtti). When, in the stanza, he enumerates action, desire, and
ignorance, he defined the cause of different births (upapatti) which
is action; the cause of re-existence, namely desire; and the cause of
births and of re-existence, namely ignorance. We shall continue
the explanation of the meaning of these terms. In fact, the Sūtra
says, "Action is the cause of births, and desire is the cause of
re-existence"; and it teaches the successive order of causation:
"The eye has action for its object; action has desire for its cause;
desire has ignorance for its cause; and ignorance has incorrect
judgment for its cause."38
That consciousness and the other skandhas are the origin of
suffering results again from the fact that the Sūtra declares that
they are respectively seed and field.
What is birth (upapatti)? What is re-existence (abhinirvṛtti)?
(iii.40, vi.39c).
Upapatti signifies a birth or an existence characterized by a
certain sphere (Kāmadhātu, etc.), a certain realm of rebirth (god,
human, etc.), a certain mode of birth (birth from a womb, from an
egg, etc.), a certain gender, etc. Abhinirvṛtti signifies re-existence
without qualification.
The cause of birth is action, and the cause of re-existence is
desire: so too a seed is the cause of a shoot characterized as a
rice-shoot, a wheat-shoot, etc.; whereas water is the cause of the
simple germination of all the different species of shoots. How does910 Chapter Six
one prove that desire is the cause of re-existence?
From the fact that a person free from desire is not reborn.
When a person endowed with desire and a person free from desire
die, we know that the first is reborn and that the second is not
reborn. Therefore since there is no rebirth where there is no
desire, we know that desire is the cause of re-existence.
Again from the fact that the series is bent by desire.³9 We state
that the series of thoughts is unceasingly bent towards the object to
which one has a desire. And the same holds for re-existence.
There is no defilement which adheres to the person (atmab-
hāva, to existence) as much as desire, the same way that lentil
paste, once it is dried, adheres to a limb.40 There is no cause which
binds one to rebirth as much as the attachment to a self does. This
reasoning proves that desire is the cause of re-existence.
The Blessed One proclaimed the Four Noble Truths, but he
also declared 41 Two Truths, relative truth (samvṛtisatya) and
absolute truth (paramarthasatya).42 What are these Two Truths?
4. The idea of a jug ends when the jug is broken; the idea of
water ends when, in the mind, one analyzes the water. The
jug and the water, and all that resembles them, exist
relatively. The rest exist absolutely.43
If the idea of a thing disappears when this thing is broken into
pieces, then this thing has relative existence (saṁvṛtisat); for
example, a jug: the idea of a jug disappears when it is reduced to
pieces. If the idea of a thing disappears when this thing is
dissipated, or broken to pieces, by the mind, then this thing should
be regarded as having relative existence; for example, water. If we
grasp and remember the dharmas, such as color, etc., in the water,The Path and the Saints 911
then the idea of water will disappear.
These things,--jug, clothes, etc., water, fire, etc.,--are given
their different names from the relative point of view or conform-
ing to conventional usage. Thus if one says, from the relative point
of view, "There is a jug, there is water," one is speaking truly, and
one is not speaking falsely. Consequently this is relatively true.
That which differs is absolute truth. If, when a thing is broken
to pieces or dissipated by the mind, the idea of this thing continues,
then this thing has absolute existence (paramarthasat); for
example, physical matter: one can reduce physical matter into
atoms, one can remember smell and other dharmas in the mind,
but the idea of the unique nature of physical matter persists. The
same holds for sensations, etc. And as this absolutely exists, it is
absolutely true.
The ancient masters44 say: Things are absolutely true in the
manner in which they are perceived, either by transworldly
knowledge or by the worldly knowledge acquired after trans-
worldly knowledge.45 They are relatively true in the manner in
which they are perceived by any other defiled or non-defiled
worldly knowledge.
The Truths have been mentioned.46 We must now explain how
they are seen. Consequently, beginning from the beginning, we
would say:47
5a-b. Firm in his cultivation, endowed with teaching and
reflection, he will be capable of giving himself up to
meditation.48
Whoever desires to see the Truths should first of all keep the
Precepts. Then he reads 49 the teaching upon which his Seeing of912 Chapter Six
the Truths depends,50 or he hears their meaning. Having heard, he
correctly reflects. Having reflected, he gives himself up to the
cultivation of meditation. With the wisdom (prajñā, ii.24, i.2a)
arisen from the teaching (śrutamayi) for its support, there arises
the wisdom arisen from reflection (cintāmayī); with this for its
support, there arises the wisdom arisen from meditation (bhāvanā-
mayi).
What are the characteristics of these three wisdoms?
5c-d. The wisdoms arisen from the teaching, etc., have
respectively for their sphere name, name and the thing, and
the thing.51
According to the Vaibhāṣikas, 52 wisdom arisen from the
teaching has name for its object; wisdom arisen from reflection has
the name and the thing for its object: in fact, sometimes it grasps
the thing by means of the name, and sometimes it grasps the name
by means of the thing.53 Wisdom arisen from meditation has the
thing for its object; it goes to the things as an abstraction made
from its name. One can compare this to three persons who are
crossing a river: one who does not know how to swim does not
abandon even for one moment his swimming apparatus; one who
knows how to swim a little sometimes holds on to it and
sometimes lets go of it; and one who knows how to swim crosses
the river without any support whatsoever (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
420a28, p. 217c6).
But, we would say,54 in this interpretation, wisdom arisen from
reflection plays no role: in fact, when it has name for its object, it is
wisdom arisen from the teaching, and when it has a thing for its
object, it is the wisdom arisen from meditation. Thus the wisdom
arisen from reflection does not exist. Rather, one should explain:The Path and the Saints 913
the wisdom arisen from the teaching is a certitude which arises
from a means of correct knowledge (pramāṇa) termed "the word
of a qualified person" (āptavacana); the wisdom arisen from
reflection is a certitude born of rational examination; and the
wisdom arisen from meditation is a certitude arisen from
absorption. In this way the specific characteristics of the three
wisdoms are proved in an irreprochable manner.³5
[In the expressions frutamayi prajñā, etc., the suffix -maya,
according to Pāṇini v.4.21 (tatprakṛtavacane mayat) indicates
cause: śrutamayī prajñā is prajñā which has fruta, that is, the word
of a qualified person (aptavacana) for its cause (hetu). Or rather,
according to Pāṇini iv.3.134 (tasya vikāraḥ), the suffix -maya
forms a word which indicates "transformation of ….. “: thus
śrutamayî prajñā is a transformation of the fruta. But this
"transformation" should be understood metaphorically: this is how
a transformation would be spoken of; other characteristics are
considered, in fact, in taking this into consideration.] As one says,
"The vital breaths are created by food, cows are created from
grass" (annamayāḥprāṇāḥ, tṛṇamayāvaḥ).56
How does one who thus applies himself to meditation succeed
in it?57
6a. These are produced within one who is endowed with the
two separations.58
When the ascetic is withdrawn with regard to his body and his
mind by separating himself from promiscuity and bad thoughts, he
succeeds.
For whom are these two separations easy?
For a contented person of few dsesires. 5⁹
6a-b. Not for one discontented and with many desires.914 Chapter Six
What should one understand by discontent and many
6c-d. Discontent is desire for more than one now possesses;
many desires is desire with regard to that which one does
not possess.
The Ābhidhārmikas60 say: To desire more of the fine things,
clothes, etc., which one possess is discontent. To desire what one
does not possess is many desires.
desires?
But is not the desire to have more also produced with respect to
what one does not possess? What then is the difference between
the two?
Discontent is the dissatisfaction6¹ that one experiences from
the goods that one possesses, of poor or of small quantity. Many
desires is the desire for goods, of excellent or in great quantity, that
one does not possess.
7a. Their opposites are their oppositions.
The opposites of discontent and of many desires, namely
contentment and few desires, are opposed to discontent and to
many desires.
7b. They are of the three spheres or pure.
They belong to the Three Dhātus; they are also
discontent and many desires only belong to Kāmadhātu. What is
the nature of content and few desires?
pure. But
7c. Non-desire.62
They have for their nature [the root of good], non-desire.(s
The Path and the Saints 915
7c. The lineages of the Āryans.63
Understand: "are non-desire." The four lineages of the Aryans,
the aryavamsas, are so called because the Aryans arise from them.
They are also non-desire in their nature.
7c-d. Among them, three are contentment.
The first three--to be content with clothing, to be content with
food, to be content with bed and with seat--are contentment by
nature.
The fourth aryavamsa is to take delight in Extinction and in
the Path.64 It is not contentment. How is it non-desire? Because it
turns its back on attachment to pleasure and attachment to
existence (v.2).
What did the Blessed One teach by the four āryavaṁsas?
8a-b. By three is taught the regimen; by the last, activity.
The Blessed One, the Master of the Law (dharmasvāmi),
established a certain regimen and a certain activity for his disciples
who, having renounced their old regimen and their old activities,65
are engaged in searching out deliverance.66 He established the
regimen in the first three äryavamsas;67 and he established activity
in the fourth: "If, with this regimen, you do these actions, before
long you will obtain deliverance."
Why did the Blessed One establish such a regimen and such an
activity?
8b. In order to create an obstacle to the arising of desire.916 Chapter Six
The Sūtra68 establishes that the arising of desire is fourfold:
"Oh monks, desire, arising, arises by reason of clothing, by reason
of food, by reason of the bed and the seat; lasting, it lasts by reason
being attached, it is attached . . . Oh monks, desire, arising,
arises by reason of such existence or non-existence... "69 It is in
order to create an obstacle to it that the four āryavamsas are
taught.
9c-d. In order to momentarily or definitively arrest the
desire of the object of the idea of self and of things
pertaining to self.
This is another way of saying the same thing. The object of the
idea of self is clothing. The object of the idea of self (ahaṁkāra-
vastu) is the ātmabhāva, the sensorial and mental complex. Desire
(iccha) is thirst (tṛṣṇā).
The first three āryavaṁsas destroy for a time the desire for the
things that one regards as pertaining to self. The fourth äryavamsa
definitively arrests the twofold desire.
We have explained the requisite qualities through which
meditation can succeed.7⁰ Being in this way a suitable receptacle,
how would the ascetic enter into meditation?
9a-b. He enters therein, through visualization on the
loathsome and through mindfulness of breathing (ānāpā-
nasmṛta).
Smrta is smrti (mindfulness). Who enters through visualiza-
tion on the loathsome? Who enters through mindfulness ofbreathing? Respectfively,
9c. Those in whom desire and imagination are predominant
(adhiragavitarkāṇām).7¹
The Path and the Saints 917
An adhiraga and an adhivitarka are those in whom rāga
(desire) and vitarka (imagining) are adhika (predominant). Those
in whom desire appears lively and appears on many occasions,
enter through the loathsome. Those who are imaginative enter
through mindfulness of breathing.
Certain masters say: Mindfulness of breathing, having an
unvaried object,--it bears on wind in which there are no difference
of color or shape,--has for its result the cutting off of the
imaginative process; whereas the loathsome, having a variety of
colors and shapes for its object, provokes imagination.
Some other masters say: Mindfulness of breathing cuts off
imagination because it is not turned towards externals, for it bears
on breathing. The loathsome is turned outwards, like visual
consciousenss; it is not visual consciousness, but it is a contempla-
tion (upanidhyāna, viii.1 = nirūpaṇa) of an object of the visual
consciousness.
Craving (rāga) is fourfold: (1) craving for colors, (2) craving
for shapes, (3) craving for contact or for tangibles, and (4) craving
for honors.
The visualization of the loathsome that has a cadaver turning
blue, rotting, etc. for its object is opposed to the first craving.72
The loathsome visualization that has a cadaver wasted and torn to
pieces for its object is opposed to the second craving. The
loathsome visualization that has a cadaver eaten by worms and a
skeleton held together by its tendons for its object is opposed to918 Chapter Six
the third craving.73 And the loathsome visualization that has an
immobile cadaver for its object is opposed to the fourth craving.
In a general way,
9d. The skeleton for all the categories of craving.
The fourfold object of craving,--color, shape, contact, and
honors, --is lacking in the chain of bones. Thus the loathsome
visualization which has bones for its object is opposed to all of the
cravings.
The loathsome visualization does not have the abandoning of
the defilements for its result, but only an arresting of the
defilements, for it is an act of attention bearing not on reality but
on a voluntary representation; and bearing not on the totality of
things, but only on one part of the visible of Kāmadhātu.74
The ascetic (yogācāra) who cultivates the loathsome visualiza-
tion is either "a beginner" or "a master" or "an absolute master of
the act of attention."75
10a-b. The beginner, by enlarging the visualization of the
bones up to the sea, and by reducing it.
The ascetic who desires to cultivate a visualization of the
loathsome, first of all fixes his mind on a part of his body,76 either
the toe, or the forehead, or on any other part of his choosing; then
he "purifies" the bone, that is, he removes the flesh from it by
supposing that the flesh rots and falls off; he then progressively
enlarges his visualization and finally sees his entire body reduced
to a skeleton. In this same way, in order to increase his power of
visualization (adhimukti), he creates the same idea of a second
individual, of the individuals of the Vihāra, of the Ārāma, of the
village, of the country, up to the earth surrounded by the ocean, as
full of skeletons. Then he reduces his visualization, in order toThe Path and the Saints 919
strengthen his power of visualization," to the point where he only
sees his own body as a skeleton. Then the visualization of the
loathsome is complete; and from this time onward the ascetic is a
beginner.
10c-d. The “master” by removing the toe, etc., until half of
the skull.
In order to strengthen this power of reduced visualization,78
the ascetic makes an abstraction of the bones of the foot, and
considers the others; and so on, always reducing, to the point
when, removing one half of the skull, he visualizes nothing more
than its other half: the ascetic is then a master; he possesses
mastery in the act of attention which constitutes visualization.
lla-b. Holding his thought between his two eyebrows, he is
"an absolute master in the act of attention."
He again makes an abstraction of the half of the skull and holds
his thought between its two eyebrows. He is then an ascetic "in
whom the act of the visualization of the loathsome has been
achieved."
The loathsome can be small through the smallness of its object,
without being small through the mastery of the ascetic. Therefore
there are four alternatives: (1) The ascetic is a master of the act of
attention which constitutes visualization and considers only his
own body; (2) the ascetic is not a master of the act of attention, but
considers the earth as filled with skeletons; (3) the ascetic is not a
master of the act of attention and considers his own body; (4) the
ascetic is a master of the act of attention and considers the earth as
filled with skeletons.
***920 Chapter Six
What is the nature of the loathsome? To how many spheres
does it belong? What is its object? By whom is it produced?
llc-d. The loathsome is non-desire; it is in ten spheres; it
has the visible of Kāmadhātu for its object; it is generated
by humans.79
Its nature is non-desire.80
The ten spheres in which the ascetic can be found in order to
produce them are the Four Dhyānas, the four sāmantakas
(preparatory stages or thresholds of the Four Dhyānas, viii.22),
dhyānāntara and Kāmadhātu.
Its object is the visibles of the sphere of Kāmadhātu. "Visible"
signifies color and shape. This means that it has a "thing" and not
a "name" for its object.
Only humans generate it;81 not beings of the other realms of
rebirth, nor much less beings of the higher spheres. Also, among
humans, the inhabitants of Uttarakuru do not produce it.
As its name, "the loathsome” (aśubhā), indicates, it is a
visualization of a repulsive or unclean thing: thus it has the
repulsive for its "aspect". [It does not have the aspect of
impermanence, etc.: it contemplates a visible thing as horrible and
not as impermanent, etc.]
In the past, it had a past object; in the present, it has a present
object; and in the future, it will have a future object: in other
words, its object is contemporaneous to it. When it is not destined
to arise, its object is tritemporal.
Since it is an act of attention on an imaginary object, it is
impure.82
Accordingly as it has been, or not, cultivated in a previous
existence, it is obtained through detachment or through cultivation
(vii.41d, 44b).The Path and the Saints 921
Such are the characteristics of the loathsome.
12a-c. Mindfulness of breathing (ānāpānasmṛti) is prajñā,
belonging to the five spheres, having wind for its object,
and it is cultivated by beings in Kāmadhātu.83
Ana is in-breathing, the entry of wind; apāna is out-breathing,
the leaving of the wind. The mindfulness (smrti) that bears on
both of these is ānāpānasmṛti.84
[Mindfulness of breathing is by nature prajñā, a knowledge
bearing on in-breathing and out-breathing.] This prajñā is called
mindfulness, smṛti, the same as the applications of mindfulness
(smṛtyupasthānas), because this knowledge of in-breathing and
out-breathing, ānāpānaprajñā, is provoked by the force of
mindfulness.85
It can be cultivated in five spheres, namely the first three
sāmantakas, dhyānāntara, and Kāmadhātu, because it is associated
with indifference (see viii.7, 23, etc.).86 In fact, says the School,
agreeable and painful sensations [in Kāmadhātu] are favorable to
imagining: thus mindfulness of breathing, which is the opposite of
imagining, cannot be associated with happiness or with suffering.
On the other hand, the two agreeable sensations [of the Dhyānas]
form an obstacle to the application of the mind to any object, and
mindfulness of breathing can only be realized by this application.
But according to the masters who believe that the fundamental
Dhyānas include the sensation of indifference (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
134bll), mindfulness of breathing can exist in eight spheres, by
adding the first three Dhyānas: higher spheres are no longer
spheres in which one breathes (see viii.7).
The object of the mindfulness of breathing is wind.
Its support is Kāmadhātu, that is, it is cultivated by humans922 Chapter Six
and by the gods of Kāmadhātu, because imagination abounds there.
It is obtained either by detachment or by cultivation. It is attention
bearing on a real thing (tattvamanasikāra).87 It belongs only to the
Buddhists.
12c. Not to outsiders.
In fact, on the one hand, the teaching of mindfulness of
breathing is absent among them;88 and on the other hand, they are
incapable of discovering the subtle dharmas by themselves.
12d. It has six aspects, counting, etc.
It is perfect when it is endowed with six operations: counting,
following, fixing, observing, modifying, and purifying.89
i. Counting. One fixes the mind on in-breathing and out-brea-
thing, without effort or contention; one lets the body and mind be
as they are; ⁹⁰ and one counts from one to ten only in the mind. One
does not count to less than ten, nor to more than ten, for fear of
contention and of mental distraction (vii.11).
There are three faults to avoid: a. to omit counting, by taking
two for one; b. counting too high, by taking one for two; c.
counting in a confused manner, by taking in-breathing for
out-breathing, and vice versa. The counting that avoids these faults
is correct. If, in the course of this cultivation the mind becomes
distracted, then one should count anew from the beginning until
absorption (samādhi) is attained.
ii. Following. Without contention, follow the progress of the
air which enters and leaves until it goes into two senses: does the
air breathed in occupy all of the body or does it go into only one
part of the body? The ascetic follows the air breathed in into the
throat, the heart, the navel, the kidneys, the thigh, and so on to the
two feet; the ascetic follows the air breathed out to a distance of aThe Path and the Saints 923
hand and a cubit.
According to other masters,9¹ he follows the air breathed out to
the "circle of air” (vāyumaṇḍala)⁹2 which holds up the universe
and to the Vairambha Winds.⁹3
This opinion is not admissible, for mindfulness of breathing is
an attention to things as they really are (tattvamanasikāra).
iii. Fixing.94 Fix the attention on the tip of the nose, or between
the eyebrows, or in another area all the way down to the toes; fix
the mind; see the breath held in the body like the thread of a pearl
necklace;⁹ state that it is cold or hot, unfavorable or favorable
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 135a15).
iv. Observing. Observe that "These breaths are not only air, but
the four primary elements, and again physical matter derived from
these four; and the mind with its mental dharmas rests on them":
in this way the ascetic discovers the five skandhas through analysis.
v. Modifying. The ascetic modifies the mind that had the air as
its object and now directs his mind to better and better dharmas
[for example, to the smṛtyupasthānas, vi.14, and the usmagatas,
vi.17, etc.] up to and including the transworldly dharmas (vi.19b).
vi. Purifying. The ascetic enters the Path of Seeing (vi.26) and
the Path of Meditation.
According to some other masters (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 135a27),
modification is progressive elevation from the foundations of
mindfulness (the smṛtyupasthānas) up to Vajropamasamadhi
(vi.44c). Purifying is the Knowledge of Extinction (kṣayajñāna),
the Knowledge of Non-Arising (anutpādajñāna) and the Right
Views of the Arhat (aśaikṣī samyagdṛṣṭi, vi.50c).
There is a summarizing stanza: "One teaches that the
mindfulness of breathing has six aspects: counting, following,
fixing, observing, modifying, and purifying."
13a. In-breathing and out-breathing are like the body.⁹6924 Chapter Six
The two breaths, being part of the body, belong to the same
sphere as does the body.
In-breathing and out-breathing do not exist among beings in
Ārūpyadhātu, among embryonic beings, among non-conscious
(acitta) beings, and among beings who have entered into the
Fourth Dhyāna: their existence therefore presupposes a body [and
bodies do not exist in Arūpyadhātu], a certain body [a body has
cavities, which embryonic beings do not have], a mind [which is
absent among non-conscious beings], and a certain type of mind
[which is absent in the Fourth Dhyāna]. When the body has
cavities in it, and when the mind belongs to a sphere in which
there is breathing, then there is in-breathing and out-breathing
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 132bl).
There is in-breathing at birth and at the moment when one
leaves the Fourth Dhyana. There is out-breathing at death and at
the moment when one enters the Fourth Dhyāna.
13b. It belongs to living beings.
It belongs to living beings, and not to non-living beings (i.10b).
13b. It is not taken up.
It does not form part of any sense organ (i.34c-d).
13c. It is an outflowing.⁹7
It diminishes when the body increases; cut off, it recovers:
therefore it is not an increase (aupacayikī, i.37), and it does not
arise from retribution. In fact, the physical matter arisen from
retribution does not recover after having been cut off (i. English
translation note 156).13c-d. It is not observed by an inferior mind.⁹8
The Path and the Saints 925
In-breathing and out-breathing is observed by a mind of its
own sphere or by a mind in a higher sphere; but not by an
airyāpathika mind, nor by a nairmāṇika mind of a lower sphere.
We have spoken of the two teachings, the visualization of
loathsome things, and mindfulness of breathing. Having attained
absorption (samādhi) by these two portals, now, with a view to
realizing insight (vipaśyanā),
How is this?
14a-b. Having realized stilling, he will cultivate the
foundations of mindfulness (smṛtyupasthānas).⁹⁹
14c-d. By considering the twofold characteristics of the
body, sensation, the mind, and the dharmas.
By considering the unique characteristics (svalakṣaṇa) and the
general characteristics (sāmānyalakṣaṇa) 100 of the body, sensation,
the mind, and the dharmas.
"The unique characteristics" means its self nature (svabhāva).
"The general characteristics" signifies the fact that "All
conditioned things are impermanent; all impure dharmas are
suffering; and that all the dharmas are empty (śūnya) and not-self
(anātmaka)."
What is the unique nature of the body? The primary elements
and physical matter derived from these primary elements (i.12,926 Chapter Six
ii.65).
"Dharmas" means the dharmas which are neither the body,
nor sensation, nor the mind. (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 937a18).
According to the School, foundation of mindfulness of the body
(kāyasmṛtyupasthāna) is realized when, being absorbed (samāh-
ita), one sees the atoms and the succesive moments (ksana) of the
body.
What is the nature of the foundations of mindfulness?
Foundation of mindfulness is threefold: foundation of mind-
fulness in and of itself (svabhāva), foundation of mindfulness
through connection, and foundation of mindfulness in the quality
of being an object.
Foundation of mindfulness in and of itself is
15a. Prajñā.101
What is prajñā?
15a. Proceeding from hearing, etc.
Prajñā proceeds from hearing, from reflection, and from
meditation. The foundations of mindfulness are likewise threefold,
proceeding from hearing, reflection, and meditation.
15b. The others, through connection and as object.
The other dharmas which are not prajñā, are, when they are
dharmas coexistent with prajñā, foundations of mindfulness***
The Path and the Saints
through connection; when they are the object of prajñā and of the
dharmas coexistent with prajñā [in other words, when they are the
object of the foundation of mindfulness in and of itself and of the
foundation of mindfulness through connection], they are a
foundation of mindfulness as object.
How do we know that the foundation of mindfulness in and of
itself is prajñā?
Because it is said in the Sūtra, “His attention is set having the
body for its object" (kāye [var. kāme] kāyānupaśyanā smṛtyupasthā-
nam) 102
What is anupaśyanā? It is prajñā. In fact, through prajñā, one
who is endowed with prajñā becomes an anupaśya.103 Therefore
the Sūtra further says, "He dwells in attention to the body, the
internal body" (madhyātmaṁ kāye kāyānupaśyī viharati). The
word kāyānupaśyin is explained as follows: one who possesses
anupasya or darśana¹04 is called an anupaśyin; and one who is an
anupaśyin with respect to the body is called a kāyānupaśyin.
What is prajñā?
The Blessed One said that it is the foundation of mindfulness.
[Why give the name of foundation of mindfulness to prajñā?]
The Vaibhāṣikas say: By reason of the preponderant role of
attention, [which presents the object to prajñā]; as a wedge (kīla)
contributes to the splitting of wood; ¹05 it is due to the force of
mindfulness that prajñā is active with respect to the object.106
But the best explanation is the following: Mindfulness is
applied (upatişthate) 107 by it; thus the prajñā is a foundation of928 Chapter Six
mindfulness (smṛtyupasthāna = smṛter upasthānam); in fact, as
the object is seen by the prajñā, so too it is expressed, that is to say,
grasped by the attention. Therefore the Blessed One said, "He
dwells having an exact notion of the body with respect to the body
(kāye kāyānupaśyī viharati): his attention is set and fixed having
the body for its object" (Samyutta, v.294). And the Blessed One
said, "He dwells with his attention fixed having his body for its
object; his attention is applied, unexhausted" (see Samyutta,
v.331).
Objection: Nevertheless the Sūtra says, “Oh monks, how is the
origin, how is the disappearance of the foundations of mindful-
ness? Through the origin of food, there is the origin of the body;
through the disappearance of food, there is the disappearance of
the body; through the origin of contact, there is the origin of
sensation ... ; through the origin of namarūpa ... ; through the
origin of manasikāra…..” (Saṁyukta, TD 2, p. 171a27). Therefore
foundation of mindfulness is the body, etc.
Answer: In this Sūtra we are not dealing with a foundation of
mindfulness in and of itself, but a foundation of mindfulness in the
quality of being an object: the attention is applied to it, and
therefore it is a foundation of mindfulness. The name differs
according to the object.
Each foundation of mindfulness is threefold accordingly as it is
considered as oneself, as another, or as oneself and another. [The
ascetic has in view his own body, the body of another . . . ]
15b-c. The order is that of their production.The Path and the Saints
Why are they produced in this order? According to the
Vaibhāṣikas, because one first sees that which is the coarsest. Or
rather: the body (1) is the support of sensual attachment which has
its origin in the desire for sensation (2); this desire takes place
because (3) the mind is not calmed; and the mind is not calmed
because (4) the defilements are not abandoned.
15c-d. Four, oppositions to errors.108
The foundations of mindfulness are taught in this order as
oppositions to the four errors, belief in purity, happiness,
permanence, and self (v.9). They are therefore four, no more and
no less.
Of the four foundations of mindfulness, three have an unmixed
object; the fourth is of two types: when it bears only on the
dharmas, its object is not mixed; when it bears on two, or three, or
four things at one and the same time, its object is mixed [or
universal, samasta].
Having thus cultivated the foundations of mindfulness having
the body, etc., for their objects
16. Placed in the foundation of mindfulness having the
dharmas as its universal object, he sees that the dharmas
are impermanent, suffering, empty, and not-self.109
Placed in the foundation of mindfulness having the dharmas as
its mixed object, placing together the body, sensation, etc., he sees
them under the fourfold aspect of impermanence, suffering,
empty, and not-self.930 Chapter Six
17a. From this there arises the Heat.110
From this cultivation of the foundation of mindfulness having
the dharmas as its object, there finally¹¹1 arises a root of good
called Uşmagata (“Heat attained"), because it is similar to heat
(uşma), being the first indication or the anticipation of the Noble
Path, a fire which burns the fuel which are the defilements.
17b. Which has the Four Truths for its object.
Since it is prolonged for a certain period of time, Usmagata, the
Heat, has the Four Truths for its object.
17c. Which has sixteen aspects.
The seeing of suffering as suffering, impermanent, empty, and
not-self; seeing arising or origin as arising, appearance, cause, and
condition; seeing extinction as extinction, calm, excellent, and
definitive salvation; and the seeing of the Path as path, truth,
obtaining, and definitive release. We shall define these different
aspects later (see vii.13).
17c-d. From Heat, the Summits.
The Heat develops, weak, medium, and strong; there finally
arises the Summits (mūrdhan).
17d. Which are similar to it.Like Heat, the Summits have the Four Truths for their object
and include the sixteen aspects: they receive another name by
reason of their excellence.
The Path and the Saints 931
They are called Summits (or “Heads”), because they are the
most elevated or the head of the unfixed roots of good, that is,
those from which one can fall away; or one can fall away from the
Summits; or one goes beyond them by penetrating into a Patience
(kṣānti).112
18a. It is through dharma that these two imprint.113
It is through the foundation of mindfulness that has the
dharmas for its object that Heat and the Summits imprint. What
does “imprint” mean? This refers to the first application of the
different aspects of the Truths.114
18b. They grow through the others also.115
Heat and the Summits grow by means of the four foundations
of mindfulness together. The progressing ascetic does not manifest
the previously acquired roots of good, because he does not esteem
them very much.
The Summits have grown by passing through weak, medium,
and strong states:
18c. From that, Patience.116
Patience (kṣānti) is so-called because in this stage, the Truths
please (kşamate) extremely much. In the Heat they please weakly,932 Chapter Six
and in the Summits, medium,--as one sees from the fact that one
cannot fall away from Patience, but can from the first two stages.
Patience is threefold, weak, medium, strong:
18c. Two are as above.
Weak and medium Patience (Divya, 271) are like the Heads, in
that they imprint first, like the Heads, by the foundation of
mindfulness having the dharmas as its object. But they differ from
the Heads in respect to their increase.
18d. Three grow totally through the dharmas.
Weak, medium, strong, they grow only through the foundation
of mindfulness which has the dharmas for its object; not by the
other foundations of mindfulness. 117
19a-b. Strong, it has the suffering of Kāmadhātu for its
object.
Strong Patience, contiguous with the highest dharmas, has only
the suffering of Kāmadhātu for its object.
A similar restriction is not formulated concerning the
preceding stages; thus they have the suffering, arising, etc., of the
three spheres for their objects.118
Medium Patience lasts from the moment when the ascetic
ceases to consider the sixteenth aspect [=definitive release] bearing
on the two higher spheres, but continues to successively eliminate
the higher aspects and spheres, until the moment when, in two
moments of thought, he is impressed with only two aspects
[=impermanence and suffering] of the suffering of Kāmadhātu.
Strong Patience exists when the ascetic considers, in a singleThe Path and the Saints 933
thought, only one aspect [=impermanence] applied to the
sufferings of Kāmadhātu. Such is the explanation of the Vaibhāṣi-
kas.
19b. It is of a moment.
It is momentary; it does not form a series.
19c. So too, the Supreme Dharmas.
These, exactly like strong Patience, bear on the suffering of
Kāmadhātu and are momentary.
They are termed Supreme Worldly Dharmas (laukika agrad-
harmas): because they are worldly, being impure; because they are
supreme dharmas; and because they are supreme among the
worldly dharmas. They are Supreme Worldly Dharmas because, in
the absence of any similar cause (sabhāgahetu), by their own
power, they manifest the Path of Seeing the Truths.119
The four roots of good, Heat, etc., are by their nature
foundations of mindfulness; they are thus prajñā. However
19c. All include the five skandhas.120
Considering the root of good, Heat, etc., with their attendants,
they include the five skandhas.
19d. With the exclusion of the possessions. ¹21934 Chapter Six
The possessions (prāptis),--that is to say, the präptis of Heat,
etc.,--are not included within Heat, etc., for it is inadmissible for
Āryans to manifest Heat, etc., anew, which would be the case if
they were to manifest its prāptis.
i. When the Heat begins and when it has three Truths for its
object, a foundation of mindfulness that has the dharmas for its
object is present; the four foundations of mindfulness of the future,
are possessed [One of the aspects is presently seen; four of the
future are possessed]. When it has the Truth of Extinction for its
object, the same foundation of mindfulness which has the dharma
for its object which is present is also the only one which is
possessed in the future. The aspects, in all cases, are those of the
Truth presently considered [One does not acquire, in the future,
the aspects of the Truths which are not present].
In the period of increase, when the Heat has the three Truths
for its object, any of the foundations of mindfulness may be
present; the four of the future are possessed. When it has the
Truth of Extinction for its object, the fourth foundation of
mindfulness is present; four of the future are possessed. All the
aspects of the future are possessed, because the gotras have been
acquired.¹22
ii. In the Summits, having for their object the Four Truths at
their beginning, and having for their object extinction in the
period of growth, the last foundation of mindfulness is present;
four of the future are possessed; all the aspects of the future are
possessed. Having for its object the three other Truths in the
period of increase, any of the foundations of mindfulness are
present; four of the future are possessed; and so too all of the
aspects.
iii. In Patience, in the beginning and in the period of increase
whichever of the Truths is considered, the last foundation ofThe Path and the Saints 935
mindfulness is present; four of the future are possessed; and so too
all of the aspects.
iv. In the Supreme Worldly Dharmas, the last foundation of
mindfulness is present; four of the future are possessed--those
which are not destined to arise; four aspects only, those of the
Truth of Suffering--for the aspects of the other Truths do not
belong to the Supreme Worldly Dharmas; for the Supreme
Worldly Dharmas are similar to the Path of Seeing,123 in which
one acquires only in the future the four aspects of the Truth that
one considers under one aspect.
20a-b. This is the fourfold nirvedhabhāgīya.124
These four--Heat, Summits, Patience, and the Supreme
Worldly Dharmas--are the roots of good called nirvedhabhāgīyas
("parts pertaining to the Path").
The first two, being non-fixed since one can fall away from
them, are weak nirvedhabhāgīyas; the Patiences are medium
nirvedhabhāgīyas; and the Supreme Worldly Dharmas are strong
nirvedhabhāgiyas.
What does nirvedhabhāgīya mean? 1. Nirvedha signifies
niścita vedha (“definitely known"), the Noble Path. Through it
doubt is abandoned: it is thus niścita ("definitive"), and the Truths
are distinguished (vedha): 125 "This is suffering..., this is the Path";
2. the Path of Seeing is one part (bhāga) of the Path; thus
nirvedhabhāga.
The dharmas useful to one part of the Path are nirvedhabhāg-
iya (with the suffix chan) because they lead to it.
All these four nirvedhabhāgiyas
20b. Arise from absorption.936 Chapter Six
Not from hearing or reflection.
20c-d. Their sphere is anāgāmya, the intermediate state,
and the Dhyānas.
Their sphere are anāgāmya (viii.22c), dhyānāntara (viii.22d),
and the Four Dhyānas: one can obtain them only in these six states
of absorption. They do not exist above, in the Arūpyas, because
they constitute the attendants of the Path of Seeing. 126 They do not
exist in the Ārūpyas, because they bear on Kāmadhātu, for the
ascetic should first of all perfectly know and abandon Kāmadhātu
as suffering and origin.
The retribution [of the nirvedhabhāgīyas] consists of the five
skandhas of Rūpadhātu. They are actions of the completing class,
and not of the projecting class (iv.95a-b), for they hate existence.
20d. Or rather, two are also of the lower sphere.
The expression "or rather" indicates another opinion.
According to the Bhadanta Ghoşaka, the first two nirvedhabhāg-
iyas are of seven spheres, with the addition of Kāmadhātu.
All four
21a. Belong to the beings of Kāmadhātu.¹27
Three can be produced only by human beings of the three
Dvīpas. Once produced, they can be manifested among the gods.
The fourth can be produced by the gods.
Three, acquired by men and women, can be found in a male or
female body. 128
21a-b. Women obtain the Supreme Worldly Dharmasdestined to be found in female and male bodies.
The Path and the Saints 937
Acquired by a female, the Supreme Worldly Dharmas will be
found in a female body [-their present body] and in a male body
[=the body that the female will necessarily produce in a new
existence]; acquired by a male, it will only be found in a male
body,--for there is, from the fact of the Supreme Worldly
Dharmas, destruction (apratisaṁkhyānirodha, ii.55d) of the
quality of female.
How are the nirvedhabhāgīyas lost?
21c-d. The Āryan loses them by losing the sphere. 129
When the Āryan loses the sphere in which he has obtained the
nirvedhabhāgīyas, he loses the nirvedhabhāgiyas. He does not lose
them in any other way, through death or through falling. One
sphere is lost by passing into another sphere, [and not through
detachment from the said sphere].
21d. The non-Ãryan, through death.130
The Prthagjana, whether or not he has passed to another
sphere, loses them by abandoning the nikāyasabhāga.
22a. He also loses the first two through falling away.
The Pṛthagjana loses the first two through death and through
falling away. The Aryan does not fall from out of the first two, and
the Pṛthagjana does not fall from out of the last two.938
Chapter Six
22b. When they belong to the fundamental Dhyānas, the
Seeing of the Truths arises from this seeing.131
He who has produced the nirvedhabhāgiyas by cultivating the
fundamental Dhyānas, shall certainly see the Truths in this very
same life, because his disgust with existence is very strong.
22c. Lost, they are acquired anew.
When the nirvedhabhāgīyas have been lost and are acquired
anew, one acquires them afresh, like the Prātimokṣa discipline
(iv.38); one does not acquired the nirvedhabhāgiyas previously
abandoned.132 Because they have not been habitually cultivated,
they are not obtained through detachment; and because they are
realized through effort, they are not regained once they are lost.
If the ascetic meets a master possessing knowledge resulting
from resolution (pranidhijñāna, vii.37),¹33 he produced the
nirvedhabhāgiyas beginning from the one which, having been
acquired, had been lost. If he does not meet him, he should produce
the nirvedhabhāgiyas from the beginning.
We have seen that the Āryan discards the nirvedhabhāgīyas,
whereas the Prthagjana loses them through falling. One distin-
guished loss (vihāni) and loss through falling (parihāṇi): these are
two types of loss, hāni. What do they consist of?
22d. The two losses are non-possession.¹34
Loss through falling necessarily results from the defilements;
but not unqualified loss (vihāni), which can result from a quality,The Path and the Saints 939
for example, the loss of the quality of Pṛthagjana at the production
of the Path, etc.135
Even though he may lose it through falling, whoever obtains
Heat is destined to attain Nirvāṇa.
But what is the distinction between Heat and the mokṣabhāg-
iyas (iv.125c-d, vi.24, vii.30)?
Whoever plants a root of good which should end in Nirvāṇa
(nirvāṇabhāgīya) will obtain Nirvāṇa. If there is no obstacle, Heat
is quite close to the Seeing of the Truths.
23a. He who has attained the Summits does not cut off the
roots.
Even though he may lose them by falling, he who has obtained
the Summits does not cut off the roots of good (iv.79); but he can
go to the painful realms of rebirth and commit mortal transgres-
sions (iv.96).
23b. He who obtains the Patience does not go to the painful
realms of rebirth.
He who loses the Patience through simple loss, vihāni, does
not go to the painful realms of rebirth, because he is removed from
the actions and the defilements which lead to them.
When one obtains Patience, and enters into the conditions not
to be produced,136 there are certain realms of rebirth, wombs,
rebirths, bodily forms, existences and defilements that no longer
arise for him: the painful realms of rebirth, the womb of an egg, or
moisture; rebirth among the Asaṁjñisattvas, the Uttarakurus, or940 Chapter Six
the Mahābrahmas: 137 bodies of the two types of eunuchs, and
androgynous bodies; the eighth, ninth rebirth, etc.; 138 and those
defilements which are abandoned by the Seeing of the Truths
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 165b6).
The abandoning is in relation to the degree of the Patience:
through weak Patience, the painful realms of rebirth enter into the
condition of not arising;... through strong Patience, all of the bad
dharmas mentioned above. 139
The nirvedhabhāgiyas are of three types by reason of the
distinction of the three gotras or families. 140 The ascetic belongs to
the family of the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas or Buddhas; and Heat,
the Summits, etc., are of the family of the ascetic who cultivates
them.
23c-d. One can attain two nirvedhabhāgīyas of the Śrāvaka
family, and become a Buddha.
It is possible for a person who belongs to the Śrāvaka family to
attain in this family the Heat and the Summits, and to become a
Buddha. But once Patience is acquired, this is no longer possible
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 352a14), because the future painful rebirths
are destroyed by the possession of the Patience. Now the
Bodhisattvas, with the intention of being useful to their fellow
creatures, go to the painful realms of rebirth. 141 Such is the
explanation of the Vaibhāṣikas.
We say however that a person of the Śrävaka family, once he
acquires Patience, cannot become a Buddha, because the Śrävaka
family, once penetrated and confirmed by the Patience, can no
longer be modified.
adapt way pangalan ng gangThe Path and the Saints
23d. One can attain three, and become the other. 142
"The other" in relation to the Buddha, is the Pratyekabuddha.
A person of the Śrāvaka family can attain for a second time from
this family the first three nirvedhabhāgīyas and become a
Pratyekabuddha.143
The nirvadhabhāgīyas of the Buddha family and of the
Pratyekabuddha family are not susceptible of being attained a
second time.
24a-b. The Master and the Rhinoceros go as far as Bodhi in
one sitting, by relying on the last Dhyāna. 144
"The Master" is the Buddha. “The Rhinoceros" is one who
resembles a rhinoceros, that is, the Pratyekabuddha. Both abide in
the Fourth Dhyana because this Dhyāna is an absorption free from
all agitation and sharpness. ¹45 "In one sitting", without rising from
it, they go from the nirvedhabhāgīyas to the arising of Bodhi. ¹46
We shall see later (iv.67) that Bodhi is the knowledge of
extinction (kşayajñāna) and the knowledge of non-arising
(anutpādajñāna).
According to others (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 352a17), the sitting
begins with the visualization of loathsome things. For the
Ābhidhārmikas who admit the existence of Pratyekabuddhas
different from those likened to a rhinoceros, 147 nothing prevents
these other Pratyekabuddhas from changing their family. 148
Does the preparation for the nirvedhabhāgiyas and the
production of the nirvedhabhāgiyas take place in the same
existence?942 Chapter Six
This is not possible. Of necessity, one must produce
24c. First, the mokṣabhāgiyas.149
Of them all
24d. The most rapid obtains deliverance in three existen-
ces. 150
The planting of the seed, the growth of the plant, and the
production of the fruit: three different stages. In this same way, in
Religion,¹51 the series gradually enters, matures, and is delivered:
first existence, to plant the so-called mokṣabhāgīya roots of good;
second, to produce the nirvedhabhāgīyas; and third, to produce the
Path. 152
The School admits (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 35a12) that the
mokṣabhāgiyas
25a. Arise from hearing and reflection. 153
But not from absorption or meditation. How many types of
actions can be mokṣabhāgiya?
25a. The three actions.
But primarily mental action. Bodily action and vocal action are
also mokṣabhāgīya when they are embraced by the resolution
(pranidhāna) for deliverance; this resolution is a type of volition
(cetanā, ii.24): by giving alms, a bodily action, by obliging oneselfto observe a rule, a vocal action, or by studying a stanza of four
pādas, 154 one projects a mokṣabhāgiya, when the force of the desire
for deliverance comes to qualify these actions.155
25b. Projected among humans.
The Path and the Saints 943
Only persons of the three Dvipas project or plant the
mokṣabhāgiyas. In fact, disgust, or intelligence (prajñā), or disgust
and intelligence are absent among the gods, among beings in hell,
and among the inhabitants of Uttarakuru. 156
We have only incidentally treated of the mokṣabhāgīyas; but
we have to explain the progressive order of the comprehension of
the Truths (satyābhisamaya) and we have followed this order to
the Supreme Worldly Dharmas. We must now teach the rest.
25c-d. From out of the Supreme Worldly Dharmas there
proceeds one Patience, a Patience having the dharmas for
its object, which is pure.¹57
Exactly one Patience having Dharma Knowledge for its aspect
(dharmajñānakṣānti) ¹58 immediately follows the Supreme Worldly
Dharmas. What is its object?
26a. Bearing on the suffering of Kāmadhātu. ¹59
Its object is the suffering of Kāmadhātu. Therefore it is called
Duḥkhe Dharmajñānakṣānti, the Patience that has the Dharma
Knowledge of Suffering for its object.160
In order to indicate that it is pure, it is qualified by its944 Chapter Six
outflowing result (nisyanda, ii.26c-d) which is a Dharma Knowl-
edge (dharmajñāna).161 The expression dharmajñānaksāṇti
therefore signifies: a ksāṇti or Patience which produces a
dharmajñāna (Dharma Knowledge), which has for its intention
and result a Dharma Knowledge. In the same way that a tree
which bears flowers or fruit is called a puspavrksa or a phalavṛksa.
This Patience is the entry into niyāma, for it is the entry into
the certitude (niyama) of the acquisition of absolute good or
samyaktva. What is samyaktva? The Sūtra says that it is Nirvā-
ņa. 162 Niyama or absolute determination with regard to the
samyaktva is called niyāma,163 and also niyama. 164
Entering into this absolute determination of the acquisition of
samyaktva is the arriving, the taking possession of (prāpti). Once
this possession arises, the ascetic is an Āryan.
It is in a future state, that is, in its arising state, that this
Patience brings about the cessation of the quality of Prthagjana; ¹65
for it is admitted that in a future state it possesses this efficacy,
which does not belong to any other dharma; in the same way that
a future lamp destroys darkness, and in the same way that a future
arising lakṣaṇa (ii.45c-d) causes arising.
According to other masters,166 the Supreme Worldly Dharmas
bring about the cessation of the quality of Pṛthagjana.
An inadmissible opinion, since these dharmas are Pṛthagjana
dharmas.
This objection does not hold, for these dharmas are in
contradiction to the quality of Pṛthagjana: this is as if someone
climbed onto the shoulders of his enemy and killed him.
According to others, 167 the quality of Prthagjana ceases both by
the Supreme Worldly Dharmas, which take the place of the
Irresistible Path (ānantaryamārga), and by the Patience which
takes the place of the Path of Deliverance (vimuktimārga,
vi.28a-b). By the first, the quality of Pṛthagjana is in the process of
being abandoned (prahiyate), and by the second, it is abandoned(prahina).
The Path and the Saints 945
26a-b. From this, a Dharma Knowledge having the same
object.
Immediately after the Patience that has the Dharma Knowl-
edge of Suffering for its object there arises a Dharma Knowledge
having for its object the suffering of Kāmadhātu. It is called the
Dharma Knowledge of Suffering.
The qualification of "pure" applied to the first Patience holds
for all of the following Patiences. The knowledge in question is
therefore pure.
In this same way there arises one Patience that has the Dharma
Knowledge for its object and a Dharma Knowledge relating to the
suffering of Kāmadhātu.
26b-c. In the same way, relating to the rest of suffering, one
consecutive Patience and a Knowledge.
Immediately following the Dharma Knowledge of Suffering,
there arises one Patience of Consecutive Knowledge, having a
composite object, bearing on the Suffering of Rūpadhātu and
Ārūpyadhātu. It is called duḥkhe'nvayajñānakṣānti (the Patience
which consists of Consecutive Knowledge of Suffering). From this
Patience there arises a consecutive Knowledge which receives the
name of Consecutive Knowledge of Suffering.
Dharma Knowledge, or Knowledge of the Dharmas (dharmaj-
ñāna) is so-called because it is the first knowledge which the ascetic
obtains, since the origin of time, on the nature of the dharmas,
suffering, etc. Consecutive Knowledge (anvayajñāna) is so-called946 Chapter Six
because it has the Dharma Knowledge for its cause (tadanvaya
taddhetuka), and because it knows the Truth in question as does
Dharma Knowledge.
In the same way that, relating to the Truth of Suffering, four
dharmas have arisen, two Patiences and two Knowledges,
26d. In that same way, relating to the three other Truths.
When, immediately after the Consecutive Knowledge of
Suffering, there has arise a Patience of Dharma Knowledge
bearing on origin in Kāmadhātu, from this Patience there arises a
Dharma Knowledge of Origin; in the same way, by the immediate
succession of arising, there arises a Patience of Consecutive
Knowledge, bearing on the rest of origin, and a Consecutive
Knowledge of Origin. There arises one Patience of Dharma
Knowledge, bearing on the extinction of suffering in Kāmadhātu,
and the Dharma Knowledge of Extinction. There then arises one
Patience of Consecutive Knowledge, bearing on the rest of
extinction, and the Consecutive Knowledge of Extinction.
There then arises one Patience of Dharma Knowledge bearing
on the path which is opposed to the suffering of Kāmadhātu, and
the Dharma Knowledge of the Path. There then arises one
Patience of Consecutive Knowledge bearing on the rest of the
Path, and the Consecutive Knowledge of the Path.
27a-b. In this way, the comprehension of the Truths
consists of sixteen mental states.168
In this order, the comprehension of the Truths (satyabhisa-
maya) is made up of sixteen mental states.
veryThe Path and the Saints 947
According to other schools, 169 the comprehension of the
Truths is single, "unique."170 One should examine what is their
point of view. For it is without making any distinctions that we
have spoken of this comprehension [by saying that it is made up of
sixteen mental states]. If one were to distinguish,171
27b. It is threefold: insight, application, and result.
Insight comprehension (darśanābhisamaya) is the comprehen-
sion of the Truths by one pure prajñā.
Application comprehension (ālambanābhisamaya) is the
comprehension of the Truths by this prajñā and also by the
dharmas associated with this prajñā.172
Resultant comprehension (kāryābhisamaya) is the comprehen-
sion of the Truths by this prajñā, by the dharmas which are
associated with it, and also by the dharmas not associated with it
but which accompany it, for example, morality, the arising lakṣaṇa
(ii.45c), etc.¹73
When the ascetic sees suffering, the three comprehensions take
place relative to suffering;¹74 the third comprehension takes place
relative to the other Truths, for origin is abandoned, extinction is
experienced, and the path cultivated. 175
Stated in this way, if the partisan of a single, unique compre-
hension intends to speak of comprehension which consists of the
seeing of the Truths, his thesis is inadmissible, by reason of the
varity of the aspects (vii.10c): one does not see origin, etc., under
the aspects of suffering.
But, he would say, one sees all the Truths under the aspect of
non-self.
If this were the case, then one would not see the Truths under
the aspects of suffering, etc.; and this hypothesis contradicts the
Sūtra which says, "The Śrāvaka, when he judges suffering as
suffering, or origin as origin, or extinction as extinction, or path as948 Chapter Six
path, there is then for him discernment of the dharmas associated
with these pure judgments . . ."176
[But, would he not say that this declaration of the Sūtra refers
to the preparatory period, before comprehension?
This is inadmissible, for there is no pure judgment in this
period.]
But, he would say, does this declaration refer to the Path of
Meditation, to the period during which one meditates on, and
cultivates the Truths already seen?
This is inadmissible, for one cultivates the Truths in the same
manner in which one has seen them.
If the partisans of a single, unique comprehension pretend that
this comprehension is unique because the ascetic who sees one
Truth obtains mastery with respect to the others, this is to say that,
through the seeing of the Truth of Suffering, the ascetic obtains
the capacity of experiencing the seeing of the other Truths without
any new preparatory exercise,--and this we approve. Nevertheless,
one should examine whether there is produced, or not, in the
interval, a departing from the comprehension. 177
But if the partisans of a single comprehension affirm the unity
of comprehension because suffering is perfectly known, origin is
abandoned, extinction realized, and the path cultivated, then this
we approve, for we have said that when one Truth is seen, there is
resultant comprehension with regard to the three others. ¹78
Objection: If you approve this opinion, you contradict the Sūtra
which teaches gradual (kramena) comprehension. It is with
reference to insight comprehension that the Sūtra teaches the
gradual comprehension of the Truths, "Oh householder, compre-
hension is not unique, but gradual (anupūrva)... " and the rest; in
all there are three Sūtras accompanied by examples. 179
But, one would say,180 the Sūtra says that "one who is free from
perplexity and doubt with regard to suffering is also free from
perplexity and doubt with regard to the Buddha." Therefore
kemalt av valgustatud
a magasabing pemantauad ant Whytur fan nog wat
kan mancomprehension is not gradual, but single and unique. 181
This objection does not hold: for this Sūtra means to say that
when suffering is understood, the perplexity and the doubt relative
to the Buddha does not become active and will necessarily be
abandoned.
The Path and the Saints 949
We have seen that comprehension consists of sixteen mental
states.
27d. It is of the same sphere as the Supreme Worldly
Dharmas, 182
These sixteen mental states are of the same sphere as the
Supreme Worldly Dharmas. We have seen that these can be of six
spheres (20c-d).
Why are there necessarily Patiences and Knowledges?
28a-b. The Patiences and Knowledges are, in this order, the
Irresistible Path and the Path of Deliverance. 183
The Patiences cannot be hindered (antarayitum aśakyatvāt) in
their cutting off of the possession of the defilements; they are
therefore, according to Pāṇini, iii.3.171-2, the Irresistible Path
(ānantaryamārga).
The Knowledges arise among the persons who are thus
delivered from the possession of the defilements, at the same time
as does possession of disconnection from the defilements950 Chapter Six
(visamyoga, i.6a, ii.55d): they are therefore the Path of Deliver-
ance (vimuktimārga). 184
As a consequence there is Patience and Knowledge, in the same
way that there are two actions: expelling the thief, and closing the
door. 185
If the possession of disconnection takes place only with the
second Patience or second Irresistible Path [=the Patience that has
the Consecutive Knowledge of Suffering as its object], then the
Knowledge,--which is free from doubt (vii.1)--will not arise
having the same object of the first Irresistible Path, namely the
suffering of Kāmadhātu.
But if the defilements are abandoned by means of the Patiences
(v.6), is there not a contradiction with the text of the Śāstra,
"There are nine categories of bonds"? 186
No, for the Patiences are the attendants of the Knowledges;
the Šāstra attributes the very same work of the Patiences to the
Knowledges, in the way that one says that the king does that which
is done by his men. ¹87
From the fact that they all see the Truths, does it follow that
the sixteen mental states of comprehension are the Path of
Seeing?
28c-d. Because they are produced within anyone who sees
that which has not been seen, fifteen moments are the Path
of Seeing.¹8
Fifteen moments, from the Patience that has the Dharma
Knowledge of Suffering for its object to the Patience of Consecu-
tive Knowledge that has the Path for its object, constitute the Path
of Seeing. Why? Because the seeing of what has not been seenThe Path and the Saints 951
continues. 189
In the sixteenth moment there is nothing more to see which
has not been seen. This moment meditates on the Truth as it has
been seen,¹⁹⁰ and so forms part of the Path of Meditation.
But, one would say, the sixteenth moment sees the fifteenth
moment, the Patience that has the Consecutive Knowledge of the
Path as its object, which has not been seen previously, 191
Without doubt; but that to which it refers is the knowledge as
to whether the Truth [of the Path] has been seen or not, not
whether a moment [of the said Truth] has been seen or not. The
fact that a moment has not been seen does not create the fact that
the Truth has not been seen, in the same way that a field is not
unharvested because one stalk remains to be cut. 192
Furthermore, the sixteenth moment, the Consecutive Knowl-
edge of the Path forms part of the Path of Meditation: a. because it
constitutes a result, a śrāmaṇyaphala (vi.51); b. because it embraces
meditation, the possession or acquisition of the eight Knowledges
and the sixteen aspects, [in contrast to the Path of Seeing, vii.21];
c. because it embraces the abandoning of a Path, the path of a
follower; and d. because it belongs to a series.¹93
Objection: The sixteenth moment should be considered as
forming part of the Path of Seeing, because it is certainly free from
falling away. And its non-falling away results from the fact that it
supports or confirms the abandoning of the defilements aban-
doned through the Path of Seeing.
If you maintain that, for this reason, the sixteenth moment is
of the Path of Seeing, this then leads to absurd consequences: the
sixteenth moment and the following, and also the seeing of the
Truths the second day and following, will be the Path of Seeing, for
they also confirm the abandoning of the defilements abandoned
through the Path of Seeing.
How is it that the first seven Knowledges are of the Path of
Seeing and not the eighth? In fact, all eight see what has been seen952 Chapter Six
through the Patience which precedes.
Because the seeing of the Truths has not been finished: it is
completed in the fifteenth moment. The first seven Knowledges
are of the Path of Seeing because, the seeing of the Truths not
being finished, they are produced in the interval, that is, either in
the course of the Path of Seeing, or between two Patiences.
We have explained how the Path of Seeing and the Path of
Meditation arise. We should now define the persons (pudgala) in
whom the Noble Path arises. In the course of the fifteen moments
which are the nature of the Path of Seeing,
29a-b. In these moments, the ascetics of weak and sharp
faculties are respectively Sraddhānusārin and Dharmānusā-
rin. 194
Placed in these moments, the ascetic with weak faculties is
called a Śraddhānusārin; the ascetic with sharp faculties is called a
Dharmānusārin. Here the word “faculties" (indriyas) signifies the
faculties of faith, absorption, etc. 195
The term Śraddhānusārin is explained etymologically: śrad-
dhayā anusāraḥ = śraddhānusāraḥ, "pursuit by reason of faith"; one
in whom there is this pursuit, or in whom the habit is to pursue by
reason of faith, is called a Śraddhānusārin, because, first,196 he has
pursued the Truth [that is to say: to become conscious of the
Truths] under the impulse of another, through confidence in
another (see vi.63).
Dharmānusārin is explained in the same way: dharmair
anusāraḥ = dharmānusāraḥ, "pursuit by means of the dharmas...
It is by himself, by means of the dharmas, that is, by means of the
twelvefold Scripture, Sūtra, etc. (see vi.63a-c), that this ascetic hasfirst pursued the Truth.
These two ascetics,
The Path and the Saints 953
29c-d. If they have not abandoned the defilements to be
abandoned through Meditation, they are candidates for the
first result. 197
"The first result”, that is, the first of the results, the state of
Srotaäpanna which is in fact the first resultant state in the order of
acquisition.
If the Śraddhānusārin and the Dharmānusārin have not
previously abandoned, by the worldly path (vi.49), any category of
the defilements to be abandoned through Meditation, and as a
consequence are found to be "bound by all the bonds” (sakalaband-
hana, ii. English translation, note 184), they are candidates for the
state of Srotaapanna from the time in which they entered the Path
of Seeing.
30a. Up to the abandoning of the five categories.
If they have, through the worldly path, abandoned the first,
second, third, fourth or fifth category of the defilements of
Kāmadhātu to be abandoned through Meditation, once having
entered the Path of Seeing, they are the same candidates for the
first state.
30b. Candidates for the second, until the abandoning of the
ninth category.
But if they have previously abandoned the sixth, seventh, or
eighth category, they are candidates for the second state, that is, for
the state of Sakṛdāgāmin.954
Chapter Six
30c-d. Candidates for the third, through detachment either
with respect to Kāmadhātu, or with respect to higher
spheres.
In the case (1) where they are detached from Kāmadhātu
through the abandoning of the ninth category of defilements of
Kāmadhātu to be abandoned through Meditation, (2) or they are
detached with respect to the higher spheres up to and including
Ākiñcanyāyatana, they are candidates for the third state, that is, for
the state of Anāgāmin. (See ii. 16c, English translation, p. 177-178,
vi, p. 985).
31a-b. In the sixteenth moment, the ascetic becomes an
abider in the state for which he was a candidate.
In the sixteenth moment, these two ascetics no longer bear the
name of Śraddhānusārin or Dharmānusārin; they no longer bear
the name of candidates. They are “abiders in a result": candidates
for the state of Srotaäpanna, Sakṛdāgāmin, or Anāgāmin, now
become Srotaāpannas, Sakṛdāgāmins, or Anāgāmins.
The quality of Arhat cannot be acquired directly, that is to say
without the state of Anāgāmin first being acquired--,for, on the
one hand, the defilements abandoned through meditation cannot
be abandoned through the Path of Seeing (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
265c13) and, on the other hand, there cannot have been detach-
ment by a worldly path previous to Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana.
(See v. English translation note 27, and above p. 951).
31c-d. At this moment, the ascetics with weak and sharp
faculties become respectively Śraddhādhimukta or Dṛṣṭi-
prāpta. 198
The ascetic with weak faculties, who was a Śraddhānusārin,The Path and the Saints 955
now takes the name of Sraddhādhimukta (vi.56, 63). The ascetic
with sharp faculties, who was a Dharmānusārin, now takes the
name of Dṛṣṭiprāpta. When faith (śraddhā) predominates [in the
ascetic with weak faculties], the ascetic is informed by his
aspiration (adhimokṣa): he is therefore called a Śraddhā-adhi-
mukta. When prajñā predominates [in the ascetic with sharp
faculties] the ascetic is informed by speculative views (drsți): he is
therefore called a Dṛṣṭiprāpta. (vi.57, 61, 63a-c)
By what reason does the ascetic who has abandoned the first
categories [from one to five] of the defilements of Kāmadhātu
abandoned through meditation, become, in the sixteenth moment,
a Srotaāpanna and not a candidate for the state of Sakṛdāgāmin?
The same question is posed for the ascetic who has abandoned the
sixth, seventh, and eighth categories, and who in the sixteenth
moment, becomes a Sakṛdāgāmin and not a candidate for the state
of Anāgāmin; and also for the ascetic who has abandoned the
higher categories of the defilements, and who, in the sixteenth
moment, becomes an Anāgāmin and not a candidate for the state
of Arhat.
32. At the moment of the acquisition of a result, the ascetic
does not acquire the path of a higher result; consequently
the abider in a result does not exert himself with a view to a
higher progress, and he is not a candidate for a result.
Upon the acquisiton of a result, one does not acquire a path
higher than this state (vi.65b-d), for example, upon the acquisition
of Srotaäpanna, one does not obtain the path of Sakṛdāgāmin: such
is this principle. As a consequence, the abider in a result, as long as
he does not exert himself with a view to a higher progress for the
acquisition of a new state, that is, as long as he does not cultivate
the preparatory exercises which have for their result the abandon-
ing of the defilements not yet abandoned and which is the cause of
the acquisition of a new state, this resident is not a candidate for
this new state.956 Chapter Six
Nevertheless, the ascetic who, [previously] detached from the
Third Dhyana [by a worldly path], enters into niyāma (vi.26a) or
the Path of Seeing in a sphere lower than this Dhyana [that is, in
anāgamya, the First or Second Dhyāna, or an intermediate state],
certainly realizes a path higher than the result. If it were
otherwise, then if he were reborn in a higher sphere [the Fourth
Dhyana or the Ārūpyas], he would not be in possession of the
faculty of happiness (sukhendriya. viii.9).¹9⁹9 (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
464b8; Jñanaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 947a5).
We have defined the persons who enter into niyāma, either by
their being bhūyovītarāga, that is, detached from the sixth,
seventh, and eighth categories of defilements of Kāmadhātu, or by
their being kamavītarāga, that is, completely detached from
Kāmadhātu (ii.16c, English translation, p. 178).
We must now study the ascetic who proceeds gradually. To this
end, the following point should be established.
As the defilements of Kāmadhātu are divided into nine
categories,
33a-b. Each sphere has nine categories of vices.
Each sphere, up to and including Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana.
As each sphere has nine categories of vices,
33b. So too there are nine categories of qualities.
se me an even go ogrodongsangeriments per the hands samtamotteetin de pThe Path and the Saints 957
Each sphere has nine categories of qualities which are as many
as the paths, the Irresistible Paths and the Paths of Deliverance,
opposed to these said vices. How is this?
33c-d. By distinguishing weak, etc., in the categories of
weak, medium, and strong.200
There are three fundamental categories, weak, medium, and
strong. Each one of these is divided into weak, medium, and
strong; this gives us nine categories: weak-weak, weak-medium,
weak-strong, medium-weak, medium-medium, medium-strong,
strong-weak, strong-medium, and strong-strong.
The weak-weak path has the power to bring about the
abandoning of the strong-strong defilement; and so on to: the
strong-strong path has the power to bring about the abandoning of
the weak-weak defilement. For it is impossible for the strong-
strong path to be produced from the very beginning; and it is
impossible that there would be a strong-strong defilement when
there is a strong-strong path.
In the same way, when one washes a piece of cloth, the greater
stains are washed out first and only lastly the subtle stains; so too a
great darkness is vanquished by a small light, whereas a great light
is required to get rid of a small amount of darkness. Such are the
types of examples that one can supply, 201
An Aryan path, although momentary and weak, is capable of
uprooting the defilements which have accrued through a succes-
sion of their causes in eternal transmigration-- his path cuts off the
possessions of the defilements which are similar to roots--for the
white dharmas are powerful, whereas the black dharmas are
weak. 202 In this same way, the vices of wind, the bile, etc.,
accumulated over a long period of time, are gotten rid of by one
grain of powder of the trivṛt root (trivṛtkarṣa); so too a great
darkness is broken up by a small, momentary light.958 Chapter Six
There are therefore nine categories of defilements abandoned
through meditation.
34a-b. The abider in a result who has not destroyed that
which one should abandon through meditation is a Sap-
takṛtparamaḥ.203
The abider in a result who has not even abandoned one
category of the defilements abandoned through meditation is a
Srotaäpanna; as he can be reborn seven times but no more, he is an
"at the most seven times." As it is not an absolute rule that he will
be reborn seven times, one says, “at the most.” The expression of
the Sūtra, saptakṛtvaḥ paramaḥ, signifies "there is rebirth for him
seven times at the most." The word paramaḥ is understood as
prakarsena ("at a maximum").
Srotaāpanna: the river or stream (srotas), the stream of
Nirvāṇa, the path, for one goes by means of a stream. The ascetic
who has entered into it, who has arrived at it and who has attained
it, is called "one who has entered into the stream" (srota-āpan-
na). 204
Objection: How can one enter it? Would one say that it is by
the obtaining of the first path? Then the eighth saint²⁰5 would be a
Srotaāpanna. Would one say that it is by the obtaining of the first
state? Then the bhūyovītarāga and the kāmavītarāga, when they
acquire the first state which they acquire, would be Srotaāpannas;
but you have said that they are, respectively, Sakṛdāgāmins and
Anāgāmins (vi.30b-d).
We would answer: The ascetic enters into the stream by the
obtaining of the first state; but this does not refer to the state that
a certain saint can acquire first, but to the state that one acquires
first when one passes through all of the states.INNE
The Path and the Saints 959
But why is not the eighth saint a Srotaäpanna, for he has
entered into the stream of the Noble Path?
Because it is at the sixteenth moment, that of the Consecutive
Knowledge of the Path, that one possesses (1) both the path of the
candidate, consisting of fifteen moments, and the path of the state,
(2) and the Path of Seeing and the Path of Meditation; (3) because
then one comprehends the "stream," that is, the Path in its
entirety, up to and including the fifteenth moment.
The Vaibhāṣikas 206 say: Independently of the present existence,
the Srotaäpanna again takes up birth among humans, seven
existences properly so-called, and seven intermediate existences
(antarābhava, iii.10); and in this same way, he again takes up birth
among the gods. That is, he takes up birth up to twenty-eight
existences. Yet, as he has everywhere the series of seven
existences, the ascetic is said to be "reborn at the most seven
times"; the same way that a Bhikṣu is called "wise in seven things"
(saptasthānakusala) 207 when he knows the "groups of seven"; so
too a tree is termed "having seven leaves" (saptaparṇa) because its
buds produce some seven leaves. 208
Objection: But the Sūtra says, “It is absolutely impossible for a
saint (pudgala) possession views (dṛṣṭisaṁpanna)209 to produce an
eighth existence."210 And this text is in contradiction to the
doctrine of the Vaibhāṣikas.
No, they answer, for this text should be understood: "He does
not produce an eighth existence in the same realm of rebirth." Or,
if one wants to hold to the letter of the Sutra: "Having transmi-
grated, having passed seven times both among the gods and
among humans, he will realize the end of suffering,"211 one should
conclude that the heavenly and human rebirths are not preceded by
any intermediate existences (antarābhava), since the Sūtra speaks
only of gods and humans.960 Chapter Six
Taking up the objection again, if one should understand: "He
does not produce an eighth existence in the same realm of rebirth,”
how does it happen that an Ürdhvasrotas of the Bhavagraparama
class (vi.38b)212 is reborn eight times in the same realm of its
rebirth?
The Vaibhāṣikas answer that the text which denies an eighth
rebirth refers only to an eighth rebirth in Kāmadhātu.
But what text and what reasoning prove that this text refers
only to Kāmadhātu? And what proves that the saint transmigrates
seven times, among the gods on the one hand, and among humans
on the other, and not seven times in all among both? The text has,
in fact, "Having transmigrated seven times among gods and
among humans."
The Kāśyapiyas read, "Having transmigrated seven times
among gods, and seven times among humans (saptakṛtvo devān
saptakṛtvo manusyan)." There is therefore no reason to attach any
importance to the preceding question.213
He who becomes a Srotaāpanna aș a human will return to be
among humans in order to obtain Nirvāṇa; he who becomes a
Srotaāpanna as a god will return to be among the gods in order to
obtain Nirvāṇa.
Why is a Srotaāpanna not reborn an eighth time? Because, in
this limit of time, in the course of seven existences, his series is
necessarily matured. Such is the nature of the Path: so too, such is
the nature of the venom of the "seven-footed serpent" that a
person bitten dies after having walked only seven paces; such is theThe Path and the Saints 961
nature of this illness that the four-day fever returns during each of
the four days (see note 210).
214 He does not obtain Nirvāṇa in less time because some seven
bonds remain, two of the avarabhāgiya or lower class, namely
sensual desire (kāmacchanda) and anger (vyāpāda), and five of the
ürdhvabhāgiya or higher class, namely two cravings (rāga) [in
Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu], dissipation (auddhhatya), pride
(mana), and delusion (moha) (v.43). Because, even though he
realizes the Noble Path [of Sakṛdāgāmin or Anāgāmin], he does
not obtain Nirvāṇa in the interval by reason of the force of the
actions which should be rewarded in the course of the seven
existences.
If a Buddha has not arisen in the period when one should
obtain Nirvāṇa, it is as a householder that he will obtain the
quality of Arhat, but he does not then remain as a householder: by
the force of dharmatā, that is, by the force of the Path of the Arhat
or the Aśaikşa, he is endowed with the marks of a Bhikṣu; 215
according to other masters, with the marks of a non-Buddhist
Bhikṣu.
Why is the Srotaäpanna declared to be an avinipātadharman,
"one incapable of falling into a painful realm of rebirth"
(apāya)?216
Because he does not accumulate actions which cause him to fall
into it; because, by the actions of this type which have already been
previously accumulated, his mind has become refractory to the
maturation of these actions, being perfumed by the powerful roots
of good by reason of the purity of his behavior, and by reason of
the purity of his sentiments with regard to the Three Jewels.²¹7
A person who has accumulated an action which should
necessarily mature in a painful realm of rebirth cannot even
produce Patience (vi. 18), much less the pure Path.218962 Chapter Six
There is a stanza, "The ignorant, if they have committed only a
small transgression, go below; the wise, if they have committed a
great transgression, avoid painful rebirth. A small mass of iron, in
a mass, sinks; the same iron, in a greater mass but fashioned into a
bowl, floats."219 The Sūtra employs the expression, "The Srotaā-
panna . . . puts an end to suffering (duḥkhasyāntaṁ karoti).” What
does "the end of suffering" mean? Suffering beyond which there is
no more suffering. This means that the saint causes suffering to no
more arise. Or rather the end of suffering is Nirvāṇa. How can one
"make" Nirvāṇa? 220 By clearing away the obstacles to Nirvāṇa;
[these obstacles are the possession of defilements or upadhi]. In
the same way that one says, "Make some space! Make the house
fall down!" (ākāśam kuru maṇḍapam pātaya). There are persons
other than the Srotaäpanna who will be reborn seven times at the
most: the Pṛthagjana whose mind is matured. But there is no fixed
principle here: this Pṛthagjana can obtain Nirvāṇa in this life, or
in an intermediate existence, etc. Consequently we do not speak of
this here.
The abider in a state within whom no category of the
defilements abandoned through meditation is destroyed is, as we
have seen, a Saptakṛtvaḥparama.
34c-d. Delivered from three or four categories, destined for
two or three rebirths, he is a Kulaṁkula.221
The Srotaāpanna becomes a Kulamkula, "one who goes from
family to family," (1) from the point of view of the abandoning of
the defilements, through the abandoning of three or four
categories of defilements of Kāmadhātu; (2) from the point of
view of the indriyas or moral faculties, through the acquisition of
pure faculties opposed to these defilements; or (3) from the point
of view of existences, because there remain only two or threeThe Path and the Saints
more rebirths for him,222
In the Kārikā only two of these causes are mentioned. For,
from the fact that the Srotaäpanna abandons the defilements after
the acquisition of his state, one concludes, without one having to
say so, that he acquires the pure faculties opposed to these
defilements. But the number of rebirths is indicated: in fact, after
having acquired the state of Srotaäpanna, the saint is capable of
obtaining the quality of Sakṛdāgāmin, Anāgāmin, or Arhat, and the
number of his rebirths will be found, from this fact, to be either
more or less.
Why does the Srotaäpanna who abandons the fifth category
not become a Kulamkula?
Because, when the fifth category is abandoned, the sixth is also
certainly abandoned, and the saint therefore becomes a Sakṛdā-
gāmin. In fact here one category of defilement is not capable of
creating an obstacle to the acquisition of a state, as in the case of
one who is separated by only one more rebirth from Nirvãa (an
Ekavicika, vi.36a-c): the reason is that here the saint, by acquiring a
new state, does not pass into another sphere of existence or
Dhātu.223
The same abider
A Kulamkula is of two types:224 (1) a Devakulaṁkula, the saint
who, having transmigrated to two or three families among the
gods, attains Nirvāṇa in the same heaven or in another;225 and (2)
a Manuşyakulaṁkula, the saint who, having transmigrated to two
or three families among humans, attains Nirvāṇa in this Dvīpa or
in another.
35a-b. Who has conquered up to five categories, is a
candidate for the second.964 Chapter Six
The abider who has abandoned from one to five categories of
defilements is a candidate for the second state.
35c-d. Having destroyed the sixth category, he is a
Sakṛdāgāmin.
He obtains the second state. The Sakṛdāgāmin, "the once-re-
turner," having gone to be among the gods, returns to be among
humans, and has then no further rebirth: whence his name. The
Sūtra says that one becomes a Sakṛdāgāmin "by reason of the
weakness of lust, anger, and delusion," because only the three weak
categories of these defilmeents remain.226
This abider in the state of Sakṛdāgāmin,
36a-c. Having destroyed seven or eight categories, and
destined for one rebirth, is an Ekavīcika; he is also a
candidate for the third state.227
This Sakṛdāgāmin becomes an Ekavīcika for three reasons, (1)
because he abandons seven or eight categories of defilements; (2)
because he acquires the faculties opposed to these defilements; and
(3) because he has to be reborn only one more time.
Why does the only category that remains to him, the ninth,
create an obstacle to the acquisition of later states? Because the
acquisition of this state involves passage to another sphere [to
Rūpadhātu]. We have seen (iv.107) that actions create obstacles in
three circumstances: they hinder the acquisition of the Patience,
the quality of Anāgāmin, and the quality of Arhat. Now this holds
here for the defilements as for actions, for they refer to goingThe Path and the Saints 965
beyond the sphere where they should be manifested as the results
of retribution--with respect to actions--and of outflowing--with
respect to the defilements (ii.56).
Vici signifies interval, separation. Nirvāṇa is separated from
this saint by one rebirth; the state of Anāgāmin is separated from
this saint by one category of defilement: he is therefore termed an
Ekavicika.
Having abandoned seven or eight categories of defilements, he
is a candidate for the third state.
He who--previously freed, through the worldly path, from
three or four categories of defilements, or from seven or eight
categories of defilements [of Kāmadhātu]--, obtains a result [the
state of Srotaäpanna or Sakṛdāgāmin according to his case], is not a
Kulaṁkula and is not an Ekavīcika as long as he does not realize a
path superior to the state acquired: in fact as long as the pure
faculties, opposed to these categories of defilements, are absent in
him (vi.32b-c).
36d. He is an Anāgāmin by the destruction of the ninth
category.
This abider in a result, through the abandoning of the ninth
category of the defilements of Kāmadhātu--the weak-weak
defilements,--becomes an Anāgāmin, because he is no longer
reborn in Kāmadhātu. The Sūtra says that one becomes an
Anāgāmin through the abandoning of the five so-called avarabhāg-
iya bonds (v.65a-c): we get the number five by adding all the bonds
that the Anāgāmin is found to have abandoned (v.70a-b);
according to his situation he has, in the first stage, abandoned two
or three bonds.228
37a-c. He is a saint who "obtains Nirvāṇa in the interval,"
"by arising," "with effort," "without effort," and "by going
higher."229966 Chapter Six
"One who obtains Nirvāṇa in the interval" (antaraparinir-
vāyin) signifies one who attains Nirvāṇa in the intermediate
existence (iii.10, 12). The other terms are explained in the same
way: one who attains Nirvāṇa by being born (upapadyaparinir-
vāyin),230 and one [one who makes an effort] (säbhisaṁskārapari-
nirvāyin),231 and one who does not make any effort (anabhisaṁskā -
raparinirvāyin).
There are five types of Anāgāmins: an Antarāparinirvāyin, an
Upapadyaparinirvāyin, a Sābhisaṁskāraparinirvāyin, an Anabhi-
saṁskāraparinirvāyin, and an Ürdhvasrotas.
The first one, who obtains Nirvāṇa in the intermediate
existence, is one who obtains Nirvāṇa in an intermediate
existence, by attaining it in Rūpadhātu.
The second one obtains Nirvāṇa232 as soon as he is reborn,
soon,233 through sopadhisesa Nirvāṇa, Nirvāṇa with remnant; 234
and because he is energetic and because the path is spontaneous, he
realizes it by himself.
According to other masters, he obtains nirupadhisesa Nirvāṇa,
Nirvāṇa without remnant, exactly like the first Anāgāmin, that is,
having obtained the quality of Arhat, he obtains Nirvāṇa without
achieving his portion (=end) of life.
This opinion is false, for this second Anāgāmin does not
possess mastery relative to the abandoning of life, and this because
this mastery does not belong to one who possesses prāntakoțica-
turthadhyāna (99.10a, vii.41a-c); this type of Dhyana exists only
among humans of the three Dvipas; and this Anāgāmin is born in
Rūpadhātu,235
The third one, the Anāgāmin who obtains Nirvāṇa with effort,
obtains Nirvāṇa after having been born, without relaxing his
exercises, for he is energetic; with effort, for the Path is not
spontaneous. The fourth one, who obtains Nirvāṇa without effort,
obtains Nirvāṇa without effort, for he is not energetic, and the967
Path is not spontaneous. Such are the definitions of these two
saints according to the Vaibhāṣikas.236
The Path and the Saints
According to another opinion, the difference between the third
and the fourth is that the former obtains Nirvāṇa by a path having
for its object conditioned things, namely suffering, its origin, and
the Path; and the latter, by a path having for its object unconditi-
oned things, namely Extinction or the Third Noble Truth.
This opinion is not justified by reason of the consequences that
it implies: the distinction would hold for the first two types of
Anāgāmins also.
In the Sūtra (Samyukta, TD 2, p. 197a26), the Anāgāmin who
obtains Nirvāṇa without effort is listed before the Anāgāmin who
obtains it with effort. This order is justified.237 In fact, for the first,
the path is realized without abhisaṁskāra, being obtained without
effort; it is thus"spontaneous." But, for the second, the path is
realized by abhisaṁskara, being obtained with effort; therefore it is
unspontaneous.
For the Anāgāmin who obtains Nirvāṇa through birth, the
path is even more spontaneous, even stronger, and the latent
defilements (anuśayas) are even weaker.
The fifth, the Ürdhvasrotas,238 is the saint "for whom there is
srotas, that is to say, gati or movement, to the height." Srotas and
gati have the same meaning. He does not obtain Nirvāṇa where he
is reborn upon leaving Kāmadhātu, but he goes higher.
37c-d. When he combines his Dhyāna, he is an Akaniṣṭha-
ga,239
There are two types of Ürdhvasrotas: either he combines his
Dhyana and, as a consequence, he rises up to Akaniṣṭha Heaven
and obtains Nirvāṇa there; or he does not combine his Dhyāna
and, as a consequence, rises up to Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana,
Bhavagra. 240968
Chapter Six
38a-b. The Akaniṣṭhaga is either a Jumper, a Half-Jumper,
or One who Dies Everywhere.241
The saint who rises up to Akaniṣṭha in order to obtain Nirvāṇa
there is of three types: he is a Jumper (pluta), a Half-Jumper
(ardhapluta), or One who Dies Everywhere (sarvacyuta).
A Jumper is one who has, down here, combined his Dhyānas;
he has tasted the First Dhyana (viii.6) and, as a consequence,
having fallen from the three higher Dhyānas, is reborn among the
Brahmakāyikas. There, by the force of his previous enthusiasm, he
combines the Fourth Dhyana: also, dying from among the
Brahmakāyikas, he is reborn among the Akaniṣṭhas. As he does
not immerse himself in any of the fourteen intermediate heavens
between the first heaven of Rūpadhātu (=the Brahmakāyikas) and
the last one (Akaniṣṭha), he is called a Jumper.
A Half-Jumper is the saint who, passing beyond any one
place,242 enters the Akaniṣṭhas after having been reborn among
the Suddhāvāsas (vi.43a-b).
An Āryan is never reborn among the Mahābrahmas, because
this heaven is a place of heresy: one considers Mahābrahmā as the
creator there;243 and because only one leader can be found there: an
Aryan would be superior to Mahābrahmā there. 244
One who Dies Everywhere transmigrates through all of the
other heavens, with the exception of the Mahābrahmas, before he
enters into Akaniṣṭha.
An Anāgāmin never takes up two existences in the same place
of rebirth, because he goes in successive order. Therefore his
quality of Anāgāmin, “a non-returner", is perfect: he is never
reborn, either in a place lower than where he was once born, or in
this same place.
Such is the Ürdhvasrotas who has combined his Dhyāna,
namely an Akaniṣṭhaga.
738b. The other is a Bhavägraga.
The Path and the Saints 969
The Ürdhvasrotas who has not combined his Dhyāna goes up
to Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana, or Bhavagra. Tasting the other
concentrations (samāpatti), he is reborn in all other places, but he
does not enter the Šuddhāvāsas; traversing the Ārūpyas he arrives
at Bhavāgra and there he obtains Nirvāṇa. In fact this saint is
essentially dedicated to absorption, whereas the Akaniṣṭhaga is
essentially dedicated to insight.
We think--even though the authors of the Sastras have not
decided this point--that the two types of Ūrdhvasrotas can obtain
Nirvāṇa "in the course of the way," before arriving at Akaniṣṭha or
Bhavagra. The quality of Akaniṣṭhaparama and Bhavāgraparama
only imply the non-production of a new existence after the saint
has obtained Akaniṣṭha Heaven or Bhavågra, not a birth in these
same heavens; the same way that the Srotaāpanna, destined to be
reborn at the most seven times (saptakṛtvaḥparama), can be
reborn less than seven times.245
There are five types of Anāgāmins who go to Rūpadhātu and
attain Nirvāṇa there: an Antarāparinirvāyin, and Upapadyapari-
nirvāyin, a Sābhisaṁskāraparinirvāyin, an Anabhisaṁskārapari-
nirvāyin, and an Ūrdhvasrotas.
38c. Another, who goes to Ārūpyadhātu, is of four types.
There is another Anägāmin, the Ārūpyopaga, "one who goes to
Ārūpyadhātu and who attains Nirvāṇa there.” Being detached
from Rūpadhātu, and dying here, he is reborn among beings in
Ārūpyadhātu. This Anāgāmin is only of four types, Upapadyapari-970 Chapter Six
nirvāyin, etc., for the intermediate state (and the Antarāparinir-
vāyin) does not exist in the births of Ārūpyadhātu.
Therefore there are six Anāgāmins, the five named above and
the Ārūpyaga, not taking into account the different types of
Ārūpyaga.
38d. Another, who obtains Nirvāṇa here.
Another obtains Nirvāṇa right here, the saint who obtains
Nirvāṇa in this existence (vi.41a). This is the seventh Anāgāmin.
39a-b. It is said that there are nine saints going to
Rūpadhātu, by making a threefold distinction among the
three.
Three Anāgāmins, each divided into three categories, make
nine Anāgāmins, because they go to Rūpadhātu.
What are these three? The Antaräparinirvāyin, the Upapadya-
parinirvayin and the Ürdhvasrotas.
How are the three categories distinguished? 1. According to
the comparisons of the Sūtra, there are three Antarāparinirvāyins
who obtain Nirvāṇa, the first, quickly, the second, not quickly, and
the third, after a long time; 2. with respect to the Upapadyapari-
nirvāyin, one should distinguish the Upapadyaparinirvāyin
properly so called, the Sābhisaṁskäraparinirvãyin, and the
Anabhisaṁskāraparinirvāyin: all three, obtaining Nirvāṇa after
having been reborn, are Upapadyaparinirvāyins; 3. with respect to
the Ürdhvasrotas, one should distinguish the Jumper, the
Half-Jumper, and the One who Dies Everywhere.
Or rather one can say that these three Anāgāmins are each
divided into three categories accordingly as Nirvāṇa is acquired by
them quickly, not quickly, or after a long time.The Path and the Saints 971
39c-d. Their differences are due to the difference of actions,
faculties, and defilements.
The distinction of these three Anāgāmins and of these nine
Anāgāmins, is due to the differences of their actions, their moral
faculties, and their defilements.
i. The three Anāgāmins differ (a) from the point of view of
their accumulated actions (iv.120) which should be rewarded either
in an intermediate existence246 or in the existence immediately to
come: [after having been reborn], or later (iv.50b); (b) from the
point of view of the activity of their defilements, which are, in this
order, weak, medium, or strong; and (c) from the point of view of
their moral faculties, which are strong, medium, or weak.
ii. Each of the three Anāgāmins is of three categories: (a) from
the point of view of their defilements, as above (weak-weak,
weak-medium, weak-strong for the three categories of Antarăpa-
rinirvāyin, etc.), (b) from the point of view of their faculties
(which are strong-strong, etc.); and (c) from the point of view of
their actions also with respect to the three Ürdhvasrotas: the
actions "to be rewarded later" differ among the Jumper, the
Half-Jumper, and the One who Dies Everywhere.
There are therefore nine categories of Anăgămin by reason of
the differences of their actions, their defilements and their
faculties.
How does the Sūtra teach that there are seven realms of rebirth
for good persons (satpuruşagati)?972
Chapter Six
40a-b. In not establishing any distinction among the
Ürdhvasrotas, there are seven realms of rebirth for the
good.247
An Ürdhvasrotas is a saint who has the characteristic of
"flowing" towards the heights.
This Sūtra, the Gatisūtra (iii. 12), by not distinguishing the
categories of Jumper, Half-Jumper, and One who Dies Every-
where, teaches seven realms of rebirth for good persons, namely
three Antarāparinirvāyins, three Upapadyaparinirvāyins,--in all
six realms of rebirth,--and the realm of Ürdhvasrotas, the seventh.
Why are only these the realms of rebirth for good persons?
Why not consider the other realms of rebirth of the Śaikṣas, such
as the realms of the Srotaäpanna and the Sakṛdāgāmin, as such?248
Those who are in the seven realms of rebirth did only good and
did not do evil; having arrived at these realms of rebirth, there is
no turning back. Now three characteristics do not exist among the
other Śaiksas:
40c-d. By reason of the cultivation of good and the
non-cultivation of evil, and of the non-returning from
whence they have come.2
Only these seven realms of rebirth are the realms of rebirth for
good persons.
It is true that the Sūtra says, "What is a good person
(satpuruşa)? One who is endowed with the Right Views of a Saikṣa
"250 It expresses itself in this manner because the Srotaäpanna
and the Sakṛdāgāmin are in fact good persons from a certain point
of view: 1. They have acquired the discipline that makes impossi-
ble (iv.33a-b) the committing of the five types of transgressions,
[killing, stealing, forbidden sexuality, lying, and alcohol];251 2. theyPATINGA KËSHILA
The Path and the Saints
have abandoned, in a general manner, their bad defilements, that
is, the defilements of Kāmadhātu (v.19, 52).252 But here the Sūtra
of the Saptasatpuruṣagati refers to the saints who are absolutely
good persons.253
It happens that an Aryan, who became an Aryan in the first
birth through the acquisition of the state of Srotaapanna or
Sakṛdāgāmin, obtains in his following existence the state of
Anāgāmin. This Anāgāmin is called a parivṛttajanmā anāgāmin
("one who becomes an Anāgāmin by rebirth [in Kāmadhātu]").
The question is posed whether this Anāgāmin is of the five types,
Antaräparinirvāyin, etc.254
41a-b. The Aryan who obtains the state of Anāgāmin after
having been reborn in Kāmadhātu, does not go to another
sphere.
This Āryan, once he has obtained the state of Anāgāmin,
obtains Nirvana in this same existence (vi.38b), [by reason of the
intensity of his disgust at the extreme suffering of Kāmadhātu].
But the Āryan who obtains the state of Anāgāmin after having
been reborn in Rūpadhātu, goes sometimes to Arūpyadhātu as a
Bhavagraparana Ürdhvasrota.
Objection: But Śakra expresses himself thus: "If at the end I
should fall, may I be reborn among the well-known gods under the
name of Akaniṣṭhas!" This contradicts your thesis.255
The Vaibhāṣikas answer: Śakra expresses himself in this way
because he does not know the Dharma.256 And, if the Blessed One
does not correct him, it is with the intention of encouraging
him.257974
Chapter Six
41c-d. This Āryan and one who is born in a higher sphere,
are incapable of modifying their faculties, and are incapable
of falling away 258
The Aryan who has become an Anāgāmin by being reborn in
Kāmadhātu and one who is born in a higher sphere are not even
capable of modifying their faculties; how could they fall away
(parihāṇi)?
Why not admit a modification of faculties and a falling away in
the case of the Aryan who has entered into Rūpadhātu or
Ārūpyadhātu?
Because neither a modification of faculties nor a falling away
occur in the case of these saints.
Why is this?
Because, from the fact of their stay in two existences, their
faculties (prajñā, etc.) have acquired an advanced state of
maturity;259 and because the saint has acquired a personality
favorable to the Path.
Why is not a Śaikṣa not detached from Kāmadhātu, that is a
Srotaāpanna and a Sakṛdāgāmin, an Antarāparinirvāyin? That is,
why does he not obtain Nirvāṇa in the intermediate existence
which follows his death?
Since he has not mastered the Path, this saint cannot manifest
it; and because these latent defilements (anuśaya) are not
extremely weak. Such is our answer.
The Vaibhāṣikas answer: Because it is very difficult to leave
Kāmadhātu. In fact, in order to obtain Nirvāṇa, the Śaikṣaṁ
question should do many things: 1. abandon the bad defilements,The Path and the Saints 975
that is to say, the defilements of Kämadhātu; 2. abandon the
neutral defilements, that is, those of Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu
(v.19); 3. acquire three results in the case of the Srotaāpanna, two
results in the case of the Sakṛdāgāmin;--whereas a detached being,
that is, an Anāgāmin only has to obtain one more result; and 4.
pass beyond the three Dhātus. Now a saint, in his intermediate
existence, is not capable of doing this.260
We have seen that "combining his Dhyānas, he is an Akaniş-
tha” (vi.37d). What Dhyāna is first combined?261
42a. First, combination of the Fourth Dhyāna.
Because it is the most powerful of the absorptions and the best
of the easy paths (sukhā pratipad, vi.66a). This is how one
proceeds.
[According to the Vaibhāṣikas,] the Arhat or the Anāgāmin
enters the Fourth Dhyāna, pure262 and prolonged, that is,
constituting a series of thoughts.263 He leaves it, and returns to the
same Fourth Dhyāna, but impure and prolongued. He continues in
this way, diminishing gradually the number of thoughts of each
pure, impure, and pure Dhyāna, until, having entered a pure
Dhyana of two thoughts, he leaves it in order to enter an impure
Dhyana of two thoughts, which will be followed by a pure Dhyāna
of two thoughts. This constitutes the preparatory stage for the
combination.
42b. The combination is achieved through the combining of
moments.
The Vaibhāṣikas say: When, following a pure thought, an976 Chapter Six
impure thought is called up, and, following this impure thought, a
pure thought is clled up: then, through the combining of an
impure thought and two pure thoughts, the combination of the
Dhyāna is achieved. The first two moments are similar to the
Irresistible Path (vi.28a), the third to the Path of Deliverance.
Having thus combined the Fourth Dhyāna, by the force of this
combined Dhyana, the saint also combines the other Dhyānas.
The combination takes place first in Kāmadhātu; later, in the
case of falling away, the saint combines these in Rūpadhātu (see
above, p. 968).
In our opinion, the combination of a single, unique impure
moment with two pure moments, is impossible to everyone, with
the exception of the Buddha. Consequently the combination of a
Dhyāna is achieved when one enters, for the period of time that
one wants, into three prolongued Dhyānas, pure, impure, and
pure.
To what end does the saint combine his Dhyānas?
42c-d. With a view to arising, to bliss and also through fear
of the defilements.
It is for three reasons that the saint combines his Dhyānas: (1)
the Anāgāmin of sharp faculties, with a view to a rebirth among
the Śuddhāvāsas and with a view to happiness in this life;264 the
Anāgāmin of weak faculties, also through fear of the defilements,
so that he may avoid falling away by holding the absorption of
disgust at a distance (viii.6); (2) the Arhat of sharp faculties, with a
view to happiness here below; the Arhat of weak faculties, also
through fear of the defilements, so that he may avoid falling away.***
The Path and the Saints 977
Why are there five types of birth among the Suddhāvāsas? 265
The cultivation of the combination of the Fourth Dhyana,
described above,
43a-b. As it is fivefold, there are five births or types of
existence among the Suddhāvāsas.
The cultivation of the combination is fivefold, weak, medium,
strong, stronger, and strongest.
In the weak cultivation, one calls up three thoughts,266 one
pure, one impure, and one pure; in the second cultivation, six
thoughts;267 in the third, the fourth, and the fifth cultivations,
nine, twelve, and fifteen thoughts.
The five births are, in this order, the result of these five
cultivations. They are produced by the force of the impure
moments included in these cultivations.
According to others,268 the five births take place by reason of
the predominance of the different faculties: Avrhas, by the
predominance of faith... Akaniṣṭhas by the predominance of
Prajna
43c-d. The Anāgāmin who has acquired extinction is
considered a Kāyasākṣin. 269
One who is in possession of the absorption of extinction
(saṁjñāveditanirodhasamāpatti) is called one who has acquired
extinction.
As the Anāgāmin, whichever one he may be, has acquired
extinction--as he has, in his body, seen the absence of thought and
immediately experienced (sākṣātkaroti) a dharma similar to978 Chapter Six
Nirvāṇa, namely the Absorption of Extinction--he is called a
Kāyasākṣin, a bodily witness.
How does he immediately experience by the body alone?
Because, in the absence of thought, this immediate perception
takes place dependent on the body. [Such is the theory of the
Vaibhāṣikas.]
But this is how the Sautrāntikas would explain this. When the
saint leaves the Absorption of Extinction, from the moment when
he thinks, "Oh! This absorption of extinction is calm like
Nirvāṇa!", he acquires a calmness of his conscious body [that is, of
the body in which the consciousness has arisen again] never
previously acquired. In this way, he directly perceives by the body
the calmness [of extinction], and this by two acts of perception: in
the first, during the absorption there is the acquisition (prāpti) of a
body conforming to the extinction, and in the second, upon leaving
the absorption, there is a consciousness which becomes conscious
of the state of the body. Perception or experience, sākṣātkriyā, is
the fact of making present (pratyakṣīkāra). There is sākṣātkriyā
when one ascertains the calmness of the body which has again
become conscious; and, from this ascertaining, it results that this
calmness has been acquired while the body was non-conscious. 270
According to the Sūtra, there are eighteen Šaikṣas.271 Why is
not the Kāyasākṣin mentioned as one of the types of Saikṣa?
Because the quality of Kāyasākṣin is not one of the causes of the
quality of Saiksa.
What are the causes of this second quality?
They are the three śikṣas, learnings or disciplines, adhiśīlam,
adhicittam, and adhiprajñām,272 which constitute the Path, and
the result of these three śikṣas, namely disconnection (i.6a, ii.55d).
It is by reason of the diversity of the fiksas and of their result that
one distinguishes the Saikṣas. Now the Absorption of Extinction is
not a śikṣa, not being a path of abandoning, nor a result of śikṣa,
not being disconnection.273 Consequently a saint, merely by virtue1
The Path and the Saints 979
of the fact that he possesses the Absorption of Extinction, is not
called a type of Śaikṣa.
We have roughly enumerated the Anāgāmins: "There are five
who go to Rūpadhātu," "another, who goes to Arūpyadhātu, is of
four types; another obtains Nirvāṇa here" (vi.38c-d); but, in
greater detail, one arrives at a higher number as an examination of
one type of Anāgāmin, the first type, the Anāgāmin who obtains
Nirvāṇa in the intermediate state (Antarāparinirvāyin) will show.
The Antaraparinirvāyin is (1) from the point of view of his
faculties, of three types, of sharp, medium, and weak faculties; (2)
from the point of view of his sphere (bhūmi), of four types,
accordingly as he has for his support a certain Dhyāna [this refers
to an Anāgāmin who goes to Rūpadhātu]; (3) from the point of
view of his family (gotra), of six types: a Parihāṇadharman (one
who can fall away), a Cetanādharman (one who can, at will, put an
end to his existence), a Anurakṣaṇādharman (one who can
preserve himself), a Sthitākampya (one who cherishes deliver-
ance), a Prativedhanādharman (one who can penetrate the state of
Arhat at will), and an Akopyadharman (one who has immovable
deliverance of mind) (vi.57c-d); (4) from the point of view of
place, of six types: the places towards which he shall enter as an
intermediate being, are the sixteen²74 heavens, from the Brahma-
kāyikas to the Akaniṣṭhas; (5) from the point of view of his
detachment from the different spheres, of thirty-six types: the
Antaraparinirvāyin can be 1. bound by all the bonds of Rūpadhātu;
2-9. he can be detached from one category... from eight categories
of defilements of the First Dhyāna; 10. he can be bound by all the
bonds of the Second Dhyāna... We thus have four groups of nine
Antarāparinirvāyins.
We do not count the saint delivered from the ninth category of
defilements of the Fourth Dhyana, who is bound by all the bonds
of Ārūpyadhātu: since this refers to the Antaraparinirvāyin, and so980 Chapter Six
to an Anāgāmin "who goes to Rūpadhātu," since intermediate
existence does not exist above Rūpadhātu.
Therefore, by taking into consideration the different distinc-
tions of place, gotras, detachment, and faculties, one obtains the
total of 2,592 types of Antaräparinirvāyins.
For each place [for example Brahmapurohita], there are six
gotras. For each of these gotras, there are nine saints: one who is
bound by all the bonds... and one who is detached from the bonds
with respect to the eight categories of defilements: this makes six
groups of nines, or fifty-four. If one multiplies this number by the
number of places, that is, by sixteen, then we have eight hundred
and sixty-four. By taking into consideration the difference in their
faculties, that is, three times eight hundred and sixty-four, we then
have two thousand five hundred and ninty-two.
With a view to obtaining a uniform distribution of nine saints
through Dhyāna, the saint who is detached from the ninth
category of a lower Dhyana is considered to be bound by all the
bonds of a higher Dhyāna.
As for the Antarāparinirvāyin, so too for the others, the
Upapadyaparinirvāyin . and the Ūrdhvasrotas. We have
therefore, for the Anāgāmins who go to Rūpadhātu, five times two
thousand five hundred and ninty-two for a total of twelve thousand
nine hundred and sixty. In this same way one could calculate the
number of types of Anāgāmins who go to Ārūpyadhātu.
44a-b. Up to the moment when he destroys the eighth part
of Bhavāgra, he is a candidate for the quality of Arhat.
We are speaking of the Anāgāmin. From the moment when he
is detached from the first category of the defilements of the First
Dhyāna, up to the moment when he abandons the eighth category
of the defilements of Bhavägra (=Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana),
the Anāgāmin is a candidate for the state of Arhat.ka
The Path and the Saints 981
44c. Also in the ninth path of abandoning.
In the path of abandoning (=the Irresistible Path, iv.28a) which
brings about the abandoning of the ninth category of defilements
of Bhavägra, he is again a candidate for the state of Arhat.
44d. This path is similar to a diamond.275
This ninth path, which breaks all of the latent defilements
(anuśayas) is called the absorption similar to a diamond (Vajro-
pamasamadhi). In truth, it does not break all of the latent
defilements because many are already broken: but it has the power
to break all of them, being the most powerful of all the paths of
abandoning (=the Irresistible Path).
There are many types of Vajropamasamadhi.
The ascetic can produce it by entering into the different states
of absorption in any one of the nine stages, anāgamya, dhyānān-
tara, the Four Dhyānas, or three Ārūpyas.
i. Produced in anāgamya,276 there are eight Vajropamasamād-
his associated with each of the four aspects of the Consecutive
Knowledge of suffering and with each of the four aspects of the
Consecutive Knowledge of origin, these Consecutive Knowledges
bearing respectively on suffering and origin in Bhavāgra (vii.13a).
Eight Vajropamasamādhis are associated with each of the four
aspects of the Dharma Knowledge of extinction, and with each of
the four aspects of the Dharma Knowledge of the Path. [Accord-
ing to the principle elucidated in vii.9].
Four Vajropamasamādhis associated with each of the four982 Chapter Six
aspects of the Consecutive Knowledge of Extinction bear on the
First Dhyāna; and so on until: four Vajropamasamadhis associated
with each of the four aspects of the Consecutive Knowledge of
Extinction bear on Bhavāgra.
Four Vajropamasamādhis are associated with each of the four
aspects of the Consecutive Knowledge of the Path, because the
Consecutive Knowledge of the Path has a universal sphere. [There
is no reason to distinguish the spheres, as in the case for the
Consecutive Knowledge of Extinction].
We have therefore, in the sphere of anagamya, fifty-two
Vajropamasamadhis by reason of the distinction of the aspects and
the objects of the Knowledges and the Consecutive Knowledges.
ii. The same calculation holds with respect to the Vajropama-
samadhis produced in the other spheres up to and including the
Fourth Dhyāna.
iii. For the Vajropamasamādhis produced in the first three
Ārūpyas, we have, in this order, twenty-eight, twenty-four, and
twenty.
1. Dharma Knowledge is absent there; 2. the Consecutive
Knowledge having the extinction of a lower sphere for its object is
also absent there (viii.21); 3. the Consecutive Knowledge exists
there having for its object the Path which is opposed to a lower
sphere, by reason of the quality of cause which the paths have
among themselves (ii.52c).
[Certain Ābhidhārmikas maintain that] the Consecutive
Knowledge of the Path does not bear on all the spheres at one and
the same time, but that one must distinguish the different spheres,
as for the Consecutive Knowledge of Extinction: in this theory,
one must add twenty-eight to the calculation of the Vajropama-
samadhis which are produced in anāgamya, etc. For the Ārūpyas,
we have forty, thirty-two and twenty-four.
By taking into consideration the families (gotras, vi.58c) and
the faculties, we obtain even higher figures.277HOS BARS
Wiggl
The Path and the Saints 983
We have seen that the ninth category of Bhavagra is aban-
doned by Vajropamasamadhi.
44d-45a. With the acquisiton of the destruction of this
category, there is the knowledge of destruction.278
At the moment when the saint acquires the destruction of the
ninth category, there arises the knowledge of destruction
(kṣayajñāna). Immediately after Vajropamasamādhi, the last path
of abandoning (=the Irresistible Path), there arises the last Path of
Deliverance. This is why this Path of Deliverance, arising at the
same time as the acquisition of the destruction of all the vices
(āsravas), is the first knowledge of the destruction which arises; it
is thus called the kṣayajñāna [by eliminating the middle word:
kṣayaprathamajñāna].
45b. Then the saint is an Aśaikṣa, an Arhat.279
When this knowledge has arisen, the candidate for the quality
of Arhat has acquired the state of Aśaikṣa, the state of Arhat: he no
longer has to apply himself (śikṣ) with a view to another state; he
is therefore an Aśaikṣa. For the same reason, having achieved his
task with respect to himself, he is worthy (arhattva) to do good for
others; he is worthy to receive offerings from all beings who are
still subject to desire.
From the fact that one defines an Arhat as an Aśaikṣa, it results
that the seven other saints, four candidates and three abiders, are
Śaikṣas.
Why are they Śaikṣas? Because it is their nature to be always
applying themselves to the three śikṣās280 with a view to the984 Chapter Six
destruction of their vices. These three fiksās, namely adhiśīlam
śikṣā,28¹ adhicittam śikṣā,282 and adhiprajñām śikṣā,283 are by their
nature morality, absorption (samādhi), and speculative knowledge
(Prajna).
But, according to this definition, can a Pṛthagjana be a Šaikṣa?.
No, because he does not exactly discern the Truths; and because
he is susceptible to completely losing the śikṣās that he has
acquired.284
This is why, with a view to affirming that he who exclusively
applies himself is a Śaikṣa, and to deny that he who abandons the
śikṣā is a Śaikṣa, the Sūtra repeats [the words of the Blessed One],
"Oh Śivaka,285 he who applies himself to that to which he should
apply himself, him alone do I call a Saikṣa."2
But how can one say that the Āryan, when he finds himself in a
normal state and not in absorption, has it for his nature to apply
himself?
By reason of his intention; as the traveller who stops for a
moment is nevertheless still a traveller. Or because the possessions
of morality, absorption and prajñā, remain attached to him even
when he is in a normal state.
What are the dharmas that are called Saikṣa? 287
The pure conditioned dharmas of the Saikṣa. So too the
dharmas that are called afaiksa are the pure conditioned dharmas
of the Aśaikṣa.
Why is not Nirvāṇa, the unconditioned, a śaikṣa?288
Because both the Aśaikṣa and the Pṛthagjana are endowed with
it. The Prthagjana is endowed with a Nirvāṇa obtained through a
worldly path.289
it.
Why is not Nirvāṇa aśaikṣa?
Because both the Śaikṣa and the Pṛthagjana are endowed with***
The Path and the Saints 985
The four candidates and the four abiders are the eight saints, or
äryapudgala: from "one who is in the progress of realizing the
state of Srotaäpanna", and Srotaäpanna, up to "one who is in the
progress of realizing the state of Arhat," and the Arhat.
Eight in considering their names, but in fact, only five, namely
the first candidate, that is to say, the person who is in the Path of
the Seeing of the Truths, and the four abiders. In fact, the last three
candidates are confused with the first three abiders.
This should be understood of the case in which the ascetic
obtains the four states in sequential order. In fact, the bhuyovitar-
āga and the kāmavītarāga, who have respectively abandoned six
and nine categories of defilements of Kāmadhātu before entering
into the Path of Seeing, are, within the Path of Seeing, candidates
for the states of Sakṛdāgāmin and Anāgāmin, without being
Srotaāpannas and Sakṛdāgāmins. Here the candidate for a higher
state is not confused with the abider in a lower state (vi.30).
We have said that the Path of Meditation is of two types,
worldly or impure, transworldly or pure (vi.lc-d). Through what
type of Path of Meditation does the Saikṣa detach himself from the
different spheres?
45c-d. Detachment from Bhavagra is through the trans-
worldly path.2⁹0
And not through the worldly path. In fact. (1) there is no
worldly path higher than Bhavägra [one detaches oneself from a
sphere by the worldly path of a higher sphere; now Bhavägra is the
highest sphere]; (2) the worldly path of a certain sphere cannot be
opposed to this same sphere, because the defilements of this986 Chapter Six
sphere attach themselves to this path.
Since it is a given that one defilement attached itself to a path,
this defilement cannot be expelled by this same path; and since it is
a given also that a path is opposed to a defilement, it is certain that
this defilement does not attach itself to this path.
45d. There is detachment from the other spheres in two
ways.
One detaches oneself from the eight other spheres, with the
exception of Bhavägra, either through the worldly path or through
the transworldly path.
46a-b. For the Aryan who detaches himself through the
worldly path, his acquisitions of the disconnections are of
two types.2⁹1
The Aryan who detaches himself from the first eight spheres
[Kāmadhātu, the Four Dhyānas, and three Arūpyas] obtains
disconnection from the defilements of these spheres through the
worldly path; in other words, he acquires the präāpti or possession
of the pratisaṁkhyānirodha of these defilements (ii.55a).
This possession is worldly and transworldly.
46c. According to other masters, he becomes detached
through the transworldly path, in the same way.
Some other masters say that in the case also where the Ãryan
becomes detached through the transworldly path, his acquisition of
disconnection is twofold.
Why is this?LA PER
The Path and the Saints 987
46d. For, even when pure disconnection is lost, the Āryan is
not filled with the defilements.292
Let us admit an instance, [say these other masters,] when the
Āryan becomes detached through the transworldly or Āryan Path;
he then does not have worldly possession of disconnection. In this
hypothesis, there may be an Āryan who, through the Āryan Path,
becomes detached from Ākiñcanyāyatana; who then, in a Dhyāna
(according to vi.61c-d), transforms, that is, sharpens (samcarati)
his faculties (indriya). This Āryan--by the fact that he abandons
the paths previously acquired, [namely, the paths of Ārūpya in
relation to his weak faculties], by the fact that he only possesses
the path of the state of Anägāmin, in relation to his sharp
faculties--will no longer be in possession of disconnection from the
defilements of Ārūpyadhātu; and, having lost this disconnection,
he will be filled with these defilements.
47a-b. But, if he is not filled with these defilements, he is
like a saint half delivered from Bhavägra, like a person who
is reborn above.
This Āryan does not have worldly acquisition of disconnection;
nevertheless this Āryan is not filled with the said defilements.
So too, the saint who is delivered from half of the categories of
defilements of Bhavagra, certainly does not possess a worldly
acquisition of disconnection from these categories, since only the
transworldly or Āryan Path destroys the defilements of Bhavagra.
Let us suppose that this saint, sharpening his faculties in a Dhyāna,
abandons the transworldly acquisition of disconnection from these
defilements of Bhavagra: you yourself recognize, nevertheless, that
he is not filled with these defilements.
So too, a Pṛthagjana is born above the First Dhyāna, in the
Second Dhyāna, etc. By the fact that he passes into the Second988 Chapter Six
Dhyāna (changing his bhūmi, bhūmisaṁcāra, vi.21c), he loses the
acquisition of disconnection from the defilements of Kāmadhātu;
nevertheless you admit that he is not filled with these defile-
ments.293
[Therefore the argument of the other masters is not demon-
strative.]294
By means of what spheres does one obtain detachment from
the different spheres?
47c-d. One becomes detached from all the spheres by means
of pure anagamya.295
From all the spheres up to Bhavagra.2⁹6
When the ascetic becomes detached from a lower sphere in a
sāmantaka (viii.22), should one admit that all of the Paths of
Deliverance arise from the sāmantaka, as is the case for the
Irresistible Paths? 297
No.
Why is this?
48a-b. At the detachment from the Three Dhātus, the last
Path of Deliverance arises either from the Dhyana, or from
a samantaka.
There are nine spheres of arising: Kāmadhātu, the Four
Dhyānas and the Four Ārūpyas (viii.1).
When one triumphs over the Three Dhātus,--that is, when one
becomes detached from Kāmadhātu, from the First Dhyana, orThe Path and the Saints 989
from the Second Dhyāna,--it is with a ninth Path of Deliverance
which arises either from a samantaka or from the Dhyāna itself.
48c. Above, it does not arise from a samantaka.298
With respect to the higher spheres, the last Path of Deliver-
ance always arises from the fundamental absorption (samāpatti),
never from the preliminary stage or threshold of this absorption.
In fact, after the Fourth Dhyāna, the fundamental absorption and
the preliminary absorption have the same sensation, the sensation
of indifference. In the spheres of the first Dhyānas, the two
sensations differ: ascetics with weak faculties are not capable of
entering, in the ninth Path of Deliverance, the fundamental
absorption, for the transformation of their sensation is difficult.299
Therefore the ninth Path of Deliverance of detachment from the
first three spheres arises from preliminary absorption.300
We have seen that the ascetic can detach himself from all the
spheres through the pure paths practiced in anāgamya (vi.47c). It
is not said that the same power belongs to the pure paths
cultivated in spheres other than anāgamya.
48c-d. Through the eight pure paths, he triumphs over his
sphere, and over a higher sphere.301
Through the pure path cultivated in eight spheres,--the
Dhyānas, dhyānāntara, and three Ārūpyas,--the ascetic detaches
himself from the sphere in which he finds himself and from
higher spheres; but not from a lower sphere because he is already
detached from it.
It is established that the transworldly paths, the Irresistible990 Chapter Six
Path as well as the Path of Deliverance, proceed from aspects of
the Truths (satyākārapravṛtta, vii.13a), that is to say, from seeing
the dharmas as impermanent, suffering, etc.
49a-c. The worldly paths, paths of deliverance and paths of
abandoning, have respectively the aspects of calm, etc.;
coarse, etc.
The worldly paths of deliverance (the Path of Deliverance)
have the aspects of calm, etc., that is, seeing their objects as calm,
etc. The worldly paths of abandoning (the Irresistible Path) have
the aspect of coarse, etc.
Respectively,
49d. They have for their objects the higher sphere, and the
lower sphere.
The paths of deliverance can302 see the higher spheres (or
higher places, sthāna) as calm, excellent, and as definitive
liberation. The paths of abandoning see the lower spheres as
coarse,303 bad, as a thick wall: as coarse, because it is not calm,
entailing a great effort;304 as bad, because it is not excellent,
because it is odious as well as presenting the greatest incapacity to
the body and the mind; and as a thick wall, because, by means of
this lower sphere, it is impossible to escape from this sphere, as if
it were a wall.
The aspects of calm, excellent, definitive liberation, are the
opposite.
Having terminated this accessory question, let us return to our
subject.Re
The Path and the Saints
What arises immediately after the Knowledge of Destruction?
50a-b. When he is Immovable, after his Knowledge of
Destruction, there is the consciousness of non-
on-arising.
If the Arhat is of the class of the Immovable Ones (akopyad-
harman, vi.56), immediately after his Knowledge of Destruction
(kṣayajñāna, vi.45a) there arises the consciousness of the future
non-arising of the vices or asravas (anutpādajñāna, vi.67a, viii.lb,
4c).
50b-c. In the contrary case, there is either the Knowledge of
Destruction or the "seeing of the Aśaikṣas."305
If the Arhat is not of this class, then after his Knowledge of
Destruction there arises either the same Knowledge of Destruc-
tion, or the Right Views of the Aśaikṣas; but not the Knowledge of
Non-Arising: for, as the ascetic who is not immovable can fall
away (vi.56), he cannot produce the Knowledge of Non-Arising.
Is this to say that the Immovable Arhat does not possess the
Views of the Aśaikṣa?
50d. These Views belong to all the Arhats.
In the Immovable Arhat, sometimes the Knowledge of
Non-Arising succeeds Knowledge of Non-Arising, sometimes the
Right Views of the Aśaikṣa.306992 Chapter Six
We have spoken of the four states or results. Of what are they
the results?
They are the results of śrāmaṇya or "the religious life."307
What is framanya?
51a. Śrāmaṇya is the immaculate path.
Śrāmaṇya is the pure path. By this path, by śrāmaṇya, one
becomes a Śramaṇa, that is to say a person who calms or who
makes cease (famayati) the defilements. ( Dhammapada, 265).
Therefore it is said in the Sūtra (Madhyama, TD 1, p. 725c4),
"He is called a Śramaṇa because he calms all of the types of
dharmas of transgression, bad, favorable to transmigration,
producing rebirth . . . old age and death."
The Prthagjana is not a true Śramaṇa (paramārthaśramaṇa)
because he does not calm the defilements in an absolute manner.
51b. His result is both conditioned and unconditioned.308
The results of frāmaṇya are conditioned and unconditioned
dharmas.309 The Sūtra says that these results are four in number.310
On the other hand,
51c. There are eighty-nine.
What are these eighty-nine?
51d. The paths of deliverance with their destructions.
We have eight Irresistible Paths, followed by eight Paths of
Deliverance, for the abandoning of the defilement to be abandonedThe Path and the Saints 993
through seeing (=the sixteen moments of comprehension, vi.27a).
We have eighty-one Irresistible Paths for the abandoning of the
defilements abandoned through meditation, namely nine paths
through which one abandons the nine categories of defilements of
each of the nine spheres (Kāmadhātu . . . Bhavāgra), and also as
many for the Paths of Deliverance.
The eighty-nine Irresistible Paths constitute śrāmaṇya.
The eighty-nine Paths of Deliverance are the conditioned
results of śrāmanya, being outflowing results (nişyandaphala,
ii.56c-d) and virile results (puruşakāraphala, ii.56d) of śrāmaṇya.
The abandoning or pratisamkhyanirodha of the eighty-nine
categories of defilements is the unconditioned result of śramanya,
being the virile result of śrāmaṇya (ii.55d, p. 278).³¹¹
We have therefore eighty-nine results of främaṇya.
But, if this theory is correct, is there not reason to complete the
teaching of the Buddha?312
No. The results are indeed eighty-nine in number;
52a-b. But four results are established for five reasons
which are encountered therein.
The Blessed One defined as results the stages (avasthā) of the
path of abandoning in which some five causes are encountered.
Such is the opinion of the School. What are these five causes?
52c-53b. In a result, there is the abandoning of a previous
path, the acquisition of another path, the addition of
destructions, the acquisition of a group of eight knowledges,
and the acquisition of sixteen aspects.994 Chapter Six
That is to say: (1-2) there is the abandoning of the path of the
candidate, and the acquisition of the path of the result; (3) the
acquisition of a single possession of abandoning in its entirety³13
(v.70); (4) the acquisition at one and the same time of eight
Knowledges, the fourfold Dharma Knowledge, and the fourfold
Consecutive Knowledge (vi.26, vii.3); and (5) the acquisition of the
sixteen aspects, impermanence, etc. (On acquisition, see vii.22.)
These characteristics exist in each of the four results.
But if only the pure path receives the name of frāmaṇya, how
can the two states, those of Sakṛdāgāmin and Anāgāmin, when
they are obtained by a worldly path, be the results of framanya?314
53c-d. (The abandoning) obtained by a worldly path is a
result, because it is combined, and because it is supported by
pure possession.
The state of Sakṛdāgāmin and the state of Anāgāmin, even if
they were acquired by a worldly path, are not only abandonings
resulting from a worldly Path of Meditation: in fact, they also
include an abandoning result of the Path of Seeing; this second
abandoning is not separable from the first abandoning; for there is
inherent in the results of Sakṛdāgāmin and Anāgāmin the single
possession of abandoning in its entirety, on the one hand, of
defilements abandoned by Seeing, and on the other hand, of
defilements abandoned by the worldly Path of Meditation.
This is why the Sūtra says, "What is the result of Sakṛdāgāmin?
The abandoning of the three bonds (satkāyadṛṣṭi, clinging to rule
and ritual, and doubt)--which are abandoned through Seeing-and
the reduction of lust, anger, and delusion.” “What is the result of
Anāgāmin? The abandoning of the five bonds here below
(avarabhāgīya).”315Furthermore, the abandoning which results from the worldly
path (abandoning of the six categories of defilements in the case of
the Sakṛdāgāmin, etc.) is supported, confirmed (saṁdhāryate) by
the pure possession of disconnection (according to vi.46a-b), as it
results from the fact that, by virtue of this pure possession, the
Sakṛdāgāmin and the Anāgāmin cannot die in a state of falling
away: they can lose their qualities, but they take them up again
before dying (vi.60).
The Path and the Saints 995
Śrāmaṇya or the religious life
54a-b. Is brāhmaṇya; it is brahmacakra.316
It is brahmacakra because it expells the defilements;317 it is
brahmacakra, the Wheel of Brahmā,
54b. Because it is set into motion by Brahmā.
The Blessed One, possessing supreme brāhmaṇya, is Brahmā.
In fact, the Sūtra says, "This Blessed One is Brahmā";318 it says that
the Blessed One is calm and pacified.
This cakra belongs to him; this cakra is therefore of Brahmā,
because he sets it into motion.
54c. The Wheel of the Dharma is the Path of Seeing 319
It is termed wheel, cakra, because it moves (cankramaṇāt). 320
The Path of Seeing, being of the nature of a wheel (a Jewel of a
Wheel, cakraratna), is called the Wheel of the Dharma.996 Chapter Six
How is the Path of Seeing of the nature of a wheel?
54d. Because it goes quickly, etc.; because it has spokes,
etc.321
1. Because it goes quickly, for it comprehends the Truths in
fifteen moments of thought; 2. because it leaves one spot and
occupies another, leaving the Irresistible Path and occupying the
Path of Deliverance; 3. because it subdues the unsubdued and rules
over those subdued, triumphing over the defilements through the
Irresistible Path by cutting off the possession of these defilements;
ruling over the vanquished defilements by the Path of Deliverance
by obtaining possession of disconnection from these defilements;
(4) because it rises and descends, either because it is alternatively
the Irresistible Path and the Path of Deliverance, or because it
successively takes as its object Kāmadhātu and the higher spheres.
The Bhadanta Ghoşaka says: The Noble Eightfold Path is a
wheel, because its parts are in the nature of spokes, etc.: Right
Views, Right Thought, Right Effort, and Right Mindfulness are
similar to spokes; Right Speech, Right Actions, and Right
Livelihood are similar to the axle; and Right Concentration is
similar to the rim.³22
On what rests the doctrine that the Wheel of the Dharma is
the Path of Seeing the Truths?
On the Agama which says that, at the moment when this path
arose within the Āryan Kauṇḍinya, [the gods] declared that the
Wheel of the Dharma had been set into motion.323
How is this Path of threefold revolution ³24 and of twelve
aspects?
The Vaibhāṣikas say: The three revolutions are 1. "this is theThe Path and the Saints 997
Noble Truth of Suffering"; 2. “It should be perfectly known”; and
3. "It is perfectly known." At each revolution there arises sight
(cakṣus), knowledge (jñāna), knowing (vidyā), and intelligence
(buddhi). Thus we have twelve aspects. 325
The same holds true for the other Truths: “This is the Origin
of Suffering," etc.
Since the revolutions and the aspects are the same for each
Truth, the Wheel of the Dharma is of three revolutions and twelve
aspects; not of twelve revolutions and forty-eight aspects. So too
"the teaching of two things” is the teaching of a great number of
things which go by twos (eye and physical matter, etc.); in the
same way a person “skillful in seven things", is skillful in a great
number of seven things.326
The three revolutions correspond, in this order, to the Path of
Seeing, the Path of Meditation, and the Path of the Arhat or
Aśaikṣa.
Such is the explanation of the Vaibhāṣikas (Vibhāṛṣā, TD 27, p.
411a18).
But if this is the case,327 then the Path of Seeing would not have
three revolutions and twelve aspects. Therefore how would the
Wheel of the Dharma be the Path of Seeing? Consequently one
should understand that the Wheel of the Dharma is this sermon
itself (dharmaparyāya), the Sermon of Benares, which sets into
motion (pravartana) the Wheel of the Dharma, which includes
three revolutions and twelve aspects: three revolutions, because it
causes the Truths to be turned some three times;328 and twelve
aspects, because it considers each Truth under a threefold aspect. 329
Through the setting into motion of this sermon, one should
understand that it goes, that it is cast into the intelligence of
another; it goes towards the intelligence of another, in that it998 Chapter Six
comes to be known by another.330
Or rather,331 the entirety of the Noble Path, the Path of Seeing,
the Path of Meditation, and the Path of the Asaikṣa, is the Wheel
of the Dharma, because it penetrates into the intelligence of those
to be disciplined (vineya).³32 If the Sūtra says that the Wheel was
set into motion (pravartita) when Kaundinya realized the Path of
Seeing, this is because the prefix pra indicates the beginning of
action: pravartita signifies what begins to be vartita. When the
Path of Seeing is produced in the intelligence of another, in the
intelligence of Kauṇḍinya, the Wheel of the Dharma begins to be
set into motion, begins to be cast into the intelligence of
another.333
How can one obtain the results within each sphere?
55a. Three are acquired in Kāmadhātu.
Three can only be acquired in Kāmadhātu, not elsewhere. [Let
us understand: by beings born in Kāmadhātu].
55a-b. The last, in the three Dhātus.
The last state of srāmaṇya, or the quality of Arhat, can be
acquired in the Three Dhātus.
We can understand why the first two states, which suppose
that the ascetic is not detached from Kāmadhātu, cannot be
acquired in the higher spheres; but why does the same hold for the
third?
55b. Higher, the Path of the Seeing of the Truths is absent.Above Kāmadhātu, the Path of Seeing is absent. In its absence,
a person detached from Kāmadhātu and reborn in a higher heaven
cannot obtain the state of Anagāmin.334
The Path and the Saints 999
Why is the Path of Seeing absent there?
With respect to Ārūpyadhātu, because hearing is absent
there;335 and because the Path of Seeing bears on Kāmadhātu.336
With respect to Rūpadhātu,
55c-d. Disgust is absent there, because the Sūtra says, "Here
one undertakes, and there one achieves."337
Prthagjanas, reborn in Rūpadhātu, are totally given over to the
bliss of absorption: all suffering sensation is absent in them;
therefore disgust is impossible there, and one cannot enter the
Noble Path except through disgust.
Furthermore the Sūtra says, "Five persons, the Antarăparinir-
vāyin being the first and the Ürdhvasrotas being the fifth,
undertake here and achieve there."
“Undertake”, vidhā, means to establish the Path, because it is
the means (upāya) to Nirvāṇa.
We have seen that: “If the Arhat is Immovable, then after his
Knowledge of Destruction there arises the Knowledge of
Non-Arising"; is this to say that there are differences among the
Arhats?
56a. Six types of Arhat are known.1000 Chapter Six
The Sūtra³38 says that there are six types of Arhats: Parihāṇad-
harmans (those who can fall away), Cetanādharmans (those who
can at will put an end to their existences), Anurakṣaṇādharmans
(those who can preserve themselves), Sthitākampyas (those who
cherish deliverance), Prativedhanādharmans (those who can
penetrate the state of Arhat at will), and Akopyadharmans (those
who have immovable deliverance of mind). They will be defined
on p. 1002, 1007.
56a-b. Five arise from the Sraddhādhimuktas ("those
liberated through faith").
Five, with the exception of the Immovable Ones (the Ako-
pyadharmans) have been Śraddhādhimuktas (vi.32).
56c. Their deliverance is occasional.339
It should be known that the deliverance of mind (cetomivukti)
of these five types of Arhats is occasional (sāmayiki) and dear,340
for it should be constantly guarded. Consequently these Arhats are
called samayavimukta. Depending (apekṣā) on the occasion
(samaya), they are delivered (vimukta): this compound is made by
omitting the middle term (= apekṣā). We have thus samayavi-
mukta, delivered by reason of the occasion, like ghṛtaghata, a pot
full of butter, a pot for butter.341
For them, the realization of absorption depends on samaya, on
circumstances: possession of a number of material goods, the
absence of illness, a certain place.
56d. For an Immovable One, it is immovable.
The deliverance of an Immovable One cannot be moved
because he cannot fall away from this deliverance; consequently it
Ais immovable.
The Path and the Saints
57a. Thus he is not occasionally delivered.342
It follows that an Immovable One is not occasionally delivered
(asamayavimukta). As he realizes absorption of his own accord, he
is delivered independently or circumstances (samaya). Or rather
samaya signifies "time": the first five Arhats are susceptible of
falling away from their deliverance, they are thus delivered for a
time, and so are samayavimukta; the sixth Arhat is not susceptible
of falling away from his deliverance, he is thus definitively
delivered, and so he is an asamayavimukta.
57b. He proceeds from Dṛṣṭiprāpta.
The Immovable One has been a Dṛṣṭiprăpta (vi.32).
on.345
Do these six Arhats belong, from the beginning of their
religious careers, to the family (gotra)³43 [that is to say, to the
family of Parihāṇadharman, one who can fall away, etc.] to which,
as Arhats, they belong? Or rather have they acquired this family
later?
57c-d. Some Arhats are of their present families from the
very beginning; some become part of their present families
through purification or perfectioning.344
Certain Arhats are, from the very beginning, Cetanādharmans;
other Arhats, after having been Parihāṇadharmans, become
Cetanādharmans through the purification of their faculties and so1002 Chapter Six
1. A Parihāṇadharman is an Arhat who is susceptible of falling
away and who is not a Cetanādharman . . . nor a Prativedhanādh-
arman.346
2. A Cetanādharman is an Arhat who is capable of putting an
end to his existence at wil1,347 without being an Anurakṣaṇādh-
arman, etc.
3. An Anurakṣaṇādharman is an Arhat who is capable of
preserving himself from falling away. 348
4. A Sthitākampya is an Arhat who when strong causes of
falling away are absent, even without preserving himself, is not
capable of being budged, that is to say, who dwells in his result;
but, not falling away, in the absence of any effort, he is not
susceptible of progressing.
5. A Prativedhanādharman is an Arhat who is capable of
penetrating without effort the Immovable Ones.
6. An Akopyadharman or an Immovable One is an Arhat who
is not capable of falling away.349
When they were Śaikṣas, the first two lacked continual
cultivation and intensive cultivation; the third only cultivated
continual practices; the fourth cultivated only intensive practices;
the fifth cultivated these two practices, but with weak faculties; and
the sixth cultivated these two practices with sharp faculties.
The Parihāṇadharman does not necessarily fall away; and so
on: the Prativedhanādharman does not necessarily penetrate.
These persons receive their different names because it can happen
that they fall away, etc. Having admitted this principle (Vibhāṣā,
TD 27, p. 319c14), one then concludes that the six types of Arhats
can exist within the Three Dhātus.
But, in the hypothesis where the Parihāṇadharman necessarily
falls away... where the Prativedhanādharman necessarily
penetrates, the situation changes: 1. there are six types of Arhats
in Kāmadhātu; 2. two types, namely the Sthitäkampya and the
Akopyadharman, exist in the higher spheres: for, in these spheres,The Path and the Saints 1003
there is 1. neither falling away (vi.41c-d), therefore there is no
Parihāṇadharman nor a Anurakṣaṇādharman there, since there is
no reason to guard oneself from falling away; 2. nor is there any
volitional thought, cetană,350 therefore the Cetanädharman is
absent; 3. nor any perfectioning of the faculties (vi.41c-d),
therefore the Prativedhanādharman is absent, for a Pratived-
hanādharman should make his faculties sharp through penetra-
ting, in order to become an Akopyadharman.
Among the first five Arhats, how many can fall away from
their families (gotra), and how many can fall away from their
results?
58a-b. Four fall from their families, and five fall from their
states,351
Four, the Cetanādharman, etc., can fall away from their
families; the Parihāṇadharman cannot fall away from his family.35
Five, the Parihāṇadharman, etc., can also fall away from their
states. (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 315bll).
58b. But one does not fall away from the first family nor
from the first state.3:
1. The Arhat does not fall away from his first family, from the
family which he obtained before he became an Arhat, for this
family has been made firm by the Path of the Saikṣa and the
Aśaikṣa. The Śaikṣa does not fall away from his first family, for
this family has been made firm by the worldly path and the
transworldly path. But one can fall away from the family which
one has obtained by the perfecting of his faculties.3541004 Chapter Six
2. The ascetic does not fall away from the first state which he
has obtained, but he can fall away from the others. Therefore he
does not fall away from the state of Srotaäpanna.355
It results that from these two principles, (1) three cases are
possible with respect to the Parihāṇadharman: the Parihāṇadhar-
man either obtains Nirvāṇa by staying in his family, or by
perfecting his faculties, or by falling away and again becoming a
Śaikṣa; (2) four cases are possible with respect to the Cetanādhar-
man: three as above, plus: or by falling away and becoming a
Parihāṇadharman; (3) and so on: five, six, seven cases for the
Anurakṣaṇādharman, the Sthitākampya and the Prativedhanād-
harman (by adding: or by becoming a Cetanādharman. ...)
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 320a22).
When an Arhat again becomes a Śaikṣa, he dwells in the same
family that was his first family. Otherwise, in the hypothesis that
he would obtain a better family, he would progress, and he would
not fall away.
Why does one not fall away from the first state? Because the
defilements abandoned through Seeing have no support (avastuka
= anadhiṣṭhāna, vii.36): in fact, having satkāyadṛṣṭi (v.7) for their
root, they exist with the ātman for their support; now there is no
atman 356
Do you pretend that these defilements have for their object
(ālambana) a thing that does not exist (abhāva)?
No. They have the Truths for their object, [they consist of
considering the upādānaskandhas as permanent, etc.]; therefore
they do not have a thing that does not exist for their object, but
they are mistaken with respect to this object.
How do the defilements which are abandoned through Seeing
differ from those which are abandoned through Meditation? TheseThe Path and the Saints
defilements are also mistaken with respect to their objects.
They differ from those which are abandoned through Seeing.
One indeed sees that the idea of self (ātmadṛṣṭi) falsely attributes
to real things, physical matter, etc., which are not "self" the quality
of “self" under the aspect of a being which acts, a being which
feels, or of Ïśvara. And the other views, the view of clinging to
extremes (antagrāhadṛṣṭi), etc. (v.7) exist having as their support
this same "quality of self" (ätmatva); as a consequence their
support is non-existent, they have no support. But the defilements
which are abandoned through Meditation, namely desire, hatred,
pride, and ignorance, have for their nature attachment, antipathy,
satisfaction, and confusion with respect to physical matter, etc.:
they are therefore, speaking absolutely, a support and in this
respect differ from the defilements which are abandoned through
Seeing. For the agreeable, the painful, etc., is real with respect to
what exists, whereas there is not a trace of self, of things
pertaining to self, of Ïśvara, etc.
Another explanation: The defilements which are abandoned
through Meditation have a determined support, characterized as
agreeable, painful, etc. But, for the defilements which are
abandoned through Seeing, there is no determined support which
is characterized as self or as a thing pertaining to self; consequently
they do not have a support.
Another point: Among the Āryans (= the Śaikṣas) who do not
reflect, the defilements which are abandoned by Meditation can
arise by reason of the weakness of mindfulness; 357 these defile-
ments do not arise among the Āryans who reflect. In the same way
that one thinks a rope is a snake if one does not observe it carefully
(Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 36a20); [so too when one's attention is
lacking, one forgets its metaphysical characteristics, the imper-
manence of the pleasant, etc.] but the error of personalism
(ātmadṛṣṭi) cannot arise among Aryans who do not reflect, because
this error is a product of reflection.
Consequently, the saint cannot fall away from the abandoning
of the defilements which have been abandoned through Seeing.1006 Chapter Six
The Sautrāntikas say that one can no longer fall away from the
quality of Arhat.358 And their opinion is correct, as one can
demonstrate by scripture and by reasoning.
i. Scriptural arguments.
1. It is said, "What, Oh Bhikṣus, is abandoned is abandoned by
ăn và prajnà” 359
2.It is said, "I declare that the Saikṣa should cultivate
vigilance."360 The Blessed One did not proscribe vigilance to the
Arhat.
3. Without doubt, the Blessed One said, “Ãnanda, I declare that,
even for the Arhat, property and honors are a cause of obstacle."
Yet the Sūtra³61 specifies that, if the Arhat can fall away, it is only
from the "blisses":362 "With respect to immovable deliverance of
mind (vi.76c), which is actualized physically (viii.35b), I declare
that one absolutely cannot fall away from it."363
But the Vaibhāṣikas answer: The Blessed One specifies that
one cannot fall away from deliverance of the mind when it is
immovable; therefore one can fall away from it when it is
occasional (sāmayikī).
We are indeed in agreement: One can fall away from the
so-called occasional deliverance of mind. But what is this
deliverance? Is it, as you think, the quality of Arhat? Should one
not believe rather that the Blessed One designates the worldly
Dhyānas by "occasional deliverance"?
Since the absorption which consists of the fundamental
Dhyānas 364 is realized under certain circumstances--for example in
a place free from noise, etc.,--it is termed "occasional (or
circumstantial) deliverance"; it is also called "cherished deliver-
ance," because, each time that it is lost, one desires it anew with a
view to enjoying the "blisses."a meg
The Path and the Saints 1007
According to another master, [the Bhadanta Rāma, a Sautrān-
tika], this absorption is called "cherished deliverance” because,
being impure, it is "delectable" (viii.5). (See above, p. 1000.)
But the deliverance which constitutes the quality of Arhat is
not "occasional" since it is possessed in a permanent manner; it is
no longer "cherished,” because one does not have to search it out
anew. If it were possible for one to fall away from the quality of
Arhat, why did the Blessed One say that the Arhat could only fall
away from the "blisses of absorption"?
Consequently immovable deliverance of the mind belongs to all
the Arhats.
As for the "blisses," a certain Arhat can fall away from them,
when, being distracted by property and honors, he loses his
mastery in absorption: this is an Arhat whose faculties are weak. A
certain Arhat does not fall away from them: this is an Arhat whose
faculties are sharp. The Arhat who falls away from the "blisses" is
a Parihāṇadharman; one who does not fall away is an Aparihāṇad-
harman. One should explain the Cetanādharman, etc., in the same
way 365
What difference is there between an Aparihāṇadharman, a
Sthitakampya and an Akopyadharman? 366
The first has not perfected his faculties: they have been sharp
from the very beginning; the third has perfected his faculties:
neither of them fall away from the absorptions that they are able
to produce. The second does not fall away from the qualities in
which he is found: rather, he does not produce any other qualities,
which, if he were to produce them, he could be moved with respect
to them. Such is the difference between these three saints.
4. But did not the Venerable Godhika [var. Gautika] fall away
from the quality of Arhat?3671008 Chapter Six
The Venerable Godhika, being a Šaikṣa, by reason of the excess
of his enjoyment (viii.6) and the weak character of his faculties, fell
away many times from "occasional deliverance": in his disgust, he
struck himself with a dagger. By reason of his indifference with
respect to his body and life, he obtained the quality of Arhat at the
very moment of his death, and Nirvāṇa.368 Therefore he did not
fall away from the quality of Arhat.
5. The Dasottara teaches, "There is a dharma which one should
produce, namely occasional, cherished deliverance. There is a
dharma that one should actualize, namely the immovable deliver-
ance of the mind.”369
If occasional and cherished deliverance were the quality of an
Arhat, and so if the quality of Arhat were of two types, why does
the Daśottara, alone among the Sūtras, speak twice, under two
distinct names, of the quality of Arhat? Moreover, no part of the
Scripture employs the expression "to produce the quality of
Arhat"; it always says that one should actualize this quality.
Would you say that the quality of Arhat, to the extent that it is
associated with weak faculties, is to be produced? 370 What do you
mean by that? That it can be "produced"? But then the quality of
Arhat associated with sharp faculties, itself, can be produced. That
it merits being produced? All the more reason the second quality of
Arhat merits being produced.
Therefore occasional deliverance is not a quality of Arhat.
6. But, if this is the case, why does the Scripture speak of the
"occasionally delivered" Arhat?
Such is an Arhat who, because of the weakness of his faculties
depends on certain circumstances in order to actualize the
absorption. An Arhat who is opposed to this is one who is “not
occasionally delivered."
7. According to the Abhidharma,371 it is by reason of three
causes that sensual desire arises: 1. the latent defilement (anuśaya)
of sensual desire has not been completely known, has not beenserta keasties
The Path and the Saints 1009
abandoned; 2. some dharmas present themselves as favorable to
the increase of sensual desire; and 3. there is erroneous judgment.
[Now the totality of these three causes is impossible in the case of
the Arhat.]
Would one say that the Abhidharma speaks of sensual desire
which is produced by the totality of its causes, [but that sensual
desire can arise having incomplete causes, by the sole force of the
external object, the visaya]? But what dharma can arise without its
causes being complete?372
ii. Let us pass on to arguments from reason.
In the Arhat there are arisen dharmas which are opposed to
the defilements and which are of such a nature that the defile-
ments are reduced to the condition of absolutely not being able to
arise, anutpattidharman. How then could the Arhat fall away?
Would you say that such dharmas are not arisen in the Arhat,
that the defilements exist within him in the state of a seed, that
which constitutes the seed of the defilements not having been
uprooted?373 In this hypothesis, how can one say of the Arhat that
he is kṣīņāsrava, a person whose vices (āsrava) are cut off (kṣīņa)?
And if he is not a kṣīņāsrava, how can one say that he is an
Arhat?374
iii. But [answer the Vaibhāṣikas], the theory of the non-falling
away of the Arhat is contradicted by the Angārakarṣūpama.³75
This Sūtra says,376 "A wise Aryan Śrävaka who follows this rule
of life, who passes his time in this way (evaṁ carata evam
viharatas),377--it happens sometimes,378 through weakness of
mindfulness, that he produced bad thoughts." Now this Āryan
Śrāvaka is not a Śaikṣa, but an Arhat, for the Sūtra says later, "For a
long period of time his mind is inclined towards distant separation
from the defilements . . . his mind is turned towards Nirvāṇa."
And we know further ³79 that these qualities, "having the mind
inclined towards separation," etc., are some of the powers of the
Arhat, which power is yet determined by the words, "his mind is
cold, purged with respect to all the dharmas in which the vices1010 Chapter Six
have their abode."
We would answer: Yes, such are the texts.380 But the Angāra-
karṣūpama refers to a Śaikṣa and not to an Arhat. In fact it is only
of a Śaikṣa that one can say that "as long as the actions of a Bhikṣu
are not 'well understood,' even when he thus cultivates these
actions, the defilements will sometimes arise within him."381
The Vaibhāṣikas maintain that one can also fall away from the
quality of Arhat.
Are the Arhats the only ones who are divided into six families
(gotra)? Is this also the case for others?
58c. The Śaikṣas and the non-Ãryans are also of six
families, 382
Šaikṣas and Pṛthagjanas are also of six families: the families of
the Arhats have their antecedents in these families.
58d. In the Path of Seeing, there is no perfecting.
One can perfect his faculties outside of the Path of Seeing the
Truths, but not while one traverses this Path, for, in view of its
rapidity [in all fifteen moments, vi.28], one cannot accomplish the
preparatory practices required for perfecting.383
Some perfect their faculties as Pṛthagjanas;384 some, as
Śraddhādhimuktas.385these malo prende
Brey
ka
The Sūtra quoted above (p. 1006) says, "I declare that one can
fall away from any one of the four blisses of absorption which one
has acquired; but, with respect to the immovable deliverance of
mind which is physically actualized, I declare that one absolutely
cannot fall away from it."
The Path and the Saints 1011
How can it be that an Immovable Arhat can fall away from the
blisses?
59a-b. There are three types of falling away: from that
which is acquired, from that which has not yet been
acquired, and from fruition.386
Whoever falls away from the possession of a spiritual quality,
falls away from what has been acquired.
Among these falling aways,
Whoever does not acquire a spiritual quality that is to be
acquired, falls away from that which has not yet been acquired.
Whoever does not actualize a spiritual quality that he
possesses, falls from his fruition (upabhoga).
away
59c-d. The last, with respect to the Master; the second also,
with respect to an Immovable One; all three, with respect
to others.387
1. The Buddha falls away only from fruition: [occupied with the
good of his followers, he ceases his enjoyment of the blisses]. 2.1012 Chapter Six
The Immovable One (the Akopyadharman) falls away from both
his fruition and from what has not yet been acquired: for he has
not necessarily acquired the dharmas proper to very distinguished
persons.388 3, The Arhats who are not immovable also fall away
from what they have acquired.
Consequently the fact that an Immovable One falls away from
his fruition is not in contradiction with the above Sūtra.
The masters who deny any falling away (aparihāṇivādin) say,
"The pure deliverance of any Arhat is immovable: but an
Immovable One is to be defined as we have said; consequently one
cannot object: how does an Immovable One fall away from the
blisses?"389
Does the saint who falls away from the state of Arhat take up a
new existence?
60a. He does not die having fallen away from his result.3⁹⁰
He never dies in the state of having fallen away from his result.
In fact the Sūtra says, “Oh Bhikṣus, it happens that the wise Āryan
Śrāvaka experiences weakness of mindfulness, that his mindful-
ness becomes slow. But he quickly rejects, he makes disappear,
destroys, annihilates [this weakness of mindfulness]."3⁹1
If it were otherwise, if a person, having become an Arhat, falls
away from the state of Arhat, and could continue to transmigrate,
the religious life (brahmacarya) would not inspire confidence.392
A
fallen away
person
from a state does not do that which a
person who resides in this state cannot do:
60b. He does not do what should not be done.393The Path and the Saints
Even though fallen, he does not do that which is in contradic-
tion with his state (for example, abrahmacarya). In the same way a
hero can be moved, but he does not fall.
How many Irresistible Paths and Paths of Deliverance are
included in the transformation or perfecting of the faculties?
60c-d. For the Immovable One, there are nine paths of two
types.394
The Prativedhanādharman who perfects his faculties and
penetrates the family of the Immovable Ones, should produce nine
Irresistible Paths, nine Paths of Deliverance, exactly like the
Śaikṣa, in order to obtain the quality of Arhat [in detaching himself
from Bhavāgra].
Why is this?
60d. By reason of his intense cultivation.3⁹5
The Prativedhanādharman has intensely cultivated the family
of weak faculties; consequently this family cannot be transformed
without a great effort: it has, in fact, been made firm both by the
Path of the Saikṣa and by the Path of the Aśaiksa.
61a. For the Dṛṣṭiprāpta, one of each type.
For the transformation of the faculties by which a Śraddhād-
himukta [=a Śaikṣa of weak faculties] becomes a Dṛṣṭiprāpta [=a
Saikṣa of sharp faculties], there must be an Irresistible Path and a1014 Chapter Six
Path of Deliverance.
In the two cases (60c-d and 61a), there is a preparatory path
(prayogamārga).
These Irresistible Paths and Paths of Deliverance are
61b. Pure paths
For the faculties of Aryans cannot be transformed by impure
paths.
Where can the faculties be transformed?
61b. There is transformation among humans.
Only humans can transform their faculties; there is no
transformation elsewhere, for elsewhere falling away is impossi-
ble.396
In what sphere do the Aśaikṣas and the Śaikṣas exist in order to
transform their faculties?
61c. The Aśaikṣas in nine spheres.397
Namely in anagamya, dhyānāntara, the Four Dhyānas andthree Ārūpyas, [for the same state of Arhat can be obtained in
these spheres].
61d. The Saikṣa, in six.
The Path and the Saints 1015
With the exception of the three Arūpyas. Why is this?
61d-62b. Because the Saikṣa who increases his faculties by
abandoning his state and his progress, obtains the state.398
When the Śaikṣa perfects his faculties, he loses a state
(=Sakṛdāgāmiphala), a state that he had acquired by the path of
weak faculties; he loses his vifesa, that is, the progress that he had
made--preparatory paths, Irresistible Path, Path of Deliverance,
and Path of Excellence,--in the detachment of the Dhyānas, a
progress realized with his weak faculties. 399 He obtains only a state
belonging to the family of sharp faculties, a state forming part of
the detachment of Kāmadhātu, not the state of Anāgāmin which is
of Ārūpyadhātu.400
The Arhats, by reason of their difference of faculties, are nine
in number.
62c-d. Two Buddhas and seven Śrāvakas, the Arhats have
nine classes of faculties.401
The Śrāvakas are seven in number, the five the first of which is
the Parihāṇadharman, plus the Immovable One (=the Akopyad-
harman) which is divided into two, depending on whether he was
from his beginnings of the immovable family, or whether he has
obtained this family through the perfecting of his faculties.4021016 Chapter Six
The two Buddhas,--the Pratyekabuddha and the Buddha,--are
varieties of Immovable Ones.
These make nine persons whose faculties are respectively
weak-weak, etc.403
In general, the Āryans are seven in number: 1. the Sraddhānu-
sarin, 2. the Dharmānusarin, 3. the Sraddhādhimukta, 4. the
Dṛṣṭiprāpta, 5. the Kāyasākṣin, 6. the Prajñāvimukta, and 7. the
Ubhayatobhāgavimukta. 404
63a-c. Seven pudgalas, by reason of their cultivation, their
faculties, absorption, deliverance, of two.405
1. By reason of their cultivation (prayoga), there exists the
Śraddhānusarin and the Dharmānusarin (vi.29a-b). In the
beginning, in the state of Pṛthagjana, it is by reason of faith
(śraddhā) that the first, under the impulse of another [that is,
learning the foundations of mindfulness, etc., from another]
applied himself (prayoga) to things,406 that is, he devoted himself
to reflection and meditation. The second applied himself in the
same way, but by following (anusara) the dharmas, that is, the
twelvefold Scriptures, and by pursuing (anusarati) the dharmas,
that is, the parts of Bodhi (bodhipākṣikas) by himself.
2. By reason of their faculties, there exists the Śraddhādhi-
mukta and the Dṛṣṭiprāpta (vi.31c-d). Their faculties are respec-
tively weak and sharp by reason of the predominance, among the
first, of intention proceeding from faith (fraddayā adhimokṣaḥ),
and, among the second, of wisdom (prajñā).
3. By reason of absorption (samāpatti), there exists the
Kāyasākṣin (vi.43c-d), because he has realized the Absorption of
Extinction (vi.43c, viii.33a).4. By reason of deliverance, there exists the Prajñāvimukta
(vi.64a-b).
seven.
The Path and the Saints
5. By reason of absorption and deliverance, there exists the
Ubhayatobhāgavimukta (vi.64a-b).
Thus, from the point of view of their enumeration, there are
six.
63c. They are six.
These seven, from the point of view of substantial entities, are
63d. Two exist in each of the three paths.
In the Path of Seeing, there exists two pudgalas or persons, the
Śraddhānusarin and the Dharmānusarin; who, in the Path of
Meditation, become a Śraddhādhimukta and a Dṛṣṭiprāpta, and, in
the Path of the Arhat (=the Aśaikṣamārga), a Samayavimukta and
an Asamayavimukta.
The Sraddhānusarin, (1) from the point of view of his faculties,
is of three types: his faculties are weak by definition; but they can
be either weak-weak, weak-medium, or weak-strong; (2) from the
point of view of his family, of five types: of the family of the
Parihāṇadharman, etc. (vi.56); (3) from the point of view of the
Path, of fifteen types: accordingly as he is in one of the eight
Patiences or in one of the seven Knowledges (vi.26-27); (4) from
the point of view of detachment, of seventy-three types: 1. bound
by all of the bonds of Kāmadhātu, 2-10. detached from one ...
from nine categories of bonds of Kāmadhātu; 11-19. detached from
one . . . from nine categories of bonds of the First Dhyāna, and so
on up to and including Akiñcanyāyatana. Eight times nine--det-
achment from Kāmadhātu, from the Four Dhyānas, and from
three Ārūpyas,--make seventy-two, plus all the bonds of Kāmadhātu,1018 Chapter Six
seventy-three; (5) from the point of view of the physical person
(aśraya), of nine types: born in one of the three Dvīpas. [with the
exception of Uttarakuru], born in one of the six heavens of
Kāmadhātu. Higher, the Path of Seeing is absent.
By taking into account all of these differences, there are some
147,825 types of Sraddhānusarin. The calculation relative to other
saints is established according to the same elements, with the
differences of title.407
Who is the saint that is called an Ubhayatobhāgavimukta,
("one who is doubly delivered")? Who is the saint that is called a
Prajñāvimukta ("one who is delivered through prajñā")?
64a-b. He who possesses extinction is doubly delivered; the
other is delivered through prajñā.408
One who has entered the Absorption of Extinction (vi.43c-d),
that is to say, one who is endowed with extinction, is called "doubly
delivered", because, by the power of prajñā and absorption, he is
delivered from the hindrance of the defilements and from the
hindrance that opposes the arising of the eight liberations.409
The other is "one who is delivered through prajñā,” because, by
the power of prajñā, he is delivered from the hindrance of the
defilements.
The Blessed One said, "One who has abandoned the five
defilements here below and who is not subject to falling away is a
complete Śaikṣa."410 How is a Saikṣa completed?The Path and the Saints 1019
64c-d. It is from the point of view of absorption, of
faculties, and of result that a Saikṣa is said to be complete.411
The complete Śaikṣa is of three types, complete by his result,
his faculties, and his absorption. The Anāgāmin of the Sraddhād-
himukta class (vi.31c) who is not a Kāyasākṣin (vi.43) is complete
from the point of view of only his result.
The saint of the Dṛṣṭiprāpta class (vi.32) who is not detached
from Kāmadhātu is complete from the point of view of only his
faculties.
The Anāgāmin of the Dṛṣṭiprāpta class who is not a Kāyasāk-
şin is complete from the point of view of his result and his
faculties.
The Anāgāmin of the Śraddhādhimukta class who is a
Kāyasākṣin is complete from the point of view of his result and his
absorption.
The Anāgāmin of the Dṛṣṭiprāpta class who is a Kāyasākṣin is
complete from the point of view of his result, his faculties, and his
absorption.
A Śaikṣa cannot be complete from the point of view of only his
absorption, for the Absorption of Extinction supposes the state of
Anāgāmin, and consequently fullness or perfection from the point
of view of result. In the same way a Saikṣa cannot be complete only
from the point of view of his faculties and his absorption.
65a. The Aśaikṣa is complete from two points of view.
From the point of view of his faculties and his absorption.
There is no Asaikṣa in fact who is not complete from the point of
view of his state: consequently perfection from the point of view of
state is counted as a perfection.1020 Chapter Six
The Prajñāvimukta (vi.64) who is an Asamayavimukta (vi.56)
is complete from the point of view of his faculties.
The Ubhayatobhāgavimukta who is a Samayavimukta is
complete from the point of view of his absorption. The Ubhaya-
tobhāgavimukta who is an Asamayavimukta is complete from the
point of view of his faculties and his absorption.
Numerous types of paths have been named: the worldly path
and the transworldly path; the Paths of Seeing, Meditation and of
the Aśaikṣa; the Preparatory Path, the Irresistible Path, the Path
of Deliverance, and the Path of Excellence. In short, how many
types of paths are there?
65b-d. In short, the path is of four types, Prepararory,
Irresistible, Deliverance, and Excellence.
Prayogamarga, the Path of Application or of Preparatory
Cultivation, is the path by which and following upon which there
arises the Irresistible Path.412
Anantaryamärga, the Irresistible Path (vi.28b), is the path by
which an obstacle is abandoned (vi.64a-b, 77).413
Vimuktimārga, the Path of Deliverance, is the first path which
arises free from the obstacle abandoned by means of the Irresisti-
ble Path.414
Visesamārga, the Path of Excellence, is the path differing from
the preceding paths.4¹5
What is the meaning of the word mārga, path?416The Path and the Saints 1021
The path is the path to Nirvāṇa because it goes from here; or
rather, because it is through it that Nirvāṇa is searched out. 417
But how are the Path of Deliverance and the Path of Excellence
paths? In fact, it is on the Preparatory Path and the Irresistible
Path that the acquisition of Nirvāṇa depends.
Because the Path of Deliverance and the Path of Excellence are
parallel to the paths of abandoning (Prahāṇamārga = the
Irresistible Path par excellence) from the point of view of their
object (the Truths), their aspects (sixteen aspects, impermanence,
etc.), and their purity; they are distinguished by being superior, for
they have for their causes all the causes of the paths of abandoning
plus the paths of abandoning themselves. And moreover because,
by means of these two paths, one obtains higher and higher paths:
(the Path of Deliverance is necessary for the acquisition of a new
Irresistible Path). Or rather because, by these two paths, one enters
into nirupadhiseșa Nirvāṇa, Nirvāṇa without remnant. 418
The path is also called pratipad, route, because, by it, one
arrives at Nirvāṇa.41⁹
There are four routes: routes difficult for slow and quick
intelligences, and routes easy for slow and quick intelligences.420
66a. The path belonging to the Dhyānas is the easy route.
The path (the Preparatory Path, etc.), cultivated in the
Dhyānas, that is to say, while one is in Dhyāna, is the easy route.
For the Dhyānas are endowed with parts (viii.1,10) and present a
perfect balance of calm (samatha) and insight (vipaśyanā): it
results from this that, in the Dhyānas, the route flows on
effortlessly.4211022
Chapter Six
66b. The difficult routes belong to other spheres.
The path in anagamya, dhyānāntara, and the Ārūpyas, is the
difficult route, for these absorptions are not endowed with parts,
and calm and insight are not in balance. In anāgamya and
dhyānāntara, the power of insight, which is great, outweighs calm,
which is small. But the opposite holds true in the Ārūpyas.
These two routes,
66c-d. When intelligence is weak, a route for slow intelli-
gence; in the contrary case, a route for a quick intelligence.
Whether the route is easy or difficult, when the faculties are
weak, the route is for slow intelligences (dhandhābhijñā); when
the faculties are sharp, the route is for quick intelligences.
The route is termed for slow intelligences when intelligence
(abhijñā) is slow (dhandha) in it. Abhijñā is the equivalent of
prajñā, and dhandha the equivalent of manda. So too, the route is
for quick intelligences when abhijñā is rapid in it, that is to say,
when prajñā is sharp in it. Or rather one can explain: the abhijñā
of a person of weak mind, is slow . . . ; the abhijñā of a person with
a sharp mind, is quick.
The Path receives the name of bodhipākṣika, “containing the
adjutants of Bodhi."422 There are thirty-seven adjutants of Bodhi,
namely the four foundations of mindfulness, the four right
exertions,423 the four supernormal powers (rddhipādas), the fivefaculties, the five powers, the seven parts of Bodhi (bodhyangas),
and the Noble Eightfold Path.424
The Path and the Saints 1023
67a-b. The Knowledge of Destruction with the Knowledge
of Non-Arising is Bodhi.425
The Knowledge of Destruction and the Knowledge of Non-Ar-
ising are Bodhi which, by reason of the differences of the saints
who obtain it, is threefold: Śrävaka Bodhi, Pratyekabuddha Bodhi,
and Unsurpassed, Perfect Bodhi. In fact, by these two Knowledges,
one completely abandons ignorance; 426 by the first, one knows in
all truth that the task is accomplished; and by the second, that
there is nothing more to be accomplished in the task.427
67b-c. Because they are favorable to it, thirty-seven
dharmas are its adjutants.
Because they are favorable (anuloma) to Bodhi, thirty-seven
dharmas are adjutants of Bodhi (bodhipakṣya).428
67d. Thirty-seven from the point of view of name, but ten
substantial entities.429
What are these ten entities?
68a-c. Faith, energy, mindfulness, prajñā, absorption, joy,
indifference, resolution, morality, and aptitude.430
How is that?
68d-69b. Foundation of mindfulness is prajñā; energy
receives the name of right exertion; the supernormal1024 Chapter Six
powers are samādhis.
The foundations of mindfulness, the right exertions (samyak-
pradhānas), and the supernormal powers are, by their nature,
prajñā, energy, and samadhi.
i. We have therefore at first five items, faith, energy,
mindfulness, samādhi, and prajñā, which, under their own names,
make up five faculties and five powers.
Among these five items, prajñā is made up of: a. the four
foundations of mindfulness,431 b. one of the parts of Bodhi, the
investigation into the dharmas (dharmapravicaya), and c. one of
the parts of the Noble Eightfold Path, Right Views.
Energy is made up of: a. the four right exertions; b. one of the
parts of Bodhi, energy; and c. one of the parts of the Noble
Eightfold Path, Right Effort.
Samadhi is made up of: a. the four supernormal powers; b. one
of the parts of Bodhi, samadhi; and c. one of the parts of the Noble
Eightfold Path, Right Concentration.
Mindfulness is made up of: a. one of the parts of Bodhi,
mindfulness; b. one of the parts of the Noble Eightfold Path, Right
Mindfulness.
ii. What do we have in addition that are not these first five
items? Among the parts of Bodhi, joy, resolution (ii.25, English
translation, p. 192), indifference; among the parts of the Noble
Eightfold Path, Right Thoughts and the three parts of morality--
Right Speech, Right Action, and Right Livelihood--which are
counted as being one item, morality,
We have five plus five items; therefore the adjutants of Bodhi
are made up of ten items.
According to the Vaibhāṣikas, there are eleven items; Right
Speech and Right Actions together form one item, and RightThe Path and the Saints
Livelihood is another item (see iv.85c-d). Therefore morality (śīla)
counts for two items added to the nine preceding items.432
We have said that the foundations of mindfulness, the right
exertions, and the supernormal powers are by their nature prajñā,
energy, and samadhi.
69c-d. A definition according to their essentials; they are
also all the qualities that arise from cultivation.
The preceding definitions refer to the principal elements of the
foundations of mindfulness, etc.; but all these adjutants of Bodhi
are also a collection of qualities, pure or impure, which have arisen
from preparatory cultivation (prayogika, ii.71b), from hearing,
reflection, or meditation.433
Why is energy termed rignt exertion?
Because the body, speech, and mind are, through energy,
correctly placed into action.
Why is samadhi termed a supernormal power (ṛddhipāda)?43³4
Because samadhi is the foundation (pada = pratiṣṭhā) of ṛddhi,
that is to say, of the "success" of all spiritual qualities.
But certain masters, [the Vaibhāṣikas], maintain that super-
normal power is samādhi, and that the four,--desire, mind, energy,
and examination,--are the "feet”, pādas, of this supernormal
power: they should therefore say that the adjutants of Bodhi are
thirteen in number by adding desire and mind to their list of1026 Chapter Six
eleven. Furthermore, to affirm that supernormal power is samadhi
is to contradict the Sūtra which defines supernormal power, "What
is supernormal power? The ascetic accomplishes different works
of miraculous power; being one, he becomes many,"435 and so
on.436
Why are faith, energy, etc., termed faculties and powers?
Accordingly as they are weak or strong, for the faculties and the
powers cannot be broken or crushed.437 (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
726b16).
How is the order of the faculties explained?
In order to obtain the result in which one believes (fraddhā),
one makes an effort (vīryam arabhate). When one forces onself,
there is a setting up of mindfulness (smṛtyupasthiti). When
mindfulness is set up, one fixes the mind (samādhi) in order to
avoid distraction. When the mind is fixed, there arises a conscious-
ness which conforms to the object (prajñā).
In which stages are the different adjutants of Bodhi placed? In
which are they the important factors?
The Vaibhāṣikas say,
70. They form seven groups which are distributed, in order,
between the beginning stage, the nirvedhabhāgīyas,
Meditation, and Seeing.4
In the beginning stage, there are the foundations of mindful-
ness, because, in this stage, one examines the body, etc.4
In the Heats (Ușmagata), there are the right exertions
(samyakpradhāna), for, in this stage one increases his energy, an
increase which is the principle of progress.The Path and the Saints 1027
In the Summits (Mürdhan), there are the supernormal powers,
for, due to them, one obtains the condition in which the roots of
good cannot be lost.440
The faculties are in the Patiences, for faith, energy, etc., become
predominant (ādhipatyaprāpta, see ii.2a-b) in this stage from the
fact that, in the Patiences, one is no longer capable of falling away
(vi.23b).
The powers are in the Supreme Worldly Dharmas, for, in this
stage, faith, energy, etc., can no longer be crushed either by the
defilements--for these are not activated--nor by any other worldly
dharmas.
The parts of Bodhi are in the Path of Meditation, for this Path
is close to Bodhi, that is to say, to the Knowledge of Destruction
and the Knowledge of Non-Arising in which the Path of Seeing is
separated by the Path of Meditation.
The parts of the Noble Eightfold Path are in the Path of
Seeing, for this Path is characterized by progress: for one goes
quickly.441
[But, one would say, the Path of Seeing proceeds from out of
the Path of Meditation. Why not respect this order?] The Sūtra
lists the parts of Bodhi (=the Path of Meditation) first, and the
parts of the Noble Eightfold Path (=the Path of Seeing) second,
with an end to having an order corresponding to the number of
parts, at first seven, and then eight. Investigation into the dharmas
(dharmapravicaya) is at one and the same time Bodhi and a part of
Bodhi, and Right Views is both the Path and a part of the Noble
Eightfold Path. (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 726c4.)
Such is the doctrine of the Vaibhāṣikas.
Other masters justify the order of the adjutants of Bodhi
without disturbing the regular succession, by placing, as it suits1028 Chapter Six
them, the Path of Seeing first, and then the Path of Meditation.
There is first 1. the foundations of mindfulness, which exist
with a view to curbing thoughts (buddhi) which disperse
themselves naturally, distracted as they are by the variety of
objects. The four foundations of mindfulness bind the mind, for it
is said in the Sūtra, “. . . with a view to expelling the idea of
desire 442 which have their support in thirst..." (Madhyama, TD
1, p. 758b5).443
2. Energy (virya) increases through the power of the founda-
tions of mindfulness, through the control and the exertion
(pradhāna) of the mind through the accomplishment of the
fourfold tasks: abandoning the bad dharmas which have been
produced, the non-production of bad dharmas which have not been
produced... : these are the four right exertions.
3. Then, by reason of the purification of absorption (samādhi),
the supernormal powers arise and are cultivated.
4. Supported by absorption, there arise faith, energy, etc.,
which are predominant among the transworldly dharmas (lokotta-
ra-dharmas) since they lead to them: they are the faculties,
indriyas.
5. The same faith, energy, etc., when they triumph over the
growth of their opponents, are the powers, balas.
6. The parts of Bodhi arise in the Path of Seeing, because, for
the first time, the ascetic understands the true nature of the
dharmas. [Bodhi signifies pure prajñā.]
7. The parts of Bodhi arise in the Path of Seeing and in the
Path of Meditation. In fact, it is said, "The Noble Eightfold Path
goes thus to fullness through meditation, the four foundations of
mindfulness go to their fullness through meditation ... the seven
parts of Bodhi go to their fullness through meditation. "444
[Therefore the Noble Eightfold Path also exists in the Path of
Meditation, for this Path, in the Path of Seeing, does not obtain its
fullness through meditation.]It is further said, "Oh Bhikṣus, to say 'words conforming to the
truth' is an expression that says the Four Truths; Oh Bhikṣus, to
say 'to advance by the Path' is an expression that speaks of the
Noble Eightfold Path."
Therefore, since the Noble Eightfold Patn exists both in the
Path of Seeing and in the Path of Meditation, the order which
places the parts of Bodhi first, and the parts of the Noble Eightfold
Path second, is justified.
The Path and the Saints 1029
Among the adjutants of Bodhi, how many are impure, and how
many are pure?
71a-b. The parts of Bodhi and the parts of the Path are
pure.
They are only pure, for they are placed in the Path of Seeing
and the Path of Meditation. Without doubt, there are worldly right
views,445 etc., but they are not called the parts of the Noble
Eightfold Path.
71b. The others are of two types.446
The other adjutants of Bodhi are either impure or pure.
How many exist in the different spheres? (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
497b26.)
71c. All exist in the First Dhyāna.1030 Chapter Six
In all, thirty-seven.
71d. In anāgamya, with the exception of joy.447
Why is joy (a part of Bodhi) absent from anāgamya?
Because the thresholds of absorption (sāmantakas) are realized
only through force,448 and again, because they include the fear of
falling into a lower sphere.
72a. In the Second, with the exception of thoughts.449
In the Second Dhyāna, thoughts (a part of the Eightfold Path)
are absent, but the other thirty-six adjutants of Bodhi remain.
Thought is absent since vicāra is also absent.
72b. In two, with the exception of the one and the other.
In the Third and the Fourth Dhyānas, there is absent both joy
and thought, but the other thirty-five adjutants of Bodhi remain.
72c. Also, in dhyānāntara.
There one finds thirty-five adjutants of Bodhi with the
exception of these same two.
72c-d. In three Ārūpyas, with the exception of the preced-
ing and the parts of morality.450
In the three Ārūpyas there is also absent Rignt Speech, Right
actions, and Right Livelihood, but thirty-two adjutants of Bodhiremain.
The Path and the Saints 1031
73a-c. In Kāmadhātu and in Bhavagra, the parts of Bodhi
and the parts of the Path are absent.451
In fact, the Pure Path is absent from these two places.
Therefore some twenty-two adjutants of Bodhi remain.452
At what moment does the person who cultivates the adjutants
of Bodhi obtain the avetyaprasādas, that is, the four types of faith
[and purity] which accompany intelligence?453
73c-74. When one sees three Truths, one obtains the
morality and the avetyaprasāda relating to the Dharma:
when one comprehends the Path, also the avetyaprasāda
relating to the Buddha and his Sangha.45
At the comprehension (abhisamaya) of the first three Truths
(vi.27), there is acquisition of the avetyaprasāda relating to the
Dharma, and to the pure precepts, dear to the Aryans.455
At the comprehension of the Truth of the Path, dear to the
Āryans, there is an acquisition of the avetyaprasāda relating to the
Buddha and to his Śrävaka-Sangha.456
The word "also" (api) is there in order to mark that there is
also an acquisition of the avetyaprasāda relating to the Dharma
and the precepts.
The prasāda relating to the Buddha is a prasāda relating to the
Aśaikṣa dharmas which make up a Buddha; so too one should
understand by Sangha the Śaikṣa and Aśaikṣa dharmas which make
up the Sangha (iv.32).1032 Chapter Six
What is understood by Dharma in the expression "avetyapra-
sāda relating to the Dharma"?
74c-75a. The Dharma is the three Truths and the Path of
the Pratyekabuddha and the Bodhisattva.457
Consequently, when one understands the Four Noble Truths,
one obtains the avetyaprasāda relating to the Dharma.458
Therefore we have, seen from the differences of the object of
prasāda, four prasādas distinguished from the point of view of
their names.
75a-c. From the point of view of substantial entities, these
four are two things, faith and morality.
The avetyaprasāda relating to the Buddha, the Dharma, and
the Sangha, are, by their nature, faith (fraddha). The precepts dear
to the Āryans, are, by their nature, morality (fila). Therefore they
are two things.
Are these two things pure or impure?
The avetyaprasādas are exclusively75b. Immaculate.
The Path and the Saints 1033
What is the meaning of the term avetyaprasāda?
A faith consecutive to the exact comprehension of the Truths.
The avetyaprasādas are arranged in the order in which, upon
leaving the contemplation of the Truths, they are actualized.
How does one actualize them upon leaving this contem-
plation?
"Oh! the Blessed One is a perfect Buddha! Well preached is his
Dharma-Vinaya! Well cultivating is his Śrāvaka-Sangha!": it is
thus that one actualizes them, for the Buddha, the Dharma, and the
Sangha are, in this order, the doctor, the remedy, and the patient.
As the prasāda of morality459 results from the prasāda of the
mind,460 it is placed fourth, at the end: it is when the mind is thus
believing (prasanna) that one acquires the precepts dear to the
Āryans. Or rather, the prasada of the precepts is placed at the end,
because the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha are the doctor,
the remedy, and the patient, and the prasāda of the precepts
corresponds to health (ārogya). Or rather because the Buddha is
the guide, the Dharma is the path, the Sangha is one's travelling
companions, and the precepts dear to the Aryans are the vehicle
(yāna).
According to the Sūtra, a Śaikṣa has eight parts (or "limbs",
angas), namely the eight parts of the Noble Eightfold Path
(mārgānga) termed "pertaining to the Śaikṣa": śaikṣī samyagdṛṣṭi .
. . śaikṣa samyaksamādhi (above, p. 1022); an Aśaikṣa has ten parts,1034 Chapter Six
namely the same eight parts of the Noble Eightfold Path termed
"pertaining to the Aśaikṣa": aśaikṣī samyagdṛṣṭi . . . , plus aśaikṣī
samyagvimukti and aśaikṣa samyagjñāna, the perfect deliverance
proper to Arhats and the knowledge of the acquisition of this
deliverance (on samyagvimuktijñāna, see vi.76d).461
Why does not the Sūtra attribute both perfect deliverance and
the knowledge of this perfect deliverance to the Saikṣa?
75c-d. Because he is bound, deliverance is not said to be a
part of a Saikṣa.
A Śaikṣa is bound by the bonds of the defilements. How could
one consider him delivered? The person who is partially bound is
not called released. Deliverance is absent from him, and he cannot
possess the knowledge of the acquisition of deliverance (vim-
ukto'smīti jñānadarśanam, Mahāvyutpatti, 81.9).
An Aśaikṣa, on the contrary, is completely liberated from all
the bonds: he is thus characterized, magnified both by his
deliverance from the defilements and by the direct knowledge of
his deliverance: therefore it is of the Aśaikṣa alone that one can say
that perfect deliverance and the knowledge of this perfect
deliverance are his parts.
What is deliverance?
75d. Deliverance is twofold.462
It is conditioned and unconditioned. (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
147a6.)The Path and the Saints
76a-c. Victory over the defilements is unconditioned
deliverance; adhimokṣa is conditioned deliverance.
76b-c. This last is a part.
The abandoning (prahāṇa, that is, pratisamkhyanirodha, ii.
English translation, p. 280-281) of the defilements is uncon-
ditioned deliverance. The intention of the Aśaikṣa is conditioned
deliverance.463
76c. It is two deliverances.464
It is conditioned deliverance which is called a "part pertaining
to an Aśaikṣa”; for the other parts, Right Views, etc., are
conditioned.
This same conditioned deliverance is described, in the Sūtra
(Samyukta, TD 2, p. 16c24), as being double, mental deliverance
and deliverance through prajñā. [Mental deliverance comes about
through the liberation from desire, and deliverance through prajñā
comes about through liberation from ignorance;] it therefore
constitutes what is called the skandha of deliverance, the
vimuktiskandha.465
But, according to another opinion,466 if the skandha of
deliverance is only intention, how do we explain the Sūtra? The
Sūtra says,
467 "Oh Vyāghrabodhayanas! What is the essential factor
of the purification of deliverance? The mind of a Bhikṣu is
detached, delivered from craving; the mind of this Bhikṣu is
detached, delivered from hatred and ignorance. In this way, either
with a view to the fullness of the skandha of deliverance which is
not complete, or with a view to maintaining the skandha of
deliverance which is complete, all desire, all energy. . . this is the
essential factor."1036 Chapter Six
It results from this Sūtra that intention does not constitute
deliverance: this is the purity of the mind resulting from the
abandoning of the defilements, craving, etc. which are expelled by
correct knowledge.4
Perfect deliverance has been explained.
What is the perfect or Right Knowledge (samyagjñāna) which
is distinct from Right Views (samyagdṛṣṭi)?
76d. Bodhi, as described above, is knowledge.
Bodhi, as we have described above, is the Knowledge of
Destruction and the Knowledge of Non-Arising (vi.67a-b), and
these constitutes Right Knowledge, the tenth part of the Aśaikṣa.
Which mind--past, present, or future--is delivered?
77a-b. The Asaikṣa mind, arising, is delivered from its
obstacles.469
The Šāstra (Jñānaprasthāna, TD 26, p. 1000b9) says, "The
future Aśaikṣa mind is delivered from its obstacle."470 What is this
obstacle?
The possession of the defilements [= ninth category of the
defilements of Bhavāgra], which in fact creates an obstacle to the
arising of an Asaikṣa mind. At the moment of Vajropamasamādhi
(vi.44c-d), this possession is abandoned, and an Aśaikṣa mind
arises and is delivered. When this possession has been abandoned,the Aśaikṣa mind has arisen and has been delivered.
But what would you say of the Aśaikṣa mind which has not
arisen at the moment of Vajropamasamadhi, or of the worldly
mind which is produced within an Asaikşa?
The Path and the Saints 1037
These two minds are also delivered; but it is of the future
Asaikṣa mind in the process of arising that the Sastra says is
delivered.
From what is the worldly mind of an Aśaikṣa delivered?
From the same possession of the defilements, an obstacle to its
arising.
But is not this same worldly mind produced within a Śaikṣa,
and have you not said that it is delivered?
The worldly mind of a Śaikṣa is not similar to that of an
Aśaikṣa, for the latter is not accompanied by the possession of the
defilements.
What is the Path--past, present, or future,--by which the
obstacle to the arising of the Aśaikṣa mind is abandoned?
77c-d. It is while perishing that the Path causes the
abandoning of the obstacle.
Perishing, that is to say, in the present.
The Śāstra and the present work defined unconditioned
deliverance (vi.76a). On the other hand, the Sūtra471 and the Śāstra
speak of three dhātus (“spheres"), namely prahāṇadhātu ("the1038 Chapter Six
sphere of abandoning”), virāgadhātu ("the sphere of the absence
of craving"), and nirodhadhātu ("the sphere of extinction”). What
is the relationship between unconditioned deliverance and these
three spheres?
78a. Unconditioned deliverance receives the name of dhātu.
This deliverance is the three dhātus.
78b. The destruction of craving is detachment.472
The abandoning of craving (rāga) is virāgadhātu, the sphere of
the absence of craving.
78c. The destruction of the others is abandoning.
The abandoning of the defilements other than craving is
prahāṇadhātu, the sphere of abandoning.
78d. The destruction of the object is called nirodhadhātu,
the sphere of extinction.473
The abandoning of the object, impure physical matter, etc.,
with the exception of the abandoning of the defilements, is the
realm of extinction.
Does one become disgusted by means of the same dharmas
through which one obtains detachment?
There are four alternatives.What are they?
The Path and the Saints 1039
79a-b. Disgust arises by means of the Patiences and the
Knowledges of Suffering and Origin.
It is only by means of the Patiences and the Knowledges of the
Truths of Suffering and Origin (vi.25d) that one obtains disgust,
and not by means of the other Patiences and Knowledges.
79b-c. Detachment arises through all the dharmas by means
of which there is abandoning.
The Patiences (=the Path of Seeing) and the Knowledges (=the
Path of Meditation) (vi. p. 949) of Suffering, of Origin, of
Extinction and of the Path, through which one abandons the
defilements, are also the means for acquiring detachment.
79d. There are therefore four alternatives.
1. If the ascetic does not abandon the defilements through the
Patiences and Knowledges of Suffering and Origin, he only
acquires disgust: these Patiences and these Knowledges have only
the causes of disgust for their sphere.
2. If the ascetic abandons his defilements through the Patience
and Knowledges of Extinction and the Path, he only acquires
detachment: these Patiences and these Knowledges have only the
causes of joy for their sphere.
3. If the ascetic abandons the defilements through the
Patiences and the Knowledges of Suffering and Origin, he acquires
detachment and disgust.
4. If the ascetic does not abandon the defilements through the
Patiences and the Knowledges of Extinction and the Path, he
acquires neither detachment nor disgust.1040 Chapter Six
Let us remark, with respect to the first and the fourth
alternative, that the ascetic who, already detached from craving,
enters the Path of Seeing, does not abandon defilements through
the Path of the Dharma Knowledge and the Dharma Know-
ledges.474 Furthermore, one does not abandon them through the
Knowledges which form part of the Preparatory Path, the Path of
Deliverance, as the Path of Excellence (vi.65b).475
Om. Homage to the Buddha.
We have spoken of the ksantis or Patiences (vi. 25d) and of the
jñānas or Knowledges (vi. 26b), of samyagdrsti or Right Views (vi.
50c) and of samyagjñāna or Right Knowledge (vi. 76c). Are the
Patiences actually Knowledges, and isn't Right Knowledge identical to
Right Views?
la. The pure Patiences are not a type of Knowledge.²
The eight types of pure Patience which form part of the Path of
Seeing (ābhisamayāntika, vi. 25d-26c) are not, by their nature,
knowledge;³ for, at the moment of patience, the defilement of doubt,
which each Patience abandons, is not already abandoned. But
Knowledge is certain: it is produced when doubt is abandoned. These
eight types of Patience are Seeing, because, by their nature, they are
examination. In opposition to the pure Patiences which are Seeing
and are not Knowledge,
lb. The prajñā of destruction and of non-arising is not seeing.³
The knowledge of destruction (kṣayajñāna) and the knowledge of
Non-Arising (anutpadajñāna, vi. 67a-b)-when they constitute
Bodhi-are not Seeing, because they do not include examination, and
because the intention of inquiry is not in them.61088 Chapter Seven
lc. All other pure prajñā is both one and the other.
Besides the Patiences and the two Knowledges named above,
pure prajñā is at one and the same time both seeing and
knowledge, for it includes examination, and is therefore seeing; it
is free from doubt, and is therefore knowledge. This refers to the
eight abhisamaya knowledges (duḥkhe jñāna, etc., vi. 26) [and also
to all prajñā of the pure Path of Meditation up to the Knowledge
of Extinction].
ld. All other prajñā is knowledge.
All other prajñā which is not pure, but worldly or impure [i.e.,
prajñā associated with the five sense consciousnesses,etc., and
prajñā associated with the mental consciousness].
le. Six are also seeing.
Six impure prajñās are at one and the same time knowledge
and seeing, namely the mental prajñā associated with the five
defilements which are views by nature (satkāyadṛṣṭi, etc., v7) and,
sixth, good prajñā, which is right worldly views (laukiki sam-
yagdrsti, i.41).
How many knowledges are there? There are ten;' but, in short
there are only two:
2a. Knowledge is pure or impure.
All the Knowledges are subsumed into two types of knowledge,The Knowledges 1089
impure or worldly knowledge, and pure or supermundane
knowledge. Of these two knowledges,
2b. The first is called conventional.8
Impure Knowledge is called "knowledge conforming to
worldly conventions.'
Why?
Because from usage it bears on (alambate) things which exist
conventionally:9 a jug, clothing, male, female, etc. [We say “from
usage," because it also bears on the real characteristics of things,
unique characteristics and common characteristics, vii. 10b].
2c-d. Pure knowledge is of two types, a knowledge of
dharmas and inferential knowledge.10
These two knowledges with the preceeding make three
knowledges: worldly, conventional knowledge, a knowledge of
dharmas, and inferential knowledge. Among these,
3a. Conventional knowledge bears on all.¹¹
All the conditioned and unconditioned dharmas are the object
of conventional knowledge.
3b-c. The knowledge of dharmas has for its object the
Suffering, etc., of Kāmadhātu.
The knowledge of dharmas has Suffering, the Arising of
Suffering, the Extinction of Suffering, and the Path leading to the
Extinction of Suffering of Kāmadhātu for its object.1090
Chapter Seven
3c-d. Inferential knowledge bears on Suffering, etc., of the
higher spheres.
Inferential knowledge has the Suffering, the Origin of
Suffering... of Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu for its object.
4a-b. When one takes into consideration the distinction of
the Truths, these two knowledges, make up four knowl-
edges.
Namely: the knowledge of Suffering (which includes the
knowledge of the dharmas of Suffering and the inferential
knowledge of Suffering), the knowledge of Origin, the knowledge
of Extinction, and the knowledge of the Path, because these two
knowledges have Suffering, its Origin, etc., for their object.
4b-c. These two knowledges, fourfold, are termed the
knowledge of Destruction and the Knowledge of Non-Ari-
sing. ¹2
The knowledge of dharmas and inferential knowledge, which
are as we have just seen fourfold by reason of their objects, are,
among the Arhats, when they are not of the nature of Seeing,¹3
called the Knowledge of Destruction and the Knowledge of
Non-Arising.
4d-5a. At the moment when they arise, they are inferential
knowledges of Suffering and Origin.
The Knowledge of Destruction and the Knowledge of Non-Ar-
ising, at the moment when they first arise are, by their nature,
inferential knowledge of Suffering and of its Origin in the higherThe Knowledges 1091
spheres, because they have for their object the skandhas of
Bhavagra¹4 under the aspects of Suffering and Origin.¹5 These two
knowledges therefore have the same object.
The Knowledge of Destruction follows Vajropamasamadhi (vi.
44d); and the Knowledge of Non-Arising follows the Knowledge
of Destruction.
Does Vajropamasamādhi have the same object as these two
knowledges at the moment of their arising?
When it has Suffering and Origin for its object, yes; when it
has Extinction and the Path for its object, no.
5b. The knowledge of the mind of another follows from
four.
The knowledge of the mind of another follows four knowl-
edges, a knowledge of the dharmas, inferential knowledge, a
knowledge of the Path, and conventional knowledge.
5c-d. It does not know a mind in a higher sphere, faculties,
personalities, nor the past and future.17
A mind is superior either from the point of view of its bhūmi,
from the point of view of its indriyas, or from the point of view of
its personality.
The knowledge of the mind of another of a lower sphere does
not know a mind in a higher sphere.
The knowledge of the mind of another of a saint with weak
faculties, namely a Śraddhādhimukta or a Samayavimukta (vi. 31c),
does not know the mind of a saint of strong faculties, namely a
Dṛṣṭiprāpta or a Asamayavimukta.
The knowledge of the mind of another of a lower saint does
not know the mind of a higher saint: in order, Anāgāmin, Arhat,1092
Chapter Seven
Pratyekabuddha, Samyaksambuddha. 18
When the mind of another is either past or future, the
knowledge of a mind of another does not know it, for this
knowledge has a present mind for its object.
Does the mind of another avoid being in the sphere of the
knowledge of the mind of another in other cases as well?
6a-b. The knowledge of dharmas and inferential knowl-
edges do not know one another.
The knowledge of the mind of another, when it is by its nature
a knowledge of dharmas, is not capable of knowing the mind of
another which is by nature inferential knowledge; when it is
inferential by nature, it is not capable of knowing the mind of
another which is by nature a series of dharmas.
Why?
Because these two knowledges have for their object the
dharmas which are opposed to Kāmadhātu and to the higher
spheres respectfully.
There is no knowledge of the mind of another in the Path of
Seeing. That is to say, an ascetic, while he cultivates the Path of
Seeing, is not endowed with the knowledge of the mind of another,
because the duration of the Path of Seeing is much reduced, and
because the Seeing of the Truths is rapid. But the mind of another
which is found in the Path of Seeing can be the object of the
knowledge of the mind of another.
When one desires to know, through the knowledge of the mind
of another, the mind of another which is found in the Path of
Seeing, one cultivates a preparatory exercise:6b-d. The Śrāvaka knows two moment of Seeing; the
Pratyekabuddha, three; the Buddha, without preparation,
all.
The Knowledges 1093
When a Śrāvaka cultivates the knowledge of the mind of
another in the desire to see the mind of an ascetic in the Path of
Seeing, he obtains some knowing of the first two moments, the
Patience of the Knowledge of the dharmas of Suffering and the
knowledge of dharmas¹9 but not the following moments (the
Patience of the Inferential Knowledge of Suffering...)-because
the knowledge of the inferential part (Suffering in the higher
spheres) of the Path of Seeing supposes a different preparatory
exercise. Thus, if this Śrāvaka then begins a new exercise in order
to obtain the knowledge of the inferential part, the ascetic whom
he examines has already arrived at the fifteenth moment when this
new preparatory exercise [which lasts thirteen moments] is
finished. The whole interval between the twelfth and the sixteenth
moment therefore is not in the sphere of the knowledge of the
mind of another of the Śrāvaka (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 515c7).
In the same circumstances, the Pratyekabuddha knows three
moments, namely the first two and the eighth; because the
required preparatory exercise, after the consciousness of the first
two moments, for the knowledge of the inferential part, is, among
the Pratyekabuddhas, weak.
According to other masters, he knows the first two moments
and the fifteenth.2⁰
The Buddha, through simple desire, and without preparatory
exercise, knows the mind of another in all the moments of the
Path of Seeing.
What are the characteristics of the Knowledge of Destruction1094 Chapter Seven
and of the Knowledge of Non-Arising?
7. The knowledge of destruction is, with respect to the
Truths, the certitude that they are known, abandoned, etc.;
the knowledge of non-arising is the certitude that they are
no longer to be known, to be abandoned, etc.²1
According to the Mūlaśāstra,2² "What is the knowledge of
extinction? 23 When one knows within himself that 'Suffering is
completely known by me, its Origin is abandoned by me, its
Extinction has been actualized by me, the Path has been cultivated
by me,' then the knowledge which results from this (tad upādāya
yaj jñānam), 24 the seeing, the knowing, the intuition, the
intelligence, the discernment, the clarity, the insight,25 is what is
called the Knowledge of Destruction." "What is the Knowledge of
Non-Arising? When one knows within himself that 'Suffering is
completely known by me and is no longer to be known... the Path
is no longer to be cultivated', then this knowledge... is what is
called the Knowledge of Non-Arising." [See the definition vii.
12a-b.]
But how can one, through a pure knowledge, have such a
knowledge? 26
The Masters of Kaśmir explain: Two conventional knowledges
are consecutive to two pure knowledges: "Suffering is known by
me...; Suffering is known by me and is no longer to be known." It is
by reason of the characteristic of these two conventional knowl-
edges that the Śästra defines the two pure knowledges. [This is
why the Śästra says: tad upādāya...]27
According to other masters,28 the ascetic knows, through a pure
knowledge, that he knows Suffering, etc.***
The Knowledges 1095
But we have said that the Knowledge of Destruction and the
Knowledge of Non-Arising are not seeing, or views. How can the
Śāstra define them as views?
The Sastra employs the term "view" through stylistic habit,29
using again the formula employed in the definition of the other
knowledges (the knowledge of Suffering,etc.). Or rather, by reason
of their characteristic of being directly perceived, these two
knowledges are qualified as seeing. It is by reason of this
characteristic of being directly perceived that it says in the Śāstra,³⁰
"Knowledge is seeing."31
There are ten knowledges: a knowledge of dharmas, inferential
knowledge, worldly, conventional knowledge, the knowledge of
the mind of another, the knowledge of Suffering, the knowledge of
Origin, the knowledge of Extinction, the knowledge of the Path,
the Knowledge of Destruction, and the Knowledge of Non-Ari-
sing.32
How are they included in one another?33
1. Conventional knowledge is made up of one knowledge,
namely the conventional knowledge, and one part of another
knowledge [namely the impure part of the knowledge of the mind
of another].34
2. A knowledge of dharmas is made up of one full knowledge
and one part of seven other knowledges, namely the Kämadhātu
part of the knowledge of suffering, of origin, of extinction, and of
the Path, the knowledge of the mind of another, the Knowledge of
Destruction, and the Knowledge of Non-Arising.
3. So too inferential knowledge, by replacing "the Kāmadhātu1096 Chapter Seven
part" with "the part relating to the two higher spheres (=Rūpad-
hātu and Ārūpyadhātu)."
4. The knowledge of suffering is made up of one knowledge
and one part of four other knowledges-that part of the knowl-
edge of dharmas, inferential knowledge, the Knowledge of
Destruction and the Knowledge of Non-Arising which have the
Truth of Suffering for their objects.
5-6. The knowledge of origin and of extinction are explained
according to the same principle.
7. A knowledge of the Path is made up of one knowledge and
one part of five knowledges: the knowledge of dharmas, inferential
knowledge, the Knowledge of Destruction, the knowledge of
Non-Arising, and the knowledge of the mind of another.
8. The knowledge of the mind of another is made up of one
knowledge and one part of four knowledges: the knowledge of
dharmas, inferential knowledge, a knowledge of the Path, and
conventional knowledge.
9. The Knowledge of Destruction is made up of one knowledge
and one part of six knowledges: the knowledge of dharmas,
inferential knowledge, the knowledge of suffering, of origin, of
extinction, and of the Path.³5
10. So too the Knowledge of Non-Arising.
How are the knowledges, which are twofold (pure and impure)
distributed into ten knowledges?
8. The knowledges are ten in number; the distinction is
established by reason of their nature, their opposition, their
aspect, their aspect and their object, their preparatory
exercises, the achievement of their task, and the extension
of their cause.
1. By reason of its nature, there is conventional knowledge,
because it is not absolute knowledge.36The Knowledges
2. By reason of their opposition, there is knowledge of the
dharmas and inferential knowledge: the first is opposed to
Kāmadhātu, and the second is opposed to the higher spheres.37
3. By reason of their aspect (ākāratas, vii.13), there is a
knowledge of Suffering and a knowledge of Origin: these two
knowledges have the same object (i.e., the pañcopādānaskandhas,
vi. English trans. p. 898 and 908), but differ in their aspects.38
4. By reason of their aspect and their object (ālambana), there
is a knowledge of Extinction and a knowledge of the Path which
differ in their aspects as well as in their objects.
5. By reason of their preparatory exercises, there is the
knowledge of the mind of another. Without doubt this knowledge
extends also to the mental states (caittas) of another, but the
preparatory exercise bears on the mind (citta); also, even though it
may know the caittas, it is termed paracittajñāna (the knowledge
of the mind of another) by reason of its preparatory exercise.
6. Because “that which should have been done has been done,”
there is the Knowledge of Destruction: this knowledge is the first
knowledge to arise in a series in which "that which should have
been done has been done." [The Knowledge of Non-Arising arises
in a similar series, but later.]
7. By reason of the extension of its causes, there is the
Knowledge of Non-Arising, for it has for its causes (=sabhā-
gahetu) all the pure knowledges, up to and including the
Knowledge of Destruction.
We have said that the knowledge of the dharmas [that is to say:
a. bearing on the Four Truths, b. in the Path of Seeing and in the
Path of Meditation] is opposed to all of Kāmadhātu [that is to say
it "opposes" the five categories of defilements, those abandoned
through the Seeing of the Four Truths and through Meditation, of
Kāmadhātu]. Furthermore1098
Chapter Seven
9a-c. The knowledge of dharmas, in the Pathway of
Meditation, when it bears on Extinction and the Path, is
opposed to the three spheres.
A knowledge of dharmas with respect to Extinction and the
Path, realized in the course of the Path of Meditation is opposed to
the three spheres-that is to say, these two knowledges oppose the
defilements of the higher spheres which are abandoned through
Meditation.39
9d. Inferential knowledge is not opposed to Kāmadhātu.
In none of its branches (Suffering, etc.) is inferential knowl-
edge opposed to the defilements of Kāmadhātu.
What are the aspects of the ten knowledges?
10a-b. A knowledge of dharmas and inferential knowledge
have sixteen aspects.
The sixteen aspects which will be explained later (vii. 13a).
10b-c. Conventional knowledge is the same and otherwise.
Conventional knowledge has the sixteen aspects; it also takes
up others, for it grasps unique characteristics, common characteris-
tics, etc.4⁰
10c-d. Four, because of the aspect of their Truth.4¹
A knowledge of Suffering, Origin, Extinction, and the Path,
bearing on the aspects of their Truths, each have four aspects.
lla-b. So too, when it is pure, the knowledge of the mind of
another. 42The Knowledges 1099
The knowledge of the mind of another, in its impure part (vii.
5b-6, note 16), bears on the aspects of its Truth; it therefore has
four aspects. This part of the knowledge of the mind of another is,
in fact, made up of the knowledge of the Path.
llb-c. When it is impure, it has for its aspects the unique
characteristics of its object.43
When the knowledge of the mind of another is impure, it
grasps the unique characteristics of its object (jñeya), namely the
mind and the mental states of another. Its aspects are in
conformity with these unique characteristics; therefore they are
not included in the sixteen.
Pure or impure
lld. It has for its sphere an individual object.44
When it bears on a mind, it does not bear on a mental state
(caitta); when it bears on a certain mental state (vedanā for
example), it does not bear on any other one (samjñā, for example).
If this is the case, why did the Blessed One say, "He knows in
truth the mind which is saraga (possesses craving) as being
sarāga",45 since the knowledge of the mind of another does not
know minds and mental states (craving, etc.) at one and the same
time, in the same way that one does not grasp the cloth and its
stain at one and the same time? 46
The expression sarāga, possessing craving, has two meanings.
A mind is sarāga because it is "mixed" with craving,47 or because it
is "united" to craving.48
The mind associated with craving (ii. 53c), that is to say, which
is presently in the prey of craving, is sarāga for two reasons; it is
mixed with craving, and it is united to craving.1100 Chapter Seven
Any other impure mind 49 is solely saraga to the extent that it is
united to craving.
Certain masters 50 think that the Sūtra, by the expression
saragacitta solely designates a mind mixed with craving, that is to
say, a mind associated with craving. As for the vigatarāga mind, a
mind without craving, this is, according to these masters, the mind
opposed to craving. In fact, they say, if the mind not associated
with craving were called vigatarāga, the mind associated with the
other defilements (hatred, etc.) would be also termed vigatarāga,
for they are not associated with craving.
Objection: In this hypothesis a non-defiled, indeterminate
mind (ii. 71b) is not sarāga, since it is not associated with craving;
it is not vigatarāga, since it is not opposed to craving. As a
consequence we must admit that what the other masters (the
Ābhidhārmikas) say, that the mind is sarāga through the fact of
being united to craving, without it necessarily being mixed with
craving. In this same way we must explain the other expressions of
the Sūtra up to "possessing delusion" (samoha) and “not
possessing delusion" (vigatamoha). [See above, note 45.]
[The Vaibhāṣikas say:] A good mind is called concentrated
because it is not turned away from its object.5¹ A defiled mind is
distracted, because it is associated with distraction.
The Westerners, or Masters of Gandhāra, say: A mind
associated with laziness is concentrated;52 a distracted mind is any
other defiled mind.
[The Vaibhāṣikas] do not admit this definition. They say: In
this system, the same mind, namely a defiled mind associated with
laziness, will be at one and the same time concentrated and
distracted. Further, this system contradicts the Mülaśāstra
(according to the Japanese editor, Jñānaprasthāna, 15.9), whichThe Knowledges 1101
says, "He knows in truth the concentrated (samkşipta) mind,
endowed with the four knowledges, a knowledge of dharmas,
inferential knowledge, worldly conventional knowledge, and a
knowledge of the Path" (Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p. 950c8). [See below, p.
A defiled mind is sunken down, because it is associated with
indolence.53
A good mind is "well in hand", because it is associated with
correct effort.54
A defiled mind is called small, because it is beloved by small
persons. A good mind is called large, because it is beloved by great
persons.55
Or rather the two minds, a defiled mind and a good mind, are
called small and great because their roots, their worth, their
followings, their entourage, and their forces, are respectively, small
or great.
In fact, 1. a defiled mind is of small roots, having two roots,
delusion, plus anger or greed: a good mind is always associated
with three roots of good; 2. a defiled mind is of small worth, being
obtained without effort: a good mind is of great worth, being
realized at the cost of great effort; 3. a defiled mind has a small
following, for a defiled mind is not accompanied by the acquisition
of a future mind of the same type;56 a good mind has a great
following, being accompanied by the acquisition of future mind57
of the same type; 4. a defiled mind has a small following, being
surrounded only by three skandhas, vedanā, saṁjñā, and saṁskāras;
a good mind has a great following, for it always includes rūpa
(dhyānānāsravasaṁvara, iv. 4a, 26); 5. a defiled mind is of small1102 Chapter Seven
force, for the roots of good, cut off, are reborn (ii. 36, English trans.
p. 210 iv. 80c); a good mind is of great force, for the Patience of the
Knowledge of the dharmas concerned with Suffering definitively
cuts off ten latent defilements (anuśayas vi. English trans. p. 943).
This is why a defiled mind is called small, and a good mind,
great.
The defiled mind is sa-uttara, because it is associated with
frivolity (auddhatya); the good mind is anuttara, because it is
opposed to frivolity.58
Calm and not calm minds are explained in the same way.
A defiled mind is non-absorbed, because it is associated with
distraction; a good mind is absorbed, because it is opposed to
distraction.
A defiled mind is uncultivated, because the two cultivations
(vii. 27) are absent. A good mind is cultivated, for the contrary
reason.
A defiled mind is undelivered, not being delivered in and of
itself, nor delivered with regard to the series in which it arises.59 A
good mind can be delivered in and of itself and from the point of
view of the series in which it arises.
Such is the explanation of the Vaibhāṣikas.
This explanation, [say the Sauträntikas,] does not conform to
the Sūtra and it does not take into account the meaning of the
terms.The Knowledges 1103
i. How does it not conform to the Sūtra?
The Sūtra says, "What is a mind internally concentrated? A
mind which is accompanied by torpor and laziness, or a mind
internally accompanied by calm but not insight."
"What is a mind externally distracted? A mind which is
dispersed towards the five objects of pleasure, or which is
externally accompanied by insight, but not by calm."60 [It results
from this text that a mind associated with laziness can be
concentrated.]
But, [the Vaibhāṣikas answer,] we have said (p. 1100, line 21)
that if a mind associated with laziness is concentrated, a defiled
(and consequently distracted) mind, when it is associated with
laziness, will be at one and the same time concentrated and
distracted.
Yes, you have said this, but it does not hold. In fact, we can only
affirm that a defiled mind, when it is associated with laziness, is
distracted,61
But, [answer the Vaibhāṣikas,] your thesis contradicts the
Śāstra!
It may. But it is better to contradict a Šāstra than a Sūtra.62
ii. How does this explanation lack the proper meaning of the
different terms?
Because it gives the characteristics of different minds-dis-
tracted, sunken-down, small, not calm, non-absorbed, uncultivated,
and undelivered on the one hand, and concentrated, well in hand,
etc., on the other hand-without noting their differences.63
[The Vaibhāṣikas answer:] It is false that we do not indicate
the special sense of the different terms. The quality of "defiled" of
distracted minds, etc., is the same; but we explain the particular
defects of these different defiled minds. In the same way we
explain the particular qualities of the different good minds, in
which their good qualities are not differentiated.
We answer that the meaning of the different terms is not
correctly established because you fail to eliminate the objection of1104 Chapter Seven
contradiction with the Sūtra.64 [The Sūtra, in fact, says that a mind
accompanied by torpor and laziness is concentrated. A mind united
with laziness, and defiled through union with torpor, is concen-
trated, but it cannot be good, for torpor is a klešamahābhūmika.]
And if, [as the Vaibhāṣikas believe], the Sūtra designates, by
the sunken-down mind,65 a small mind, it would not speak
separately of a sunken-down mind and a small mind. Now it
distinguishes them, for it says, "When the mind is sunken down, or
fears becoming sunken down, this is not a proper time to cultivate
the praśrabdhi, samādhi, and upekṣa parts of Bodhi. When the
mind is small or fears becoming small, this is not a fitting moment
to cultivate the dharmavicaya, vīrya, and prīti parts of Bodhi."66
Objection [of the Vaibhāṣikas:] Is the cultivation of the parts of
Bodhi partial in the case which concerns us?67 [Must we believe
that at a certain moment one cultivates praśrabdhi, samādhi,
upekṣa, and at another moment dharmavicaya, vīrya, and prīti? ]68
No. When the text says "cultivation", it does not signify the
fact of actualizing, but the fact of fixing the attention on, or taking
as an object.
[Answer of the Vaibhāṣikas:]69 The mind in which indolence
dominates and in which frivolity is reduced is called "sunken
down" (līna). The mind in which frivolity dominates and in which
indolence is reduced is called “small” (uddhata). These two minds
are therefore distinct, and the Sūtra can speak of them separately
without contradicting our system. But, taking into consideration
the fact that these two defilements, indolence and frivolity, coexist
in a single mental heap, we say that the mind which is sunken
down is small.7⁰
7¹ We do not pretend to challenge a text of intentional
meaning; but such is not the intention of the Sūtra [i.e., to
designate a mind in which indolence dominates as sunken down...]
***The Knowledges 1105
In the thesis presented above (p. 1099, line 23) that all minds
"united with craving" (rāgasamyukta) "possess craving" (sarāga),
what is the meaning of the expression rāgasamyukta, united with
craving?
1. If a mind is united with craving, and as a consequence
possesses craving, because the possession of craving continues in
the series in which this mind is produced, then the mind of an
imperfect saint or Śaikṣa, even when it is pure, will be termed
"possessing craving", since the craving has not been completely
expelled from the series of the Saikṣa.72
2. If a mind is both united with craving and possesses craving
through the fact of being the object (ālambana) of the "active
craving"73, then the impure mind of an Arhat will possess craving,
since this mind can be the object of the craving of another
person.74
If
you do not admit that the mind of an Arhat can be grasped as
an object through the craving of another person, how can this
mind be termed impure?
Would you say that it is impure, not because it is the object of
the craving of another, but because it is the object of a “general
defilement" (sāmānyakleśa, v. 12, namely of ignorance or delusion)
of another? In this hypothesis, do not say that this mind is sarāga,
that it "possesses craving"; say rather that it is samoha, that it
"possesses moha," since it is the object of the moha or ignorance of
another.
But, we would say, none of these proposed explanations is
valid. In fact the knowledge of the mind of another does not bear
on the "possessions" which can be found in the series of another.
Consequently when I know that the mind of another person
possesses craving, this mind of another does not possess craving
because it is "united with craving" in the sense that it is
accompanied by the possession of craving, or in the sense that it is
found in the series in which this possession has not been expelled.
The knowledge of the mind of another no longer knows the
craving which would be the object of the mind of another.1106 Chapter Seven
Therefore a mind is not termed sarāga through the fact of
rāgasamyoga, through the fact of being "united with rāga" in the
proposed twofold sense.
[Objection:]75 If this is the case, what is a sarāga mind?
[Vasubandhu:] One should determine the intention of the
Sūtra. A sarāga mind or one "possessing craving” is not a
rāgasamyukta mind, a mind "united to craving", but a rāgasam-
prayukta mind, a mind “associated with craving," a mind in which
craving presently exists. Vigatarāga, "without craving" is a mind
which is not associated with craving, even when this mind will be
accompanied by the possession of craving.
[Objection:] The expression vigatarāga cannot have this
meaning; for another Sūtra says that a mind which is without
craving (vigatarāga), without anger (vigatadveşa), and without
ignorance (vigatamoha), does not fall back into threefold
existence. Now if this mind is accompanied by the possession of
craving, etc., it will fall back again.
[Vasubandhu:] In this other Sūtra, “a mind without craving"
(vigatarāga citta) signifies "a mind which is not accompanied by
the possession of craving" (vigatarāgaprāpti citta).
[Objection:] Have you not refuted your own opinion? We said
in fact (page 1100, line 5) that if one calls a mind without craving
vigatarāga, that is, a mind in which craving is not presently active,
then one should term all minds associated with another defilement
vigataraga. But one does not say that a mind associated with hatred
is vigataraga, "without craving."
[Vasubandhu:] There is nothing wrong with saying that a
mind without craving is vigatarāga. But one does not consider a
mind without craving but associated with hatred as being
vigataraga, but rather as "possessing hatred" (sadveşa), distin-
guishing it through its specific characteristic which is one of being"associated with hatred."
The Knowledges 1107
When the knowledge of the mind of another attains its object,
namely the mind of another person, does it attain this mind of
another as this latter knows it?
No. When one knows the mind of another, one does not see
the object of this mind; one does not see this mind as it itself
knows something: one knows only that it is defiled, etc.; one does
not know the object, color, etc., by reason of which it is defiled. If it
were otherwise, the knowledge of the mind of another would bear
on rūpa, etc., and would no longer be the knowledge of the mind of
another; the knowledge of the mind of another would bear on
itself: for the person whose mind I know can at the same moment
know my mind.
The characteristics of the knowledge of the mind of another
are set: it knows the individual characteristics of a thing (the
dravya-svalakṣaṇa) but not its general, conventionally true
characteristics (its samvṛtisat-sāmānyalakṣaṇa); it knows mind and
mental states but not physical matter, the present but not the past
or future, of another but not of oneself, of the sphere of
Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu, but not of Ārūpyadhātu; or rather the
pure mind and mental states, of the category to which he himself
belongs: pure, he knows a pure mind and mental states; impure, he
knows an impure mind and mental states. The knowledge of the
mind of another is incompatible with the Path of Seeing and the
Uninterrupted Path (ānantaryamārga), with the Samadhi of
Emptiness and the Samadhi of No-Marks, and with the Knowl-
edge of Destruction and the Knowledge of Non-Arising. Other
conditions are not excluded: the knowledge of the mind of another
is compatible with the Path of Meditation (the Path of Liberation,
vimuktimārga, and the Path of Distinction, visesamārga), with the
Uncommitted Samadhi (apranihitasamadhi), etc.
The teaching of the knowledge of the mind of another is ended.1108
Chapter Seven
12a-b. The other has fourteen aspects by excluding the
aspect of emptiness and the aspect of non-self.
The "others" are the Knowledge of Destruction and the
Knowledge of Non-Arising.
Both have fourteen aspects (vii. 13a), excluding the aspect of
emptiness and the aspect of non-self. In fact, these two Knowl-
edges, even though they are of the absolute level of truth,76 are also
included in the conventional level of truth (vi. 4);77 they are
therefore foreign to the aspects of emptiness and non-self. When
an ascetic departs from the contemplation in which the knowl-
edges of the absolute truth are realized, through the force of these
knowledges, later knowledges 78 are produced which are of the
conventional level of truth: "my births are cut off, the religious life
has been fully cultivated, I have done what should have been done,
and I do not know of any more existences for me."⁹" The two
knowledges, the Knowledge of Destruction and the Knowledge of
Non-Arising, therefore participate in the conventional level of
truth, not in and of themselves or through definition, but through
their outflowing.
Are there any pure aspects outside of these sixteen aspects?
12c. There are no pure aspects outside of the sixteen.
The Masters of Kaśmir say that there are no pure aspects
outside of the sixteen.
12d. Some others, according to the Śāstra, affirm that there
are.The Knowledges 1109
The Foreign Masters maintain the opposite opinion. [For the
opinion of "the other masters," see p. 1094, line 27].
The Mülaśāstra says,80 "Can one distinguish the dharmas
belonging to Kāmadhātu through a mind not included among the
Dhātus (that is to say, pure)? One can distinguish them as they are,
as impermanent, suffering, empty, impersonal, cause, proximate
cause, near cause, specificing cause; there is this characteristic
(sthāna), there is this cause (vastu)."
One should thus consider the specific aspects through the
expressions asty etat sthānam, asty etad vastu, as two pure aspects
which are added to the eight aspects of suffering and origin.
According to the Masters of Kaśmīr, the Śāstra does not teach
the existence of these two additional aspects. One should
understand, ". it is fitting (asty ayam yogaḥ) that a pure mind
distinguish these dharmas as impermanent. . .'
The Foreign Masters answer that this interpretation is not
admissible. For, if the Śästra employs the terms asty etat sthānam...
without referring to the pure aspects, but only through simple
phraseology, it would also employ them in a parallel passage,
namely when it explains, "Can one distinguish the dharmas
belonging to Kāmadhātu by a mind susceptible of being abandoned
by Seeing the Truths? Yes, one can distinguish them, namely, one
becomes attached to, one hates, one prides oneself, one errs, one
erroneously distinguishes these dharmas as self, mine (=kayadṛṣṭi),
as eternal or perishable (=antagrāhadṛṣṭi), as non-cause, non-ac-
tion, nonexistent (=mithyādṛṣți), as supreme, excellent, distin-
guished, superior (=dṛṣṭiparāmaría), as purification, deliverance,
salvation (=silavrataparāmarśa), with anxiety, disagreement, or
doubt."81 This text should have the expressions asty etat sthā-
if they solely signify asty ayam yogaḥ, in the sense that it is
fatal that a mind susceptible of being abandoned through the
Seeing of the Truths considers the dharmas as self, mine...
***1110 Chapter Seven
How many things constitute the sixteen aspects?
13a. The aspects are sixteen things.82
Certain masters said that the aspects, sixteen in name, are only
seven in fact. The four aspects of the Truth of Suffering are in fact
distinct from one another. The aspects of the other Truths, in their
fourfold name, only constitute one thing for each Truth: hetu
(material cause), samudaya (arising or origin), prabhava (appear-
ance), and pratyaya (efficient condition) are synonyms and are only
one aspect; in the same way that Śakra, Indra, and Puramdara are
different names for one and the same personage. Ascetics
contemplate, separately, the four aspects of the Truth of Suffering,
and any one of the aspects, material cause, etc., of the three other
Truths.
But [the Vaibhāṣikas] maintain that the sixteen aspects exist in
fact, [for they should be contemplated one by one].83
I. For the Truth of Suffering:
1. Impermanence, because it arises dependent upon efficient
causes.
2. Suffering, because it is painful by nature (vi. 3).
3. Empty, as it opposes the belief in the view of things
pertaining to self.
4. No soul, as it opposes the belief in a self.
II. For the Truth of Origin:
1. Cause (hetu), because it has the characteristic of a seed
(bijadharmayogena). The hetu is a distant or material cause. The
word yoga signifies nyāya or truth.
2. Arising, as it produces. This is the near cause, that from
which a dharma immediately arises or originates.
3. Successive appearance, which constitutes the series: seed,
4The Knowledges 1111
shoot, stalk...
4. Efficient conditions (pratyaya), as realizing an effect in joint
causation; for example, the coming together of efficient condition-
s-earth, stick, wheel, twine, water, etc.-produces a jug (see ii.
III. For the Truth of Extinction:
1. Extinction, by reason of the destruction of the [impure]
skandhas.
2. Calm, by reason of the extinction of the three fires, craving,
anger, and delusion (viii. 26c).
3. Excellent, by reason of the absence of all pain.
4. Salvation, because it is disassociated from all causes of pain.
IV. For the Truth of the Path:
1. Path, because one traverses it (towards Nirvāṇa.)84
2. Truth, because it is yogayukta, that is to say, endowed with
proofs, endowed with resources or means.
3. Obtaining, because it brings about correct obtaining, that is
to say one obtains (Nirvāṇa through it.)
4. Definitive release, because it causes one to pass beyond in a
definitive manner.
There is a second exegesis:
I. For the Truth of Suffering:
1. Impermanent (anitya), because it is not definitive (anatyan-
tika).
2. Suffering, because it resembles a burden.
3. Empty, because it is empty of puruşa (agent, etc.).
4. No-soul, because it does not obey the will.85
II. For the Truth of Origin:1112 Chapter Seven
1. Cause (hetu), because it comes about from that (the root hi
signifies gati; hetu signifies hinoty asmāt).
2. Arising (samudaya), because there is emergence: (the
dharma emerges from the future).86
3. Appearance (prabhava), as it is a procession (prasaraṇa).
4. Condition (pratyaya) or foundation, that is, the essential
element from the action of generation.
III. For the Truth of Extinction:
1. Extinction, because of the cessation of the former suffering
and of the non-continuation of subsequent suffering.
2. Calm, because it is delivered from the three conditioned
characteristics (saṁskṛtalakṣaṇas. ii. 45c).
3. Excellent, because it is absolutely good (pāramārthaśubha, iv.
8c).
4. Salvation, because it supremely strengthens (9v. 8b).87
IV. For the Truth of the Path:
1. Path, because it is opposed to the wrong path.
2. Truth, because it is opposed to non-truth.
3. Obtaining, because it is not in contradiction with the city of
Nirvāṇa.88
4. Definitive release, because it abandons existence in the
Three Dhātus.
Since ancient explanations differ, we are permitted to present a
third explanation:
I. For the Truth of Suffering:
1. Impermanent, because it arises and perishes.The Knowledges 1113
2. Suffering, because it is repugnant to the mind of Āryans (vi.
English trans. p. 898).
3. Empty, because no ātman is found in it.
4. No soul, because this is not an atman.
II. For the Truth of Origin: the four aspects of the Second
Truth, cause (hetu), arising (samudaya), appearance (prabhava),
and condition (pratyaya), are explained according to the Sūtra,
"The five upādānaskandhas (impure skandhas, i. 8a) are chandamū-
laka, chandasamudaya, chandajātīya, chandaprabhava," that is to
say they have chanda (=desire-tṛṣṇa-thirst) for their root (mūla)
or hetu, which brings about their arising (samudaya), for their
condition (chandajātīya=chandapratyaya), for their appearance
(prabhava).89 The only difference between the Sūtra and the Sastra
is that the latter places the condition (pratyaya) aspect in first
place, and not the appearance (prabhava) aspect.⁹0
What is the difference between these four types of "proces-
sions"?
A. One should distinguish four states (avastha) of desire
(chanda): 1. the affection that one experiences for oneself when
one thinks, "I am", without otherwise distinguishing an actual
"self," without thinking of a past or future self; 2. the desire for
re-existence without any other specification; 3. the desire for a
certain re-existence; 4. the desire for reincarnation, a desire which
makes one accomplish a certain action.
The first desire is the initial cause of suffering as the seed is
the initial cause of the fruit-; it is called hetu.⁹1
The second desire is that which brings about re-existence as
the production of the shoot, stalk, etc., is a casual process or arising
(samudaya) which brings about fruit; it is therefore called
samudaya, a cause which brings forth.1114 Chapter Seven
The third desire is the cause which determines the quality of
suffering, as the field, the water, the fertilizer, etc., determine the
virility, the ripening, the appearance of the fruit; it is therefore
called pratyaya, or condition.92
The fourth desire is the cause from whence the fruit appears-
as the flower is the cause of the fruit; it is therefore called
prabhāva, or appearance.
The fourth desire is the immediate or direct cause; the other
three are the mediate or indirect causes.
B. And again, according to the Sūtra," there are two groups of
five "modes of desire" (tṛṣṇāvicaritas), and two groups of four,
which are, respectively, the four desires studied above. The first
two desires are of five aspects, and the last two are of four.
a. When one thinks asmi, "I am," general affection for one's
own person without determination is produced, which is fivefold: I
am such; I am the same [as formerly]; I am different; I am
something that is; I am something that is not.
b. When one thinks bhaviṣyāmi, “I shall be," there is produced
a general desire for re-existence without determination, which is
also fivefold: "I shall be such, I shall be thus, I shall be different, I
shall exist, and I shall not exist."
c. There is produced particularized desire for re-existence,
which is fourfold: "May I be; may I be such; may I be the same; may
I be different.”
d. There is produced a desire for reincarnation, which is
fourfold: "It is absolutely necessary that I may be, that I may be
such, the same, different. 94
The first desires are the initial cause of suffering; they are
therefore the hetu... The rest as above.
III. For the Truth of Extinction:
1. Extinction, because it cuts off transmigration."
2. Calm, because it is cessationof all suffering; thus it is said,The Knowledges 1115
"All the samskāras, Oh Bhikṣus, are suffering; only Nirvāṇa alone
is absolute calm."96
3. Excellent, because it is the highest.
4. Definitive salvation, because it is without returning.
IV. For the Truth of the Path:
1. Path, because it resembles the right path.
2. Truth, because it is true.
3. Obtaining, because it is determined; that is to say one arrives
by this path and not by another, as it is said, “This path leads to
purity, other systems do not lead to it."
4. Definitive release, because it is definitive separation from
threefold existence.
[Fourth explanation.]⁹7
[I. For the Truth of Suffering:]
Furthermore, it is in order to cure persons who nourish views
of permanence, bliss, of things pertaining to the self, and a soul
that the aspects of impermanence, suffering, empty, and no-soul
are established.98
[II. For the Truth of Arising:]
1. The cause aspect is opposed to the view, “There is only one
cause" (nästi hetuḥ, v. 7, English trans. p. 777).
2. The arising aspect is opposed to the view, "There is only one
cause"-be it İśvara, or pradhāna (ii. 64). Cause is a complex.
3. The appearance aspect is opposed to the idea of evolution
(pariņāmadṛṣṭi), the theory that bhāva, or existence, existing
initially, transforms itself: rather, bhāva begins.99
4. The condition aspect is opposed to the view that the world is
created by an intelligent being (buddhipūrvakṛtadṛṣṭi, iv. 1): things
arise from a multiplicity of causes. 1001116 Chapter Seven
[III. For the Truth of Extinction:]
1. The extinction aspect is opposed to the view that there is no
deliverance.
2. The calm aspect is opposed to the view that deliverance is
suffering.
3. The excellent aspect is opposed to the view that the
happiness of the dhyānas and samapāttis is excellent (v. 7, English
trans. p. 777).
4. The definitive release aspect is opposed to the view that
deliverance is subject to falling, that it is not definitive.
[IV. For the Truth of the Path.]
The Path, truth, cultivation, and definitive release aspects
oppose, respectively, the views that there is no path, that a false
path is the Path, that there is another path, and that the Path is
subject to falling.
13b. The aspects are prajñā.101
The aspects are by their nature mental prajñā or discernment.
(ii. 24).
But, we would say, if this is so, then prajñā, the knowledge that
discerns the dharmas, will not be endowed with the aspects, for
prajñā cannot be associated (samprayukta) with prajñā. It i
therefore correct to say [—with the Sautrāntikas-] that "aspect"
is a mode of perceiving (grahana) objects by the mind and mental
states, 102
Is it solely prajñā which perceives the different, unique
characteristics (visesa, i. 14c) of objects?
13b-c. Everything that has an object perceives.Prajñā and all the other dharmas which have an object
(sālamba) 103 perceive.
The Knowledges 1117
13d. Everything that exists is the object of perception.
Everything that exists is perceived by the dharmas which have
an object.
We have therefore three more or less large categories: 1.
prajñā is aspect, subject, and object; 2. the other minds and mental
states, which are associated with prajñā, are subject and object; and
3. all the other dharmas, conditioned or unconditioned, are only
object.104
We have explained the aspects of the ten knowledges; we must
now explain their natures, the sphere which serves as their
support (bhūmi), and the person (āśraya) in whom they arise.
14a. The first is of three natures; the others are good.
"The first" is worldly, conventional knowledge, because this
knowledge is named first in the Kārika (vii. 2b)¹05, and is of three
types, good, bad, or neutral. The nine other knowledges are only
good.
14b. The first exists in all spheres.
It exists in all spheres, from Kāmadhātu up to Bhavagra
(=naivasaṁjñānāṁjñāyatana).
14c. In six, the knowledge named dharma.1118 Chapter Seven
A knowledge of the dharmas is obtained in or through the Four
Dhyānas, and in Anāgamya and Dhyānāntara.
14c-d. In nine, that which is called anvaya (inferential).
Inferential knowledge is obtained in the six spheres which
have been mentioned, and furthermore, in three Ārūpyas.
14d. So too six jñānas.
When one considers them together, some six knowledges,-
the knowledge of Suffering, Origin, Extinction, the Path,
Destruction, and Non-Arising-are obtained in nine spheres;
when they form part of the knowledge of dharmas, they are
obtained in six spheres; when they form part of inferential
knowledge, they are obtained in nine spheres.
15a. The knowledge of the mind of another exists in the
Four Dhyānas.
The knowledge of the mind of another is only obtained in the
Four Dhyānas, and nowhere else.
15b. It has for its support a person either in Kāmadhātu or
Rūpadhātu.
Beings in Kāmadhātu and Rūpadḥātu realize the knowledge of
the mind of another.
15c. The knowledge of dharmas, a person in Kāmādhātu. 106
The knowledge of dharmas can only be realized by a person in
Kāmadhātu, and not by a person in either Rūpadhātu or Ārūpyadhātu.
15d. Others, in persons of the three spheres.What are the other knowledges?
They are the eight knowledges with the exception of the
knowledge of the mind of another and the knowledge of dharmas.
The Knowledges 1119
We have explained the spheres in which one acquires the
knowledges, and the sphere to which the persons who can acquire
the knowledges belong. Let us explain the relationship of the
knowledges with the four applications of mindfulness (vi. 15).
16a. The knowledge of Extinction is an application of
mindfulness.
The knowledge of Extinction is an application of mindfulness
which relates to a dharma.
16b. The knowledge of the mind of another is threefold.
16c. The others, four.
The knowledge of the mind of another, related to the mind of
another, necessarily relates to vedanā, saṁjñā, and the samskāras.
By excluding the knowledge of Extinction and the knowledge
of the mind of another, the other eight knowledges have the four
applications of mindfulness for their nature [The knowledge of
Suffering, in fact, sometimes relates to the body...; the knowledge
of the Path, when it has pure discipline ¹07 for its object, is an
application of mindfulness related to the body].
***1120 Chapter Seven
The different knowledges are the object of how many other
knowledges?
16d. Nine knowledges are the object of a knowledge of
dharmas.
Excluding inferential knowledge.
17a. Nine are the object of inferential knowledge and
knowledge of the Path.
Excluding the knowledge of dharmas in inferential knowledge;
by excluding worldly conventional knowledge in the knowledge of
the Path, because it does not form part of the Path.
17b. Two are the object of the knowledge of Suffering and
Origin.
Worldly conventional knowledge and the part of the knowl-
edge of the mind of another which is impure, are the object of a
knowledge of Suffering and of Origin.
17c. Ten, of four.
Ten knowledges are the object of worldly conventional
knowledge, a knowledge of the mind of another, the Knowledge of
Destruction and the Knowledge of Non-Arising.
17c. None are the object of one.
No knowledge is the object of the knowledge of Extinction
whose only object is Extinction obtained through conscious effort
(pratisamkhyanirodha).
***The Knowledges
How many dharmas constitute in their totality the object of the
ten knowledges? How many dharmas constitute the object of each
knowledge? 108
17d. The totality of their object is ten dharmas.¹09
What are these ten dharmas?
18a-b. Dharmas of the Three Dhātus, pure dharmas,
unconditioned, each category being twofold.
The conditioned dharmas are divided into eight classes:
dharmas of Kāmadhātu, of Rūpadhātu, of Ārūpyadhātu, plus the
pure dharmas, all being either associated with the mind or not
(saṁprayukta, viprayukta, ii. 22).
The unconditioned dharmas are divided into two classes, good
and neutral.110
Which of these two classes of dharmas are the object of the ten
knowledges?
1. Worldly conventional knowledge is related to ten dharmas;
2. a knowledge of dharmas is related to five: two dharmas of
Kāmadhātu, associated or not with the mind; 111 and a good
unconditioned dharma; 3. inferential knowledge is related to
seven: two of Rūpadhātu, two of Ārūpyadhātu, and two pure,
which make six, and a good unconditioned dharma; 4-5. the
knowledge of Suffering and of Origin are related to only good
unconditioned dharmas; 7. a knowledge of the Path is related to
the two pure dharmas; 8. a knowledge of the mind of another is
related to three; the dharmas associated with the mind which are
of Kāmadhātu, and of the Rūpadhātu, and pure; 9-10. the
Knowledge of Destruction and the Knowledge of Non-Arising are
related to nine dharmas, with the exception of neutral uncondi-
tioned dharmas.1122 Chapter Seven
Can one, through a single knowledge,¹¹2 know all of the
dharmas?
No.
Yet
18c-d. One conventional knowledge, with the exception of
its own complex, knows the rest as non-self.
When a moment of conventional knowledge knows all the
dharmas as not being a self, this is with the exception, in the
totality of the dharmas, of 1. itself, this same moment of
conventional knowledge, for the subject of knowledge cannot be its
own object;¹¹3 2. the mental dharmas which are associated with it,
for they have the same object as it does; and 3. the dharmas
disassociated from the mind but which accompany it, for example,
its characteristics (ii. 45c), for they are too close.
This conventional knowledge of universal consciousness
belongs only to Kāmadhātu, being prajñā of hearing or reflection
(śrutamayı, cintamayī, vi. English trans. p. 913), not prajñā of
absorption (bhāvanāmayī, iv. 123c), for the conventional knowl-
edge which is of this third type of prajñā always has a determined
sphere for its object. If it were otherwise one could obtain at one
and the same time detachment with respect to all of the spheres.114
The different categories of humans are endowed with how
many knowledges?
A common person possesses only worldly conventional
knowledge; when he is detached [from Kāmadhātu], he also
possesses a knowledge of the mind of another.The Knowledges 1123
As for the Āryan,
19a-b. Not detached, in the first pure moment, he possesses
one knowledge.
An Aryan who is not detached through a worldly path before
entering the Path, in the moment in which the Patience which is
the knowledge of the dharmas related to Suffering (duḥkhe
dharmajñānakṣānti, vi. 25c) arises, possesses a single knowledge,
namely worldly conventional knowledge, because this Patience is
not a knowledge (vii. 1).
19c. In the second moment, he possesses three knowledges.
At the moment of the knowledge of dharmas related to
Suffering, he possesses worldly conventional knowledge, a
knowledge of dharmas, and a knowledge of Suffering.
19c-d. Beyond, in four moments, each time adding a
knowledge.
A knowledge is added in each of four subsequent moments; at
the fourth moment (the inferential knowledge of suffering) there
is inferential knowledge; at the sixth moment (a knowledge of
dharmas related to Origin) there is the knowledge of origin; at the
tenth moment (the knowledge of the dharmas as they relate to
Extinction), there is the knowledge of Extinction; and at the
fourteenth moment (the knowledge of the dharmas as related to
the Path), there is the knowledge of the Path.
Consequently, having attained the knowledge of the dharmas
related to the Path, the ascetic possesses seven knowledges.115
For an Aryan who, before entering into the Pure Path (the
Path of Seeing), has obtained detachment through a worldly path,1124 Chapter Seven
we must add the knowledge of the mind of another. A samayavi-
mukta Arhat (vi.50, 56) possesses nine knowledges, by adding the
Knowledge of Extinction; an asamayavimukta Arhat in addition
possesses the Knowledge of Non-Arising (vi. 50).116
How many knowledges does the ascetic cultivate (acquire)¹¹7 at
one and the same time in different stages, the Path of Seeing the
Truths, and in the Path of Meditation, etc.?
With respect to the fifteen minds (vi.28c-d) of the Path of
Seeing:
20a-c. In Seeing, future patiences and knowledges exist to
the extent to which they are produced.118
Those which are produced are acquired or cultivated. For
example, when an ascetic produces the Patience of the knowledge
of the dharmas related to Suffering, he cultivates future Patience of
this same type, and he takes possession of future Patience of this
same type. [And so on to the Patience of the inferential knowledge
of the Path].119 The four aspects of this Patience (impermanence,
etc.) are also acquired when any one of the aspects is produced.
Why, in the Path of Seeing, is there only acquisition of the
knowledge and the aspects of the type of knowledge and the
aspects produced? 120
When the Patience of the knowledge of the dharmas related to
Suffering is produced, the gotra,—that is to say, the seed or the
cause of this Patience, and the gotras of its four aspects, are
grasped,¹21 whereas the gotras of the knowledge of dharmas
related to Suffering, etc., are not grasped. As for the aspects, we see
that the four aspects of each Truth are of the same type, for they
have the same object. When one of them is produced, the gotras of
the others are grasped.
20c-d. In the Path of Seeing one also acquires conventional
knowledge at the moment of the three inferential
knowledges.¹22
The ascetic takes possession of future conventional knowledgeThe Knowledges 1125
at the moment of the three inferential knowledges of Suffering,
Origin, and Extinction (moments 4, 8, and 12 of the Path of
Seeing, vi. 26b): not at the moment of the knowledge of the
dharmas, because, in the knowledge of the dharmas, each Truth
has not been understood in its totality, but only relating to
Kāmadhātu.
21a. This conventional knowledge is termed "the end of
abhisamaya."123
It is termed abhisamayāntika jñāna, because it is cultivated
(=acquired) at the end of the comprehension of each Truth.
Why does an ascetic not take possession of it at the moment of
inferential knowledge of the Path (sixteenth moment of compre-
hension or abhisamaya, the first moment of the Path of Medita-
tion)?
a. Because the Path has not been understood (abhisamita)
formerly, through a worldly path, under its aspects of Path, Truth,
etc. (above p. 1111).¹24
b. Because the Path is not susceptible of being understood in its
entirety. Suffering, its Origin, and its Extinction can be respec-
tively known, abandoned, realized, in their entirety; but the Path
cannot be practiced (= actualized) in its entirety. Without doubt
one cannot say of a person who is in the Path of Seeing, that, at the
end of his comprehension of the Truths of Origin and Extinction,
he has complete abandoning of Origin, and complete realization of
Extinction: 125 yet a time will come when this abandoning and this
realization will be complete. But the same does not hold for the
Path, given the diversity of families (gotra) of the Śrāvakas,
Pratyekabuddhas, and Buddha.
Some say: Because conventional knowledge accompanies the
Path of Seeing. Now the sixteenth moment of this "comprehen-
sion" (the inferential knowledge of the Path) forms part of the
Path of Meditation. ¹26 Thus one does not acquire "the end of
comprehension" in the sixteenth moment.
We would say that this argument does not hold, for one should1126 Chapter Seven
not regard the fact that conventional knowledge does not
accompany the Path of Meditation as a proof.127
21b. It is not destined to arise.
At no moment is there the possibility for it to arise.
This knowledge does not arise when the ascetic is in contem-
plation, nor when the ascetic has left his contemplation (=Seeing
of the Truths). On the one hand this knowledge is incompatible
with his contemplation (see above p. 1122); on the other hand the
mind, outside of its contemplation, is too coarse. 128
If this is so, how can one say that one takes possession of
conventional knowledge, and that conventional knowledge is
"cultivated."
[The Sarvästivādins answer:] Formerly it was not acquired, but
now it is acquired.
How can it be acquired, since it is not produced?
[The Sarvāstivādins answer:] It is termed acquired because it is
acquired [and not because it should be produced].
"Acquired because it is acquired," is an unprecedented manner
of speaking. You do not thus explain how conventional knowledge
is cultivated. This point should be understood in the same way as
the Former Masters [the Sautrāntikas] understood it. According to
these Masters, one acquires conventional knowledge through the
power of the Aryamārga (=the Path of Seeing). After one has left
the contemplation of the Aryamãrga, a conventional knowledge
bearing on the Truths is realized, and it is much more distin-
guished than that which preceeds the obtaining of the Aryamärga
itself. When one says that an ascetic acquired this conventional
knowledge through the Path of Seeing, one means to speak of the
acquisition of a personality (aśraya) capable of realizing of this
conventional knowledge, 129 as the acquisition of a mineral
containing gold is called the acquisition of gold itself. 130The Knowledges 1127
The Vaibhāṣikas do not accept this manner of seeing things.
They hold that the so-called abhisamayāntika conventional
knowledge is an unarisen dharma.
21c. From the sphere or from a lower sphere. 131
When one realizes the Path of Seeing of a certain sphere
(bhūmi), one acquires, in the future, the conventional knowledge
of this sphere or of a lower sphere. This means that if one realizes
the Path of Seeing in the state of Anagamya, one acquires, in the
future, the Path of Seeing of a single sphere (i.e., Anāgamya), and
one acquires, in the future, the conventional knowledge of two
spheres (Anāgamya and Kāmadhātu): and so on until: if one
realizes the Path of Seeing in the Fourth Dhyāna, one acquires, in
the future, the Path of Seeing of six spheres (Anāgamya,
Dhyānāntara, and the Four Dhyānas), and one acquires, in the
future, the conventional knowledge of seven spheres (the same,
plus Kāmadhātu).
21c. In Extinction, the last.
If one cultivates conventional knowledge at the end of
Suffering and Origin, that is to say in the moments of the
inferential knowledge of Suffering and the inferential knowledge
of Origin, conventional knowledge is by nature the four
foundations of mindfulness (vi. 14).
If one cultivates at the end of Extinction, that is, in the
moment of the inferential knowledge of Extinction, it is only the
last foundation of mindfulness, namely the foundation of
mindfulness related to dharmas.
21d. It has the aspects of its Truth.1128 Chapter Seven
When one cultivates conventional knowledge at the end of the
comprehension of a certain truth, the conventional knowledge
takes on the aspects of this Truth and has this Truth for its object.
21d. It proceeds from effort.
Being acquired through the power of the Path of Seeing, it is
exclusively obtained through effort; it does not arise from
detachment.
The knowledges are so called because knowledge is the major
element in them; if one takes into consideration their followings,
they make up four skandhas in Kāmadhātu, and five skandhas in
Rūpadhātu (by adding dhyānasaṁvaralakṣaṇarūpa, iv. 13c).
132 How many knowledges does one cultivate in the different
states of the Path of Meditation?
22a. In the sixteenth, six, through non-detachment.
One should add "are cultivated" (bhavyante, according to vii.
20a). In the sixteenth moment (the inferential knowledge of the
Path), the ascetic who is not detached from Kāmadhātu cultivates
(i.e., takes possession of and actualizes) two knowledges in the
present; 133 he cultivates (takes possession of) six knowledges in
the future: namely the knowledge of dharmas, inferential
knowledge, and knowledges of the Four Truths.134
22b. Through detachment, seven.The Knowledges 1129
With respect to the ascetic already detached from Kāmadhātu,
at the moment when he attains inferential knowledge of the Path,
one should add the cultivation of the knowledge of the mind of
another, the seventh.
22c-d. Above, in the Path of Meditation associated with
sensual desire, there is the cultivation of seven.
Beyond the sixteenth moment, that is, in the rest of the Path of
Meditation, as long as one has not obtained detachment,¹35 in the
preparatory paths, the uninterrupted paths, the paths of deliver-
ance, and in the excellent paths, there is cultivation of seven
knowledges, namely a knowledge of the dharmas, inferential
knowledge, the knowledges of the Four Truths, and worldly,
conventional knowledge.
If one cultivates a worldly path,136 one also, in the present,
cultivates worldly conventional knowledge. If one cultivates a
transworldly path, one also, in the present, cultivates one of the
four knowledges of the dharmas. One will cultivate the other six
knowledges in the future.
23a-d. In the uninterrupted paths of the victory over seven
spheres, of the acquisition of the supernormal knowledges,
and of the quality of Immovability, of mixed meditation.
And also in the eight paths of higher deliverance.
Based on the preceding, add "there is cultivation of seven
knowledges."
One cultivates seven knowledges, the same as above, in the
uninterrupted paths (paths of the expulsion of the defilements and
the obstacles) which make up:
1. victory over seven spheres, that is to say detachment from
the Four Dhyānas and the three Ārūpyas: these spheres are
"vanquished" when one is detached from them;1130 Chapter Seven
2. the acquisition of five supernormal knowledges, with the
exception of the sixth (vii. 42);
3. entry into Immovability (vi. 57, 60c, English trans. p. 1002);
4. the mixed meditation (vi. 42) of the Saikṣa.
If the ascetic cultivates these paths through a worldly path,¹37
he cultivates, in the present, conventional knowledge; if he follows
a transworldly path, he cultivates in the present one of the four
inferential knowledges, and one of the two knowledges of dharmas
(Extinction and the Path).
In the acquisition of the quality of Immovability, he does not
cultivate conventional knowledge; for this latter is not opposed to
Bhavagra. Here the Knowledge of the Destruction is the seventh
knowledge.
Above the detachment from the seven spheres, in the first
eight paths of deliverance of Bhavagra, the ascetic cultivates, in the
future, seven knowledges, namely the knowledge of dharmas,
inferential knowledge, the knowledges of the Four Truths, and the
knowledge of the mind of another; 138 he does not cultivate
conventional knowledge, because this knowledge is not opposed to
Bhavagra.
He cultivates, in the present, one of the four inferential
knowledges or one of the two knowledges of dharmas (Extinction
and the Path).
24a-b. The Saikṣa, in the path of deliverance of the
perfectioning of the faculties, cultivates six or seven
knowledges.
The Saikṣa (in opposition to the Aśaikṣa who enters the state
of Immovability) in the path of deliverance (third stage) of the
perfectioning of his faculties (vi. 60c), cultivates six knowledgesThe Knowledges 1131
when he is not detached (i.e., when he is not an Anāgāmin). When
he is detached, he cultivates seven knowledges, the knowledge of
the mind of another being the seventh.
Some other masters say that conventional knowledge is
cultivated by one who is not detached as well as by one who is
detached,139
In the preparatory path (prayogamärga, first stage), both of
them cultivate this knowledge.
24c. In the uninterrupted path, he cultivates six knowl-
edges.
Detached or non-detached, he cultivates six knowledges, ¹40 as
above, in the uninterrupted path (second stage) of the perfection-
ing of his faculties. He does not cultivate conventional knowledge,
because the perfectioning of the faculties resembles the Path of
Seeing; he does not cultivate the knowledge of the mind of another
because this knowledge is absent from the uninterrupted path: in
fact this knowledge does not oppose the defilements.
24d. The same in the victory over Bhavāgra.
In the uninterrupted paths of detachment from Bhavagra, the
Śaikşa cultivates six knowledges.
25a. At the moment of the knowledge of destruction, nine
knowledges.
The ninth path of deliverance of detachment from Bhavāgra is
called the Knowledge of Destruction (vi. 44d). [The first eight
have been discussed vii. 23c-d]. The ascetic then cultivates nine1132 Chapter Seven
knowledges, with the exception of the Knowledge of Non-Arising.
25b. An Immovable One cultivates ten knowledges.
The saint who is from the beginning an Immovable One (vi.
57c) cultivates ten knowledges at the moment when he produces
the Knowledge of Destruction, for at this moment he obtains the
Knowledge of Non-Arising (vi. 50a).
25c. Ten knowledges also in the last deliverance in the
passage to the state of Immovability.
The ascetic who obtains the state of Immovability through the
perfectioning of his faculties also cultivates ten knowledges in the
last path (the ninth path of deliverance) of this perfectioning (vi.
60c).
25d. In the cases not mentioned, there is cultivation of eight
knowledges.
What are the cases not mentioned?
1. The ninth path of deliverance from detachment to Kāma-
dhātu (excluded from the definition 22c-d);
2. the paths of deliverance from detachment to the seven
spheres, to the five supernormal knowledges, to mixed meditation
of the Saikṣa (excluded from the definitions 23a-c);
3. the first eight paths of deliverance of the perfectioning of
the faculties leading to the state of Immovability (excluded from
the definition 25c); and
4. the preparatory path and the excellent path (prayogamārga
and višeşamārga) of one who is detached (or an Anāgāmin).The Knowledges 1133
In all these paths, there is cultivation of eight future knowl-
edges, with the exception of the Knowledge of Destruction and the
Knowledge of Non-Arising. This is the case for the Śaikṣa.
The Asaikṣa, in the preparatory path, the path of deliverance,
and the excellent path of the five supernormal knowledges and of
mixed meditation, cultivates nine knowledges (with the exception
of the Knowledge of Non-Arising) or ten knowledges, depending
on whether the Aśaikṣa is a samayavimukta or an asamayavimukta.
In the uninterrupted paths of the same (five supernormal
knowledges and mixed meditation), he cultivates either eight or
nine knowledges, with the exception of the knowledge of the mind
of another in both cases.
Nevertheless, in the path of deliverance of the two supernor-
mal knowledges which are neutral (the divine eye and divine
hearing), -this path being itself morally neutral-there is no
cultivation of any future knowledge.141
As for the Pṛthagjana,—in the ninth path of deliverance of
detachment from Kāmadhātu and the three Dhyānas; in the
preparatory paths; in the paths of deliverance of the three
supernormal knowledges; in the realizations of the spiritual
qualities, Apramāṇas, Vimokṣas, etc.: 142 all these paths being
cultivated in the Dhyānas (and not in the samantakas),—he
cultivates, in the future, conventional knowledge and the knowl-
edge of the mind of another; but not in the nirvedhabhāgiyas
because three constitute the following of the Path of Seeing.
In the other cases, obtaining a path not previously obtained, he
cultivates solely, in the future, conventional knowledge.
***1134 Chapter Seven
To which sphere does the knowledge belong which is culti-
vated in the worldly and transworldly paths?
A knowledge of the mind of another, a future cultivation,
belongs to the sphere which serves as the support of the Path, or
rather to the sphere which one obtains through the Path.¹43
It is not a rule that pure knowledge, cultivated in the future,
will belong to the sphere which serves as the support for its
arising.
26a-b. The knowledge that one cultivates in the future
belongs to the sphere from which one is detached, to the
sphere acquired, or to a lower sphere.
When, in order to become detached from one sphere an ascetic
cultivates the paths (prayoga, etc.) of the two classes, pure or
impure, he cultivates pure knowledges which are either of the
sphere which he obtains for the first time by these paths, of the
sphere which is the support of the path, or of a lower sphere.144
26c. In the knowledge of destruction, the pure is also of all
spheres. 145
At the moment when a knowledge of the destruction of the
cankers arises (vi. 44d), there is cultivated the qualities of all the
spheres, including the impure ones,146 namely the Apramāṇas, the
Vimokşas, etc. In fact, Vajropamasamadhi cuts off these ties which
are the possessions of the defilements; all the qualities will be
found in a series freed from the defilements; one can thus say that
they "breathe" (or that they open, that they inflate), in the manner
of a sack when one cuts the ropes that bind it.¹47 The Arhat has
obtained rule over his mind: all the good dharmas come towards
him, as vassals come to present their homage¹48 to a prince who
accedes to supreme kingship.149***
The Knowledges 1135
Is everything that has been previously obtained also cultivated?
26d. That which has been obtained previously is not
cultivated.
What is cultivated is what has not been obtained. That which,
having been obtained and lost is obtained anew—that is to say, is
newly realized or actualized-is not cultivated, that is, the ascetic
does not take possession of it for the future. Because this has been
acquired and rejected in the past. 150
Does the term "cultivation" (bhāvanā) only designate acquisi-
tion?
No. Cultivation is of four types: 1. acquisition, 2. practice, 3.
opposition, and 4. expulsion.
27. Cultivation of good conditioned dharmas is acquisition
and practice; there is cultivation of opposition and
expulsion with respect to impure dharmas.151
There is cultivation of acquisition ¹52 and practice with respect
to the good conditioned dharmas, acquisition with respect to the
future and acquisition and practice with respect to the present.
These two cultivations rest on the first two efforts, effort for the
arising of what has not yet arisen, and effort for the growth of
what has already arisen.
There is cultivation of opposition ¹53 and expulsion ¹54 with
respect to impure dharmas; they rest on the last two efforts, effort
for the non-arising of what has not arisen, and effort for the
destruction of what has already arisen. 155
Thus the good but impure dharmas are susceptible of four1136 Chapter Seven
types of cultivation; the pure dharmas are susceptible of the first
two; the defiled and neutral dharmas of the last two.
The Vaibhāṣikas of the West say that there are six types of
cultivation: four as above, plus the cultivation of constraint
(samvarabhāvanā), and the cultivation of inspection (vibhāvanāb-
hāvanā).
The first is the cultivation of the organs, 156 the eye, etc.; the
second is the cultivation of the body, as it says in the Sūtra, “These
six organs well subdued, well guarded..."157 and, "There is in the
body the beard, hair, etc. "158
The Vaibhāṣikas of Kaśmīr however think that these two
cultivations should be included within the cultivation of opposition
and expulsion.¹59
We have explained the knowledges. Now we must explain the
spiritual qualities (guṇas), which are made up of the knowledges.160
Among these qualities, there are first those which are uniquely
proper to the Buddha,161 which the Bodhisattva acquires at the
moment of the Knowledge of Destruction (vi. 45) in becoming an
Arhat and, at the same time, a Buddha.
These qualities are eighteen in number.
28a-b. The dharmas unique to the Buddha are eighteen, the
powers, etc.
The ten powers, the four absences of fear, the three founda-
tions of mindfulness, and great compassion:¹62 this group
constitutes the eighteen dharmas unique to the Buddha, so called
because others do not acquire them by becoming Arhats.***
We shall examine first the nature of the powers.163
The Knowledges 1137
28c-29. There are ten knowledges in sthānāsthāna; [eight
in karmaphala; nine in the dhyānas, etc., in the Indriyas, in
the Abhimokṣas, in the Dhātus; nine or ten in the paths;
two are conventional knowledge; and extinction is made up
of six or ten knowledges.]164
The power which consists of the knowledge of what is possible
and what is impossible (sthānästhāna, vii. 30c) is made up of ten
knowledges.165
28d. Eight in karmaphala;
The power which consists of the knowledge of the retribution
of actions is made up of eight knowledges, with the exception of
the knowledge of the Path and Extinction. 166
29a. Nine in the Dhyānas, etc., in the Indriyas, in the
Abhimokşas, in the Dhātus;
The power of the knowledge of the Dhyānas, Vimokṣas,
Samādhis and Samāpattis;167 the power of the knowledge of the
degree of the moral faculties of beings; 168 the power of the
knowledge of the different aspirations of beings; 169 and the power
of the knowledge of the different acquired dispositions of
beings ¹70-these four powers are made up of nine knowledges,
excluding the knowledge of extinction.
29b. Nine or ten in the paths;1138 Chapter Seven
The power of the knowledge of the paths which lead to the
different realms of rebirth and to Nirvāṇa, is made up of either
nine knowledges or ten knowledges. If one understands "the Path
with its result," this power then includes the knowledge of
extinction (which is the result of the Path); but if one understands
"the Path without its result," then this power is made up of nine
knowledges.171
29c. Two are conventional knowledges;
The power of the knowledge of former abodes and the power
of the knowledge of the death and rebirth of beings are both
conventional knowledges.
29d. Destruction is made up of six or ten knowledges.
The power of the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers
is made up of six or ten knowledges. One can consider the
knowledge of the destruction of the cankers in and of itself as the
knowledge of the destruction of the cankers which is made up of
the knowledge of the dharmas, inferential knowledge, the
knowledge of extinction, the Knowledge of Destruction, the
Knowledge of Non-Arising, and conventional knowledge; or one
can understand the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers as
the knowledge which is produced in a series where the cankers
have been expelled: the ten knowledges exist in such a series.
As for the spheres which serve as the support for the powers:
30a-c. The
of former abodes and the power of
power
death-rebirth lie in the Dhyānas; the others in all the
spheres.The Knowledges 1139
The knowledge of former abodes and the knowledge of the
death and rebirth of beings have the Dhyānas for their spheres;
the other powers are of all the spheres, Kāmadhātu, Anāgamya,
the Four Dhyānas, Dhyānāntara, and the Four Ārūpyas.
They arise in a male body in Jambudvīpa, that is to say in the
Buddha, for Buddhas do not appear outside of Jambudvīpa.¹72
In others this tenfold knowledge is not called a power: it is only
in the series of the Buddha that it is called a power, because,
elsewhere, it is shackled.
30c-d. Why? Because its power does not know any obstacle.
The knowledge which knows all the objects of knowledge
without any obstacle is called a power. This is why the ten powers
exist only in the Buddha, because the Buddha, having expelled all
the cankers and all the traces (vāsanā, see vii. 32d) of ignorance,
knows all objects of his own accord. It is not the same for the
knowledges of others, and as a consequence these knowledges are
not called powers.
According to tradition, Sāriputra refused a person who asked
for admission to the Order; 173 he was not capable of seeing the
number of the previous and subsequent births of a pigeon chased
by a hawk (?).174
The Buddha's knowledge is exercised without obstacle, the
power of his mind is infinite and envelopes all objects (see p. 1146).
If such is the power of his mind, what is the power of his body?
31a. Nārāyaṇa power in his body; [according to others, in
his parts; this is a power the seventh term of a series which1140
Chapter Seven
begins with the elephant and in which each term is worth
ten times the preceeding; it consists of a tangible.]¹75
Nārāyaṇa is the name of a power and also the name of one who
possesses this power, namely the god Nārāyaṇa: the same for
Cāņūra and Mahanagna. The power of the body of the Buddha is
equal to that of Nārāyaṇa.
31b. According to others, in his parts;
According to others, each part of his body (samdhi) possesses
this power.
The Bhadanta, [the Dārṣṭāntika Master], says that his physical
power is like his mental power, that is, infinite; for, if it were
otherwise, the body of the Blessed One would not be able to
support infinite knowledge. 176
The Buddhas have nagãgranthi power in their body parts,
Pratyekabuddhas have famkalā power, and Cakravartins have
śanku power.177
What is the extent of Nārāyaṇa power?
31c. This is a power the seventh term of a series which
begins with the elephant and in which each term is worth
ten times the preceeding;
There is a series: prākṛtahastin, gandhahastin, mahānagna,178
praskandin, varāṁga, cāṇūra, and nārāyaṇa.179 The power of each
term is worth ten times the power of the preceeding term: ten
prākṛtahastins make one gandhahastin and so on. 180
According to others, this is the case for the first six terms; but
ten cāņūras are equal to a half-nārāyaṇa, and two half-nārāyaṇas
are equal to one nārāyaṇa.The Knowledges 1141
According to the author of this book, among the definitions of
the physical power of the Buddha, that one is true which makes
this power the greatest. 181
31d. It consists of a tangible.
The physical power of the Buddha is, by its nature, a tangible
(spraṣṭavyāyatana). It consists of primary elements of a special
nature.
According to others, however, it is a rūpa derived from the
primary elements, but a derived rupa different from the seven
derived tangibles, ślakṣṇatva, etc. (i. 10d). 182
As for the four assurances (vaisāradya),183
32a-c. Assurance is fourfold
The Buddha possesses four assurances which are explained in
the Sūtra.
32c. Resembling the first, the tenth, the second, and the
seventh power.
1. The first assurance, the assurance that he has attained
supreme comprehension with respect to all the dharmas, resem-
bles the first power (the power of the knowledge of what is
possible and what is impossible); it consists of ten knowledges, and
can exist (lit. "be supported”) in all of the spheres.
2. The second assurance, the assurance that he has the
knowledge of the destruction of all the defilements, resembles the
tenth power,
the power of the knowledge of the destruction of the
defilements: it consists of ten knowledges, and can exist in six
spheres.1142 Chapter Seven
3. The third assurance, the assurance that he can fully explain
the dharmas, resembles the second power, the power of the
knowledge of the retribution of actions:184 it consists of eight
knowledges, and can exist in all of the spheres.
4. The fourth assurance, the assurance that he can explain the
Path leading to definitive deliverance, resembles the seventh
power, the power of the knowledge of the paths which lead to the
different realms of rebirth and to Nirvāṇa: it consists of ten or
nine knowledges, and can exist in all of the spheres.
How can the knowledges be called assurances (vaiśāradya)?
The word vaiśäradya signifies "absence of fear" (nirbhayatā).
By reason of the fact that he knows that he has understood all the
dharmas, destroyed all the defilements, etc., the Buddha is free
from fear in the assemblies. Thus vaiśāradya is knowledge.
[In our opinion] the assurances, being a result of knowledge,
are not knowledge by nature. 185
What are the three applications of mindfulness of the Buddha?
32d. Three are mindfulness and awareness (prajñā). 186
The Sūtra ¹87 explains at length the three applications of
mindfulness of the Buddha: 1. When his disciples, unanimous,
respectfully listen, accept and practice his teaching, he experiences
neither joy nor satisfaction, but he remains indifferent, in full
mindfulness and awareness. 2. When his disciples, unanimous, do
not hear, do not accept and do not practice his teaching, he does
not experience displeasure nor impatience, but he remains
indifferent, in full mindfulness and awareness. 3. When some of
his disciples hear, accept and practice his teaching, while others,
not hearing, do not accept and do not practice his teaching, he doesThe Knowledges 1143
not experience joy and displeasure, but remains indifferent in full
mindfulness and awareness. These three applications of mindful-
ness are, by their nature, mindfulness and awareness.
But a Śrāvaka who is free from the cankers, whose disciples are
either respectful or not respectful, or respectful and not respectful,
experiences neither joy nor displeasure, nor either joy or
displeasure. Why consider the three applications of mindfulness as
dharmas unique to a Buddha?
Because the Buddha has abandoned joy and displeasure along
with their traces. Or rather because the disciples are the disciples
of the Buddha: it is admirable that the Buddha does not experience
either joy or displeasure from their respect or disrespect; but the
disciples are not the disciples of the Śrävakas from whom they
receive the teaching: there is nothing admirable in the fact that
these Śrāvakas do not experience joy or displeasure.
33a. Great compassion is a conventional mental state; [it is
great through its factors, its aspects, its object, its equality,
and its excellence; it differs from (ordinary) compassion in
eight ways.] 188
Great compassion is, by its nature, conventional knowledge
(vii. 2b). In the contrary case, it would be, in its nature, absence of
hatred as is ordinary compassion (viii. 29); like ordinary compas-
sion, it would not embrace all beings of the Three Dhātus, it would
not envision the three types of suffering.
Why is the compassion of the Blessed One termed "great"?
33b. It is great through its factors, its aspects, its object, its
equality, and its excellence.1144 Chapter Seven
1. By reason of its factors (saṁbhāra); it is produced in fact by a
great provisioning (sambhāra) of merit (punya) and knowledge
(jñāna). 189
2. By reason of its aspects, of the modality under which it
grasps things: it considers things as painful by reason of the
threefold suffering, the suffering inherent in suffering itself, the
suffering inherent in change, and the suffering inherent in the
saṁskāras (vi. 3),190 whereas ordinary compassion only envisions
the suffering inherent in suffering itself.
3.By reason of the object, for it has for its object all beings in
the Three Dhātus.
4. By reason of its equality, for it is equally concerned with the
happiness and benefit of all being.
5.By reason of its excellence, for no other compassion which
has arisen surpasses it.191
How does great compassion differ from ordinary compassion?
33c. It differs from ordinary compassion in eight ways.
1. With respect to its nature: ordinary compassion is absence of
hatred, whereas great compassion is absence of ignorance.
2. With respect to its aspect: ordinary compassion takes on the
form of one suffering, whereas great compassion takes on the form
of threefold suffering.
3. With respect to its object: ordinary compassion is concerned
with the beings of one Dhātu, whereas great compassion is
concerned with the Three Dhātus.
4. With respect to its sphere: ordinary compassion is of the
sphere of the Four Dhyānas,192 whereas great compassion is of the
sphere of the Fourth Dhyana.
5. With respect to the personality which serves as its support:
ordinary compassion arises in the series of the Śrāvakas, etc.,¹
193The Knowledges 1145
whereas great compassion arises in the series of the Buddhas.
6. With respect to its acquisition: ordinary compassion is
obtained through detachment from Kāmadhātu, whereas great
compassion is obtained through detachment from Bhavagra.
7. With respect to its protection: ordinary compassion does not
protect, whereas great compassion protects.
8. With respect to compassion: ordinary compassion is an
unequal compassion, for it sympathizes only with beings who are
suffering, whereas great compassion is an equal compassion,
turned towards all beings equally.
We have explained the qualities which belong only to the
Buddhas and which distinguish them from other beings. Do the
Buddhas resemble one another among themselves?
Under certain conditions, yes; under other conditions, no.
34. In saṁbhāra, dharmakāya and their service to beings,
the Buddhas are identical; not in their duration of life, their
caste, their stature, etc. 195
The Buddhas are identical in that they have, in their previous
existences, equally accumulated merit and knowledge, in that they
have realized the same dharmakāya;¹⁹6 and in that they equally
carry out service to others.
But the Buddhas differ through the difference in the duration
of their lives, their caste, their gotra, the dimensions of their
bodies, etc. According to the period in which they appear, their life
is long or short, they are Kṣatriyas or Brahmins, they belong to the
Gautamagotra or to the Kāśyapagotra, and their bodies are great or
small. The word et cetera indicates that the Dharma of the1146 Chapter Seven
Buddhas lasts a long or short period of time, accordingly as, at the
moment of their appearance, the beings to be converted are
straight or crooked.197
All intelligent persons who reflect on the threefold perfecti-
on ¹9⁹8 of the Tathāgatas necessarily produce a profound affection, a
profound respect with respect to them. This threefold perfection is
the perfection of their causes which consists of the provisions of
merit and knowledge; the perfection of the result which consists of
the dharmakāya, and the perfection of benefit which consists of
service to all beings.
i. The perfection of cause is fourfold: 1. Cultivation of the
accumulation of all qualities and all knowledge; 199 2. prolonged
cultivation;200 3. uninterrupted cultivation; and 4. zealous
cultivation.
ii. The perfection of the result is fourfold, for the realization of
the dharmakāya includes four perfections, that of knowledge, of
abandoning, of power and of material body.
a. The perfection of knowledge is fourfold: 1. untaught
knowledge; 2. universal knowledge (that is to say knowledge of all
individual characteristics); 3. omniform knowledge,201 (that is to
say knowledge of all manners of being); and 4. spontaneous
knowledge (knowledge through the simple desire to know).
b. The perfection of abandoning is fourfold: 1. abandoning of
all the defilements; 2. definitive abandoning (not susceptible of
falling away); 3. abandoning of the defilements with their traces
(because no bond remains); and 4. abandoning of the obstacles to
samādhi and samāpatti [of such a sort that the Buddha is doubly
delivered (vi. 64a)].202
c. The perfection of power is fourfold: 1. perfection in the
mastery of creating, transforming, and maintaining an externalThe Knowledges 1147
object;203 2. perfection in the mastery of abandoning and
prolonging life; 204 3. perfection in the mastery of movement
through resistant bodies, through space, to very distant location, of
great speed, and mastery in the reduction of a large body to a small
volume;205 and 4. perfection of marvellous qualities, multiple and
natural.206
d. The perfection of the material body is fourfold: 1. perfection
in marks (lakṣaṇa); 2. perfection in secondary marks (anuvyañ-
jana); 3. perfection in power (that is to say possession of
Nārāyaṇa's power, vii. 31); and (with respect to internal events)
perfection of the body whose bones are like diamonds; and (with
respect to external events) emissions of rays of light (which exceed
one hundred thousand suns.)
iii. The perfection of service is fourfold: 1-3. to deliver
definitively (atyanta) from the suffering of the three painful
realms of rebirth; 4. to deliver from the suffering of transmigra-
tion; or rather: 1-3. to install into the three vehicles; 4. to install
into good realms of rebirth.
Such are, in short, the perfections of the Buddhas. There would
be no end of our discussion if we were to speak of them in great
detail. Only the Buddhas, the Blessed Ones, if they were to prolong
their existence for numbers of asaṁkhyeyakalpas, would be
capable of knowing and speaking of their grandeur. It is enough to
know that the Buddhas, endowed with qualities, knowledges,
powers, and infinite and extraordinary benefits, are like mines of
jewels.
Nevertheless fools (bāla = pṛthagjana), themselves poor in
qualities and judging based upon themselves-have no spiritual
aspirations: they understand in vain the extolling of the merits of
the Buddha and they do not conceive affection either for the
Buddha or his Dharma.
The wise, on the contrary, understand the explanation of the
qualities of the Buddha, conceiving, with respect to the Buddha and
his Dharma, a mind of faith which penetrates to the marrow of1148 Chapter Seven
their bones. These persons, through this single mind of faith,207
surmount an infinite mass of actions of unnecessary retribution; 208
they obtain excellent human and divine rebirths; and, finally, they
arrive at Nirvāṇa. This is why the Tathāgatas are said to be a
supreme field of merit; for this field gives forth fruits which are
certain, agreeable, abundant, rapid, (experienced in this life), and
of excellent issue. The Blessed One, in fact, has proclaimed, “If
anyone plants a small root of good in the field of merit which are
the Buddhas, he will first possess heavenly realms of rebirth and
then he will obtain the Deathless (Ekottara, 24.15).209 We have
explained the eighteen qualities unique to the Buddhas.
35a. There are other qualities which the Buddhas have in
common with Śaikṣas
The Buddhas possess innumerable qualities which they have in
common either with Śrāvakas
35b. And Pṛthagjanas
Or with ordinary persons.
35c. Absence of Contention, Knowledge Resulting from
Resolution, the Unhindered Knowledges, the Supernormal
Knowledges, etc.
These are: the Samadhi Absence of Contention, the Knowledge
Resulting from Resolution, the Four Unhindered Knowledges, the
Supernormal Knowledges, the Dhyānas, the Ārūpyas, the Eight
Samāpattis, the Three Samādhis, the Four Apramāṇas, the Eight
Vimokṣas, the Eight Abhibhvāyatanas, the Ten Kṛtsnāyatanas, etc.The Knowledges
The first three are common to both the Buddhas and the
Aryans; the Supernormal Knowledges, the Dhyānas, etc., can also
belong to ordinary persons.
Araṇā [is the power to hinder the arising of another's
defilements].210 The Arhats know that the sufferings of beings are
produced through their defilements; they know that they them-
selves are the most worthy field of merit (iv. 103, 117a); they fear
that others might generate defilements with respect to them
[which would be particularly injurious to them];2¹¹ thus they
generate a knowledge of such a nature that no other person will
produce, with respect to them, lust, hatred, pride, etc. This
knowledge puts an end, in beings, to rana, or contention, which is a
defilement, a cause of torment: it is thus called araṇā or absence of
contention.
What are the characteristics of the so-called Araṇā Samādhi,
the Absorption Absence of Contention?
36a. Absence of Contention is conventional knowledge;
By nature it is conventional knowledge, as it results from its
object.
36b. It is of the sphere of the Fourth Dhyāna;
It exists in ("has for its support") the Fourth Dhyāna, which is
the best of the easy paths (vi. 66).
36c. It is produced by a person who is Immovable.1150 Chapter Seven
It is produced by Immovable Arhats (akopyadharman, vi. 56)
and not by others: for others are not capable of radically cutting off
their own defilements (they are in fact subject to falling) and so
they cannot arrest the defilements of others.
36d. It is produced by humans.
It is produced by humans, for it is only a being in the human
realm of rebirth who can cultivate it in the Three Dvipas.
36e. It relates to the defilements of Kāmadhātu, is future,
and has a real object.
It bears on the defilements of others, in Kāmadhātu, in the
future, and "has a real object" (savastuka), “May no defilements
arise in others with respect to me!" The savastuka defilements are
craving, anger, etc., which are abandoned through Meditation
(vi. 58).
The avastuka defilements of others (vi. 58), which are
abandoned through Seeing, are not susceptible of being arrested,
for the universal (sarvatraga) defilements (v. 12), which exist in
the totality of their sphere, also exist in the series of another. 212
As is the Samādhi Absence of Contention,
37a-b. So too the Knowledge Resulting from Resolution;
[but it has all for its object].213
Like the Samadhi Absence of Contention, the Knowledge
Resulting from Resolution is, by nature, conventional knowledge;
like Absence of Contention, it exists in the Fourth Dhyāna, it is
produced in the series of an Immovable One, and it is meditated
upon by a being in the human realm of rebirth.The Knowledges 1151
37b. But it has all for its object.
But, unlike the Samadhi Absence of Contention, it bears on all
the dharmas.
Yet2¹4 the Vaibhāṣikas say that the dharmas of Ārūpyadhātu
are not known by a direct seeing through the Knowledge Resulting
from Resolution-being of the Fourth Dhyana, this knowledge
does not bear on a higher sphere. These dharmas are known
through inference (anumāna). In fact, one knows 1. the outflowing
of Ārūpyadhātu, namely the extreme calm which follows, in a
subsequent existence, from a former existence in Ārūpyadhātu; 2.
the conduct of Ārūpyadhātu, that is to say the practice of the
Ārūpya Samāpattis which will produce an existence in Ārūpyadhā-
tu, and one can infer from a cause to its result and from a result
to its cause. As the farmer knows a seed from its fruit and a fruit
from its seed, seeing a calm person, one concludes, “He is reborn
falling from Ārūpyadhātu, but he will be reborn in Ārūpyadhātu."
Such is the opinion of the Vaibhāṣikas.
Others believe however that the Knowledge Resulting from
Resolution bears on Ārūpyadhātu, for there is nothing that is not
within the mental range of the Buddhas. 215
One who would produce the Knowledge Resulting from
Resolution begins by forming a resolution, holding a certain object
in his consciousness; he enters into the Fourth prāntakoṭika
Dhyāna (viii. 41a): this is the preparatory exercise. As soon as he
leaves this absorption, he produces an exact consciousness in
conformity with his resolution the sphere of which varies
according to the power of his absorption.216
37c-d. So too the Unhindered Knowledges of dharmas, of
objects, of etymological explanations, and of eloquence.217
There are Four Unhindered Knowledges: the Unhindered1152 Chapter Seven
Knowledge of dharmas, the Unhindered Knowledge of things
(artha), the Unhindered Knowledge of etymological explanations
(nirukta), and the Unhindered Knowledge of eloquence (prati-
bhāna). They are like the Samādhi Absence of Contention in that
they belong solely to the Immovable Ones who are humans. But
they differ from it with respect to their object, the sphere in which
they are acquired, and their nature.
38a-b. The first three are unhindered knowledges bearing,
in this order, on name, the thing, speech.218
Infallible (avivartya) knowledge of names, phrases, and
syllables (ii.47a) is the Unhindered Knowledge of dharmas,219
Infallible knowledge of the thing is the Unhindered Knowl-
edge of things.
Infallible knowledge of speech is the Unhindered Knowledge
of etymological explanation.
38c-d. The fourth is the knowledge of exact and facile
expression, and of mastery with respect to the Path.220
Infallible knowledge which confers the capacity to express
oneself in an exact and facile22¹ manner and which also confers
never failing attention on a person who is a master in absorption is
the Unhindered Knowledge of eloquence. 222
39a-b. Its object is speech and the Path; [it is made up of
nine knowledges.] 223
Speech and the Path are the object of this Unhindered
Knowledge.39b. It is made up of nine knowledges.
Which, in its nature, is made up of nine knowledges with the
exception of the knowledge of extinction.
39c. It is of all the spheres.
The Knowledges 1153
It can arise in an ascetic who exists in any of the spheres, from
Kāmadhātu to Bhavāgra, since it has for its object either speech or
the Path.
39c. Unhindered Knowledge of things (artha) is made up of
ten or six.
Artha or thing signifies "all the dharmas": in which case the
Unhindered Knowledge of things is, by its nature, the ten
knowledges; but if artha signifies Nirvāṇa, then it is made up of six
knowledges: the knowledge of dharmas, inferential knowledge, the
knowledge of extinction, the Knowledge of Destruction, the
Knowledge of Non-Arising and conventional knowledge.
39d. It arises everywhere.
That is to say it can exist in any sphere.
39d. The others are conventional knowledge.
Two Unhindered Knowledges (of the dharmas and of etymo-
logical explanation) are conventional knowledge, for they have
names, phrases, and syllables, etc., and speech, for their object.1154
Chapter Seven
40a. The Unhindered Knowledge of dharmas exists in
Kāmadhātu and the Dhyānas.
It therefore exists in five spheres. Above them, names are
absent [and so too phrases and syllables].224
40b. The Unhindered Knowledge of speech exists in
Kāmadhātu and the First Dhyāna.
The Unhindered Knowledge of etymological explanation
exists only in Kāmadhātu and the First Dhyāna, because vitarka is
absent above them.225
According to the Prajñaptipāda, the Unhindered Knowledges
are in the following order: 1. the infallible knowledge of name,
phrase, and syllable; 2. the knowledge of the thing (artha)
expressed by its name, etc.; 3. the knowledge of the expression of
the characteristics of the thing, its number (singular, dual, or
plural), its gender (feminine, masculine, or neuter), the time,
etc.;226 4. the knowledge of what is not possible (asaktatā) [=which
produced the asaktatā] either of the expression, or of phrases and
syllables. In this way the order of the Unhindered Knowledges is
justified.
According to others, nirukti is an etymological explanation
(nirvacanaṁ), for example: rūpyate tasmād rūpam (it is physical
matter because it can be crushed), vijānātīti vijñānam, (it is
consciousness because it knows or distinguishes), cinotīti cittam (it
is mind because it accumulates); pratibhāna is the rejoinder.227
According to the School, the preparatory exercises of the Four
Unhindered Knowledges are, in this order, the study of calculation,The Knowledges 1155
the word of the Buddha, the study of sounds (sabdavidyā), and the
study of causes (hetuvidyā),228 for a person who has not cultivated
these four disciplines is not capable of producing the Four
Unhindered Knowledges. But, in fact,229 the study of the word of
the Buddha alone suffices to achieve the four preparatory exercises.
40c. One only obtains them together.
If a person obtains one Unhindered Knowledge, he obtains the
others; if he does not obtain them all, he does not obtain any of
them.
The six qualities described above, Absence of Contention, etc.
40d. These six are prantakotika.
They receive this name because they are obtained through the
power of the Prāntakoţika Dhyāna (vii. 41a-c).
41a. It is sixfold.
The Fourth Prāntakoţika Dhyāna is made up of six things: it
consists of 1. Absence of Contention, 2. the Knowledge Resulting
from Resolution, 3-5. three Unhindered Knowledges (with the
exception of the Unhindered Knowledge of etymological explana-
tion), and 6. the Prantakoţika Dhyāna itself.230
Even though the Unhindered Knowledge of etymological
explanation may be obtained through the power of a Prāntakotika
Dhyāna, it does not arise in the Fourth Dhyāna, for it has
Kāmadhātu and the First Dhyāna for its sphere; consequently it is
not included within the Fourth Prāntakoṭika Dhyāna.1156 Chapter Seven
What is the Prantakoţika Dhyana?
It is the last dhyana in the Fourth Dhyāna. 231
41b-c. It is the last dhyāna, in a series with all the spheres
and carried to its maximum.232
a. The Fourth Dhyāna is "in a series with all the spheres" when
one cultivates it in the following manner: from a good mind of
Kāmadhātu, one enters into the First Dhyāna; from the First
Dhyāna, into the Second, and so on up to naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāya-
tana (= the Fourth Dhyāna); then, one redescends to a good mind
of Kāmadhātu; finally, from this mind, one ascends again to the
Fourth Dhyāna.
b. One cultivates the Fourth Dhyāna; after having cultivated in
an inferior manner, one cultivates in a medium manner; after
having cultivated in a medium manner, one cultivates in a superior
manner. Each one of these three categories is divided into three.
The Fourth Dhyāna is therefore made up of nine categories. The
highest category of the Fourth Dhyāna is called "carried to the
maximum" (vṛddhikāṣṭāgata). The Dhyāna which possesses these
two qualities is called prantakotika, because its end (koti) has been
traversed (pragatā) to the extreme (antam).233
Koți signifies both "type" (prakāra) and “summit, apex,” as
one says: cătuşkotika praśna, that is, a fourfold question; or as one
says: bhūtakoți, "the limit of existence."234
These qualities of the Buddha are
41d. With the exception of the Buddha, acquired through
effort.
With the exception of the Buddha, the other Āryans acquire
these six qualities, the Samādhi Absence of Contention, etc., only
through effort, and not through detachment, since all do notThe Knowledges 1157
possess them.²35 The Buddha alone acquires them through
detachment, for the Buddha obtains all his qualities in a single
stroke, from the beginning, at the moment of the Knowledge of
Destruction, through detachment.²36 Later, he actualizes them at
his will, without effort; for the Buddha is the master of all the
dharmas that he possesses.
We have explained the three categories, Absence of Conten-
tion, Knowledge Resulting from Resolution, the Unhindered
Knowledges, which are common to the Aryans. Among the
qualities which also belong to ordinary persons (prthagjanas) 237
we must explain the Supernormal Knowledges.
42a-d. Realization of the knowledge of supernormal power,
of ear, of the mind, of past existences, of death and rebirth,
of the destruction of the cankers; this is the sixfold
supernormal knowledge. 238
There are six supernormal knowledges: 1. the supernormal
knowledge which consists of the realization of the knowledge of
the sphere of ṛddhi or supernormal power (that is to say,
displacement and creation); 239 2. the supernormal knowledge
which consists of the realization of the knowledge of divine
hearing;240 3. the supernormal knowledge which consists of the
realization of the knowledge or consciousness of the mind of
another;241 4. 242the supernormal knowledge which consists of the
realization of the knowledge of the memory of past existences;243
5. the supernormal knowledge which consists of the realization of
the knowledge of divine sight (of the death and birth of all
beings);244 and 6. the supernormal knowledge which consists of
the realization of the knowledge of the destruction of the
cankers.245
Even though the sixth supernormal knowledge belongs only to1158 Chapter Seven
the Āryans, since the first five are also possessed by ordinary
persons, and by reason of the characteristics of the greatest
number of supernormal knowledges, here all of the supernormal
knowledges are considered as common to the Āryans and to
ordinary persons.246
42d. They are prajñā of deliverance.247
They are by their nature the prajña of the Path of Deliverance,
like the results of the religious life.248
43a. Four are conventional knowledge.249
Four, with the exception of the supernormal knowledge of the
minds of others and the supernormal knowledge of the destruction
of the cankers, are conventional knowledges (vii.2).
43b. The knowledge of the mind of another is made up of
five knowledges.
The fifth supernormal knowledge is by nature the knowledge
of dharmas, inferential knowledge, a knowledge of the Path,
conventional knowledge, and the knowledge of the mind of
another.250
43c. The supernormal knowledge of the destruction of the
cankers is similar to the power.251
Exactly like the power of the knowledge of the destruction of
the cankers, this supernormal knowledge is made up of six or ten
knowledges. So too, it can exist in all of the spheres and relates to
all objects.43d. Five exist in the Four Dhyānas.252
The Knowledges 1159
The first five supernormal knowledges exist in the Four
Dhyānas, that is to say, they are obtained by an ascetic in any of
these Dhyānas.
Why do they not exist in the non-material absorptions, the
Ārūpyas?
a. The first three have rüpa for their object (see p. 1162, line
14). Thus one cannot produce them in the ärūpyas.
b. The knowledge of the mind of another is prepared through
the gate of physical matter (rupa), that is to say through a path
which has color and shape for its object.253 Now the non-material
absorptions do not have physical matter for their object.
c. As for the memory of previous existences, the ascetic
prepares for this by going over again and again the course of
successive states (anupūrvāvasthāntarasmaraṇāt);254 now the
non-material absorptions do not have the dharmas of Kāmadhātu
for their object, and when a memory of past existences is
actualized, it bears, as the Sūtra says, on the place, the gotra, etc.,
and on material dharmas.255
d. In fact the ascetic who wishes to know the mind of another
first considers, in his own series, the characteristics of his body and
mind, "Such is my body, such is my mind." As he has considered
his own body and mind, in this same way, envisioning the series of
another, he takes into consideration the characteristic of the body
and mind of another: thus he knows the mind of another and the
supernormal knowledge arises. When the supernormal knowledge
is realized, the ascetic no longer considers the rupa of the body; he
directly knows the mind.256
e. The ascetic who wishes to remember his past existences,
begins by grasping the characteristic of the mind which has just
perished; from this mind, he again considers the states which it
immediately succeeds in the present existence up to the mind atemembers one moment of mind of his
antarābhava), this supernormal knowl-
der for him to remember the previous
preliminary exercise is the same.
peginner in the practice of this supernor-
ese existences only in their chronological
ce is acquired, he remembers them by
existences.
ly that which has been experienced
ow can there be remembrance of the
do not return here, the ascetic does not
ad he has not experienced them in their
pns are not born in this heaven.
pecause he has experienced them through
who
who remembers them understands, "The
are such." The experience, in fact, is
nd hearing.
pm Ārūpyadhātu, arise here produce this
y means of the series of another.
e which consists of the memory of past
re of a Dhyana, and one cannot, through
ind which is in Ārūpyadhātu.
un by means of their own series. 258
the first three supernormal knowled-
owledge of the sphere of rddhi, of divine
ght,-consists of the observation of
t.259 When this preparation is achieved,
in each case.
ſe supernormal knowledges do not exist
Pyadhātu.260The Knowledges 1161
44a. They have their own sphere or a lower sphere for their
domain. 261
Through the Supernormal Knowledge of magical power of a
certain sphere, acquired in a certain dhyāna (vii. 43d), one
possesses the powers of displacement and creation (vii. 48) in this
sphere or in a lower sphere, but not in a higher sphere.
So too, through the Supernormal Knowledge of divine hearing,
one understands the sounds of the sphere to which the Supernor-
mal Knowledge belongs, or the sounds of a lower sphere, but not
the sounds of a higher sphere.
Through the Supernormal Knowledge of the mind of another,
one does not know the mind of another when it is of a sphere
higher than that of the Supernormal Knowledge.
Through the Supernormal Knowledge of the memory of
past
existences, one does not obtain the memory of existences in a
sphere higher than that of the Supernormal Knowledge.
Consequently, a mind in Ārūpyadhātu cannot be attained either
through the Supernormal Knowledge of the knowledge of the
mind of another, nor through the Supernormal Knowledge of the
memory of past existences, because this mind in Ārūpyadhātu is of
a sphere higher than that of the Supernormal Knowledges.262
How are the Supernormal Knowledges acquired?
If they have not been acquired in a past life, they are acquired
only through effort.
44b. Already cultivated, they are acquired through detach-
ment.1162 Chapter Seven
When they have been cultivated in a past life, they are acquired
through detachment. [The ascetic takes possession of them
through the sole fact that he detaches himself from Kāmadhātu
and enters a Dhyāna]. Nevertheless, intense, they are acquired
only through effort. Their manifestation always supposes an
effort, except in the case of the Buddha, who acquires any of the
Supernormal Knowledges through simple detachment, and
actualized them at will (ii. 44a, vii. 41d).
44c. The third is made up of three applications of mindful-
ness.263
The supernormal knowledge of the mind of another contains
three applications of mindfulness, vedanā, citta, and dharma (vi.
14)-because it has the mind and its mental states for its object.
44d. Supernormal power, hearing, and sight make up the
first application of mindfulness.264
The supernormal knowledges of supernormal power, divine
hearing, and divine sight, make up the first application of
mindfulness, that is, the body as an application of mindfulness, for
they have rūpa, color and shape, for their object. The supernormal
knowledge of supernormal power has four external āyatanas, with
the exception of sound, for its sphere.265 And divine hearing and
divine sight have both sound and rūpa for their domain.
If this is the case, how can the Supernormal Knowledge of the
divine sight know, as the Sūtra explains,266 that "These beings
endowed with bad physical actions, with bad vocal actions, deniers
(apavādaka) of the Aryans, produce false views, attach themselves
to views and to wrong actions, because of which, at the end of their
lives, they fall into bad realms of rebirth..."?
The Supernormal Knowledge of divine sight does not knowThe Knowledges 1163
that a being is endowed with a mental action, that a being has
conceived a false view, etc. But there is another knowledge which
accompanies the Supernormal Knowledge of divine sight,267 which
arises in the series of the Aryan, and which knows mental action,
etc. As this knowledge is produced through the power of the
Supernormal Knowledges of divine sight, it receives, together with
this Supernormal Knowledge, the name of "Knowledge of death
and rebirth."
As their natures are not determined in the Kārikā, it follows in
and of itself that the two Supernormal Knowledges of memory of
past existences and the destruction of the cankers have for their
nature the four applications of mindfulness. 268
45a-b. The Supernormal Knowledges of hearing and sight
are neutral; the others are good.269
The Supernormal Knowledges of divine hearing and divine
sight are morally neutral, for, by nature, they are prajñā associated
with auditory and visual consciousness.
If this is the case, how can one say that they are of the sphere of
the Four Dhyānas? In fact, there is no visual or auditory
consciousness in the Second Dhyāna and above (i.46).
There is no contradiction here, for we express ourselves in this
way by consideration of the
organs. The organs, the ears and eyes,
which are the support of the Supernormal Knowledges, are
produced through the power of the Four Dhyānas and belong to
their sphere: they therefore exist in the four spheres. The
Supernormal Knowledge, being supported on the organ, is
therefore said to be supported on (= exist in) the Four Dhyānas.
Or rather, we express ourselves in this way because we consider1164 Chapter Seven
the ānantaryamārga (or preparation, above p. 1160, line 25) of the
Supernormal Knowledge; in fact the ānantaryamārga of the
Supernormal Knowledge of divine hearing and divine sight is
supported on four spheres, the Four Dhyanas.270
The other supernormal knowledges are good.
If this is the case, why does the Prakaraṇapāda say, "What is
supernormal knowledge? It is good prajñā"?
This definition refers to the greater number of cases (bāhulika)
or to the essential (prādhānika). The supernormal knowledges are,
in the greater number of cases, good; and the good supernormal
knowledges are the most essential.
According to the Sūtra, there are three Aśaikṣa Wisdoms
(vidyā).271 To which supernormal knowledges do these wisdoms
correspond?
45c-d. Three supernormal knowledges are wisdom, [because
they bring about the cessation of non-wisdom relative to
the past, etc.]272
The three wisdoms,—the Aśaikṣa wisdom which consists of
the realization of the knowledge of past lives, the Aśaikṣa wisdom
which consists of the realization of the knowledge of the death and
birth of all beings, and the Aśaikṣa wisdom which consists of the
realization of the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers,-
are, in the order of the Sūtra, the fifth, the second, and the sixth
supernormal knowledges.
Why are these three supernormal knowledges called wisdoms
(vidyā)?The Knowledges 1165
45d. Because they bring about the cessation of non-wisdom
(ignorance) relating to the past, etc.
It is because the memory of past existences (=the fourth
supernormal knowledge) brings about the cessation of error
relating to the past, the knowledge of death and birth (=the fifth
supernormal knowledge) brings about the cessation of error
relating to the future, and the knowledge of the destruction of the
cankers (=the sixth supernormal knowledge) brings about the
cessation of error relating to the present.273
Which of these three supernormal knowledges really belongs
to the Aśaikṣas?
46a. The last belongs to the Aśaikṣas.
The knowledge of the destruction of the cankers belongs only
to the Arhat.
46a-b. The two others are said to belong to the Aśaikṣas
when they arise in the series of an Aśaikṣa.274
The other two supernormal knowledges are said to belong to
an Aśaikṣa when they arise in the series of an Aśaikṣa: by nature
however, they are neither-Śaikṣa-nor-Aśaikṣa. (ii. 38a)
If this is so, why not admit that these two supernormal
knowledges are, when they are produced in a Śaikṣa, the wisdom of
a Śaikṣa.
46c-d. We admit that they exist in the Saikṣa, but then they
are not called wisdoms because the series of the Śaikṣa is
associated with non-wisdom.2751166
Chapter Seven
In fact the Buddha did not say that these two supernormal
knowledges are Śaikṣa dharmas.
Why?
When a series is associated with non-wisdom (avidyā, ignor-
ance) it is not correct to give the name of wisdom (vidyā) to the
supernormal knowledge which is produced in this series, for the
supernormal knowledge is obscured by the non-wisdom.276
The Sūtra says that there are three methods of conversion.277
To which supernormal knowledges do they correspond?
47a-b. The first, the third and the sixth are the methods of
conversion.278
The supernormal knowledges of ṛddhi, of the knowledge of the
mind of another, and of the destruction of the cankers, are, in this
order the three methods of conversion (pratihārya): "to carry off"
(har), that is, to convert, through miracles (ṛddhiprātihārya),
through reading the mind of someone (ādeśanāprātihārya), and
through the Teaching (anuśāsanīprātihārya).
The prefix pra- signifies ādikarman (initial action), and the
prefix ati-signifies bhṛśam (forceful): these three supernormal
knowledges are called prātihārya because, thanks to them, the
work of conversion (haraṇa) is begun (pra-) and done in an
intense manner (ati-).
Through them, one carries away (haranti) the mind of persons
to be converted, from the very first (āditas) and very forcefully (ati
bhṛām).
Or rather, they receive the name of prātihārya, for throughThe Knowledges
them one first or forcefully makes oneself a master of persons who
hate (pratihata) the Good Law, or of those who are indifferent.279
Through them, one makes persons of hostile, unbelieving, or
non-zealous mind, produce a mind of refuge, a mind of faith, or a
mind of practice.280
47b. Conversion through the Teaching is the best.281
Among the three methods of conversion, conversion through
the Teaching is the best.
47c-d. Because it does not exist without supernormal
knowledge, and because it confers the fruits of salvation and
of well-being.
Conversion through miracles and conversion through reading
someone's mind can be produced by means of wisdom.282 There is
a wisdom called Gāndhārī:283 the person who possesses it can fly
through space. There is also a wisdom called Ikṣaṇikā: 284 the
person who possesses it can read the mind of others. Conversion
through the Teaching cannot be realized by such means, and as a
consequence, since it is never separated from the supernormal
knowledge of the destruction of the cankers,285 it is superior to the
other two.
Further, the first two methods of conversion are only capable
of captivating the mind of another for a short period of time, and
they do not produce any important results. But the third method of
conversion causes others to produce beneficial results; for by
means of this method of conversion, the preacher teaches, in truth,
the means to salvation and to well-being.
***1168 Chapter Seven
What is rddhi?
48a. Rddhi is absorption.286
According to the Vaibhāṣikas, the word ṛddhi designates
absorption or samadhi. The absorption is so named, for it is due to
it that the work succeeds (samṛdhyati).
What does ṛddhi consist of?
48a-b. From it, there arises displacement and fictive
creation.287
Displacement (gati) is of three types: transport displacement,
displacement through adhimokṣa (intention), and rapid displace-
ment like the mind.288
48c-d. Rapid displacement like the mind is unique to the
Master.289
This displacement goes very quickly, like the mind; from
whence its name of manojava. Only the Buddha possesses it, not
other beings. The body arrives at a great distance even in the time
it takes to think of arriving there. This is why the Buddha said that
the sphere of the Buddha is incomprehensible.290 The Master also
possesses the other two displacements.
48c-d. The others possess displacement of transport and of
adhimokṣa.The Knowledges
Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas elevate their bodies and move,
as a bird2⁹¹ gradually raises his body and moves. 292 As for the
displacement of adhimokṣa, when one does it, through the power
of intention (adhimokṣa), what is distant becomes close: 293
through this adhimokṣa the object comes quickly.
49a-c. Fictive creation in Kāmadhātu is made up of four
external āyatanas; [it is of two types; fictive creation of the
sphere of Rūpadhātu is made up of two ayatanas.] 294
49b. It is of two types.
Fictive creation (nirmita) is of two types, of the sphere of
Kāmadhātu, and of the sphere of Rūpadhātu. The first consists of
the creation of physical matter, odor, taste, tangibles which are
external,295 with the exception of sound. The second consists of
the creation of physical matter and tangibles only, because odors
and tastes do not exist in Rūpadhātu.2⁹6
Fictive creation in Kāmadhātu is twofold, accordingly as it is
connected with the body of the ascetic himself or with another: for
example an ascetic transforms himself into a tiger, or he creates,
apart from himself, a tiger.297
49c. Fictive creation of the sphere of Rūpadhātu is made up
of two ayatanas.
The same holds true of fictive creations in Rūpadhātu. A
person who is in Kāmadhātu and one who is in Rūpadhātua are
each capable of four types of fictive creations, so creation is
eightfold.
But when a person in Rūpadhātu produces a fictive creation in
Kāmadhātu, is it not found to possess odor and taste?1170 Chapter Seven
No, there is no possession, no more so than a person does not
possess clothing or attire, even though they are bound to his body,
because these things, not being living organisms (asattvasaṁk-
hyāta, i. 10b), are not bound to the sense organs.
Yet certain masters say that a person in Rūpadhātu can only
create two ayatanas, physical matter and tangibles, for they fear
that if this person creates odors, etc., he will be found to possess
odors, etc.
Is it through the supernormal knowledge of creation itself that
the ascetic creates fictive, created objects (nirmita)?
No.
How is this?
It is created as a result of supernormal knowledge (abhijñā-
phala, ii. 72b. English trans. p. 314).
What is this dharma that you term the result of supernormal
knowledge?
49c-d. It is through a mind capable of creating fictive beings
(nirmāṇacitta) that one creates. They are fourteen in
number.
A result of supernormal knowledge are minds capable of
creating fictive, created objects. These minds are fourteen in
number.
50a-b. They are the results of the Dhyānas, from the
number of two up to five, in this order.The Knowledges 1171
These minds are fourteen in number, being differentiated by
their Dhyāna (fundamental Dhyāna, mūladhyāna) which serves as
their support.
Two minds are the results of the First Dhyana: the first of the
sphere of Kāmadhātu, and the second of the sphere of the First
Dhyāna, 298
Three minds are the results of the Second Dhyāna: two of the
two lower spheres (Kāmadhātu and the First Dhyāna) and one of
the same sphere as the Dhyana of which it is the result, so
therefore of the Second Dhyāna.
In the same way four and five minds are the results of the
Third and Fourth Dhyānas. The mind capable of creating fictive
objects, the result of a certain Dhyāna, is of the sphere of this
Dhyana or of a lower sphere.
50b. They do not arise from a lower Dhyāna.299
The Dhyana mind of a lower sphere does not produce a mind
capable of creating fictive beings (that is, a result of a Dhyāna) of a
higher sphere, because its power is too small.
A fictive being, that is to say, a magical being-of a lower
sphere, but which is the result of the Second Dhyāna, prevails over,
from the standpoint of its going and coming, a being of a higher
sphere, which is a result of the First Dhyāna. 300 The same for the
following Dhyānas.
50c. One obtains them like a Dhyāna³01
One obtains a mind capable of creating fictive beings, a result
of a mūladhyāna, as one obtains the Dhyāna, that is to say, through
detachment, for the result is obtained at the same time as its
support.1172
Chapter Seven
50c-d. A mind capable of creating fictive beings proceeds
from a pure Dhyāna and from itself; [it produces the
two.]302
Its result, a mind capable of creating fictive beings, is produced
from a Dhyāna. This mind does not lead to a departure from
contemplation.
50d. It produces the two.
A first mind capable of creating fictive beings arises from a
pure (śuddhaka, viii. 6) Dhyāna. Then successive minds capable of
creating fictive beings arise from a mind of their same type, that is
to say, of the first, of the second... mind capable of creating fictive
beings: the former mind of this series thus produces a subsequent
mind capable of creating fictive beings. The last mind is followed
by a pure Dhyāna. Therefore the mind capable of creating fictive
beings comes from two minds (a pure Dhyāna and a mind capable
of creating fictive beings) and produces these same two. This is to
suppose that the person who has a mind which is capable of
creating fictive beings-the result of an absorption, and morally
neutral-does not again enter a Dhyāna, that he would not depart
from this Dhyāna, in the same way that one enters through a door
and leaves through this same door.
51a. One creation takes place through one mind of its
sphere.
All the fictive, created (nirmita) things are created by a mind of
their sphere, for a mind capable of creating fictive beings of a
certain sphere does not produce a being belonging to another
sphere.The Knowledges 1173
51b. But speech also takes place through a mind of a lower
sphere.303
Speech uttered by fictive (nirmita) being also depends, in
certain cases, on a mind of a lower sphere.
Speech uttered by a fictive being in Kāmadhātu or of the First
Dhyāna takes place by virtue of a mind of the sphere of this created
being. But a fictive being of a higher sphere, of the Second Dhyāna,
etc., speaks by virtue of a mind of the First Dhyana: for in the
higher spheres a mind endowed with vitarka and vicāra (ii. 33,
English trans. p. 203) and capable of producing vijñāpti (iv. 7d)
does not exist.
51c. With the creator, except in the case of the Master.
When the nirmatar, the person who produces fictive beings
(nirmita), produces a number of fictive beings, all speak when
their creator speaks, because their vāgvijñāpti (iv. 3d) or vocal
action, is common to all. This is why the stanza says, “When one
speaks, namely the creator, all his creatures speak; when one
remains silent, all remain silent."304
This rule does not refer to the Buddha, for he possesses a
perfect mastery in absorption: at his will, fictive beings speak one
after the other; they question the Buddha and the Buddha answers;
the Buddha questions them and they respond.
But, one would say, when the mind which produces the voice
arises, the mind capable of creating fictive beings no longer exists:
therefore at this moment the fictive being does not exist; thus how
does a fictive being speak?1174
Chapter Seven
51d. The fictive being speaks, because its creator sets speech
into motion through another mind, after having empo-
wered the fictive being.
Through the power of a mind previous to its entry into
contemplation and creation, the creator empowers (adhitisthati)
the fictive being, "May it last!" By means of another mind, he
causes it to speak. Therefore, even though the fictive being speaks,
the two minds,-that which creates it and that which causes it to
speak, are not simultaneous, and yet the vocal action takes place
with the fictive being for its support.
52a. Empowerment continues after death. 305
It is not only for the duration of his own life that the creator is
capable of empowering a thing in such a manner that it endures;
his empowerment can also make the thing last after his own death.
It is thus, through his own empowerment that Kāśyapa the
Great made his bones last until the advent of Maitreya,3⁰6
52a. But not with respect to that which is not hard.
It is only a hard thing which is susceptible of being empowered
for a long period of time. This is why Kaśyapa the Great did not
empower his flesh.
52b. Some other masters say no.
The body protected by the power of empowerment is not
capable of lasting beyond death. If the bones of Kāśyapa last, it is
through the protection of the gods.307
52c-d. From the beginning, the ascetic creates a single
creation through numerous minds capable of creatingThe Knowledges 1175
fictive beings; the contrary, when his practice is purified. 308
A beginner, by means of numerous minds capable of creating
fictive beings, produces a single fictive being; later, when his
practice is complete, the ascetic produces at his own will, by means
of a single such mind, many or few creatures.
53a. Produced through meditation, it is neutral.
The mind capable of creating fictive beings, when it is acquired
through meditation (that is, when it is the result of a Dhyāna, or of
a supernormal knowledge), is morally neutral: the result of a
supernormal knowledge is in fact one of the classes of neutral
items (ii. 71b).
53b. Innate, it is threefold.
But when it is innate, it can be good, bad, or neutral: for
example gods, nāgas, etc., who have been created with a view to
aiding or harming.
Also capable of being created, among the ten material (rūpin)
āyatanas, are nine āyatanas, with the exclusion of sound, namely,
the eye, visible things, the ear, the organ of smell, etc.309
[But if nine ayatanas are capable of being created, there can
therefore be creation of organs (indriya): there can therefore be an
apparition of a new being (sattva), for the organs are of rūpa
(color and shape) which belong to living beings.]³10
The organ is not capable of being created. Yet one can say
without being incorrect that “creation consists of nine āyatanas,'
for creation-whether it refers to the transformation of the body
of the creator or to the creation of a distinct body-consists of four
ayatanas, physical matter (rūpa) odors, tastes, and tangible things,
and does not exist independently of the five organs.1176 Chapter Seven
311Ṛddhi is, we have said, of two types: produced through
meditation (or Dhyāna), and innate.312
It is also of three other types:
53c-d. Ṛddhi is also produced through mantras, plants, and
actions; in all five types.
It is produced through meditation (bhāvanāja), or innate
(upapattilābhika), or created through mantras (mantrakṛta),
created through the use of drugs or medicines (oṣadhikṛta)³¹3 or
produced through karma (karmaja). 314
Examples of the fifth type (produced through karma) are the
ṛddhi of Māndhātar, etc., and the ṛddhi of beings in intermediate
existence (iii. 14d).
Are divine sight and the divine hearing called “divine” in the
proper sense of the word, because they are of the nature of the
organs of the gods, or rather figuratively so, because they are as if
they were divine?
They are "as divine" in the case of the Bodhisattvas, Cakravar-
tins, and Gṛhapatiratnas.315
When they are divine in the proper sense of the word ³16
54a-b. Divine sight and divine hearing are of pure rūpa of
the sphere of the Dhyānas.317
By reason of a preparatory exercise consisting of meditation onThe Knowledges
light and sound-the ascetic is in the Dhyānas, and in the eyes and
ears of the ascetic-eyes and ears which are in Kämadhātu—there
is found to be attracted (ii. 10a, English trans. p. 166) a pure rūpa, a
matter derived from the primary elements of the sphere of the
Dhyāna in which it exists, subtle and excellent. This rūpa
constitutes his eyes and ears; it sees and understands; it constitutes
what is called divine sight and divine hearing. Arising by reason of
physical matter (rupa) of the sphere of the Dhyānas, the organs
are therefore divine in the proper sense of the word.
54c-d. They are always active, non-deficient; they bear on
the distant, the subtle, etc.
Divine sight and divine hearing of this category, obtained
through meditation,318 are never tatsabhāga (i. 42), but are always
accompanied by visual or auditory consciousness.
They are never deficient; for they come in pairs, and are in a
good state (lit. "not seized by squinting"), as are the organs of
beings born in Rūpadhātu.
They grasp what is obscured, subtle, distant, etc. On this point,
there is a stanza, “The eye of flesh does not see rūpa which is
distant, obscured, or subtle; it does not see in all directions. Divine
sight, the contrary."319
320 When one sees the rūpas by means of divine sight, are the
objects of sight near or far away?
The objects are near or far away according to the person and
according to the eye. If they desire to see, but make no effort to do
so, Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas and Buddhas see, respectively, a
Sāhasra, a Dvisāhasra, or a Trisāhasra universe (iii. 73). If they
make an effort,
55a-b. The Arhat, the Rhinoceros and the Master see a
Dvisāhasra, a Trisähasra, infinite universes.3211178 Chapter Seven
If a Śrāvaka, desiring to see by divine sight, makes a great
effort, he will see a Dvisāhasra Madhyama Lokadhātu. ³22 A
Pratyekabuddha will see a Trisahasra Mahāsāhasra Lokadhātu.
And the Buddha the Blessed One, will see the Asamkhya Loka-
dhātu: he sees according as he desires.
Why is this?
As his knowledge extends to all the dharmas, so too his divine
sight extends to all the rūpas.
Is only rddhi innate, or can other supernatural powers be
innate?
55c. The others are also innate.323
Four powers, divine hearing, divine sight, memory of past
existences, and knowledge of the mind of another, are also
innate. But the innate powers are not called supernormal
knowledges.
55c-d. Divine sight, when it is innate, does not see
intermediary beings.324
It is not capable of seeing the color and shape of intermediate
beings which are seen only by the divine sight of supernormal
knowledge. For the rest, innate divine sight is similar to the divine
sight of supernormal knowledge.
56a. This knowledge of the mind of another is of three
types.The Knowledges 1179
This knowledge signifies the knowledge of the mind of another
when it is innate. It can be three types: good, bad, or neutral.
56b. Also when it is produced through reflection (tarka) or
through formulas (vidyā).
When it is produced through reflection or through formulas,
the knowledge of the mind of another can be morally good, bad, or
neutral. A person, through the study of the Ikṣanikaśāstra,325 is
capable of interpreting signs: his knowledge of the mind of
another is produced through reflection; so too one can know the
mind of another through mantras. But, produced by meditation or
Dhyāna, this knowledge is only good.326
A knowledge of the mind of another, and memory of past
existences are innate in the beings in hell. Through these two
knowledges,
56c. The beings in hell know from the very beginning.327
From their birth and as long as they are not crushed by their
sufferings, they know the minds of others and remember their past
existences (see iv. 80d).
Beings in the other realms of rebirth where a knowledge of the
mind of another and a memory of past existences are innate always
know because their sufferings do not overwhelm them.
56d. Among humans, not innate. 328
Among humans, the five powers, ṛddhi, etc., described above,
are not innate.
If this is so, how do certain persons, the Bodhisattvas, naturally1180 Chapter Seven
possess a remembranace of past existences?
The remembrance of past existences that they possess by
nature is not innate among them, that is, acquired by the mere fact
of their human birth; it results from certain actions.
How is this?
A knowledge of the memory of past existences is of three
types: a result of meditation (the supernormal knowledge
described above), innate (as among the gods), or realized through
action (as is the case with the Bodhisattvas).
Om. Homage to the Buddha.
We have studied the qualities (guna) of the knowledges (the
pranidhijñānas, the abhijñās, etc.). Let us now study the natures of the
Dhyānas, etc. We shall speak first of their supports (aśraya), that is,
the mental states in which these qualities are produced.
1a. The Dhyānas are twofold; (the Dhyānas are four in
number; the Dhyānas as existence have been defined. The
concentrations are the applications of pure minds on a single
object; with their concomitants, they are the five skandhas.)¹
(We shall first study the Dhyānas, since they are, with the
exception of the Ārūpyas or "non-material concentrations",—the
support of all qualities, either common or specific, pure or impure.)
Each of these Dhyānas is of two types: samāpatti, absorption or
concentration, and upapatti or existence.²
lb. The Dhyānas are four in number.
There are four Dhyānas, the First to the Fourth.
lc. The Dhyānas as existence have been defined.1216 Chapter Eight
The Dhyānas as existence have been defined in the Third
Chapter of this book. How are they defined? It says, "The first
Three are threefold and the Fourth is eightfold." (iii.2)
ld. Concentration is the application of a pure mind on a
single object;
In general, Dhyāna as absorption is defined as an application of
a pure mind on a single object,4 for the Dhyānas have samadhi or
concentration (ii, p. 190) for their nature.
le. With their concomitents, they are the five skandhas.
If one consideres samadhi with its following, Dhyāna as
absorption has the five skandhas for its nature."
What is "application on a single object"?
The fact that minds have a single object.6 [The Sauträntikas
object]: If this is the case, then what is designated by the word
samadhi are the minds themselves which have a single object.
There is no reason to admit the existence of a separate thing, a
certain mental dharma, as samādhi.¹
[The Vaibhāṣikas answer:] What is called samadhi is a certain
dharma by which the minds are concentrated, applied on a single
object. The concentrated minds are not samadhi.8
Here many difficulties present themselves:
1. Since minds are momentary, each of them has a single object.
What then is the role of samādhi?
2. Samadhi causes the second mind to not be distracted orThe Absorptions 1217
turned aside from the object of the first mind. But if this is the
case, then the samadhi does not exercise any action with regard to
the first mind which you consider as associated with samadhi.
3. Why imagine samadhi in and of itself? Why not admit that
the minds are applied to a single object by reason of the causes that
you assign to samādhi?
4. Finally, you have defined samādhi as a universal dharma
(mahābhūmika, ii.24): hence all minds should possess the
characteristic of being concentrated.
[The Vaibhāṣikas answer this last objection:] No, because of
the weakness of the samadhi.
The Sautrāntikas say that the minds which have the same
object constitute samādhi: samadhi does not exist separately. For it
is said in the Sūtra that the Four Dhyānas are adhicitta śikṣa, the
“higher mental learning"; another says that the Four Dhyānas are
the primary element in the purification of the mind (cittaparisud-
dhipradhana) 10
What is the meaning of the word dhyana?
¹1By reason of dhyana the ascetic is "concentrated" and capable
of upanidhyāna.¹2 Upanidhyai signifies "to know truly", as it is said
in the Sūtra, “He who is concentrated knows truly".¹3 (The root
dhyai is used in the sense of upanidhyāna.)
In the School [of the Sarvästivādins], all dhyāna is prajñā
[whereas in some other schools, dhyāna is cinta or reflection].14
If the Dhyānas are absorptions or samādhis, then are all
absorptions, good, bad, or neutral,-Dhyāna?
No. Only absorptions filled with certain excellences are called
Dhyānas. So too in the world, it is the sun that is called "the light
maker" (bhāskara) (and not the firefly).1218 Chapter Eight
What are the excellences?
Samadhi is in fact excellent: it is an absorption filled with
“parts” (angasamāyukta, viii.10), which goes by the means of the
yoke of calmness (śamatha) and insight (vipaśyana) [that is to say,
in which calmness and insight are in equilibrium],¹5 that is termed
in the Sūtra "happiness in this world” (dṛṣṭadharmasukhavihāra,
viii.27) and "the easy path" (sukhapratipad, vi.66), the path by
which one knows better and easily. It is thus the excellent
absorptions which are called dhyana.
But if dhyāna is an absorption filled with parts, how can a
defiled absorption be called dhyāna?
Because it is bad upanidhyāna.
But this entails false conclusions. [In fact, one cultivates bad
upanidhyāna with a mind controlled by sensual desire, and this
state cannot be a dhyana.]
No. We give the name of dhyana to the defiled state that
resembles true dhyāna, as, in the world, one calls a thing that
resembles a grain, although incapable of germinating, "rotten
grain", and not a pebble, etc. [In the same way one speaks of a
pārājika Bhikṣu, iv.39c-d.] And the Blessed One speaks of bad
dhyāna. 16
What are the characteristics of the First to the Fourth Dhyāna?
2a. The First is filled with vicara, prīti, and sukha, (parts
that the following [Dhyānas] successively abandon).¹7
The First Dhyana is a good concentration filled with vicara,
prīti, and sukha [that is to say, associated with a vicāra filled or
associated with priti and sukha]. This also says implicitly, "filledThe Absorptions 1219
with vitarka," for vitarka necessarily accompanies vicāra, as smoke
accompanies fire. It does not happen that vicāra is associated with
prīti and sukha without at the same time being associated with
vitarka. 18
2b. Parts that the following (Dhyānas) successively
abandon.
The Second, Third, and Fourth Dhyana are characterized by the
successive abandoning of each of these three parts; eliminating
vicāra, the Second Dhyana is only filled with prīti and sukha;
eliminating priti, the Third Dhyana is only filled with sukha; and
by eliminating sukha, these three parts are absent from the Fourth
Dhyāna.
We have described the Dhyānas. What are the Ārūpyas?
2c. So too, the Arūpyas (which are made up of four
skandhas).19
a. The Ārūpyas, that is, the absorptions of, and the rebirths in
Ārūpyadhātu are like the Dhyānas in their number and nature.
There are four Ārūpyas and each Ārūpya is twofold, existence
and concentration. [The existences have been defined in the Third
Chapter, iii.3]. The concentrations of Ārūpya, in their nature and
in general, are applications of pure minds on a single object.
By reason of this double similarity, the stanza says "So too, the
Ārūpyas" (are like the Dhyānas).
2d. They are made up of four skandhas.1220 Chapter Eight
b. The Dhyānas are accompanied by five skandhas, but the
Ārūpyas are accompanied by only four skandhas, for no rūpa or
physical matter accompanies it.
2e. It arises out of separation from lower spheres.20
All the Ārūpyas are concentration; but there are four Ārūpyas
because the concentration that constitutes each Ārūpya proceeds
from separation from a lower sphere. Äkāśānantyayatana is the
absorption that proceeds from separation from the Fourth
Dhyana; and so on to Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana (or Bhavāgra)
which proceeds from separation from Ākiṁcanyāyatana.
What is separation?
The paths (Ānantaryamārga and Vimuktimärga) by which the
ascetic is delivered from the lower spheres, because these paths
have turned him away from them.
3a-b. They are called vibhūtarūpasaṁjñā together with
three samantakas.²1
[The basic or maula Ārūpyas, with the preparatory stages or
thresholds, the sāmantakas of the three higher Ārūpyas are
defined as abodes of "those who have conquered the idea of
physical matter."]
The first sāmantaka, the threshold of Ākāśānantyāyatana is not
called a sāmantaka because it has the Fourth Dhyāna for its object,
and so the idea of physical matter is not completely transcended in
it.
The Ārūpyas are so called because there is no rūpa or physical
matter in them: they are made up of the four skandhas as
mentioned above.The Absorptions 1221
[Hsüan-tsang: 3c. There is no rūpa in Ārūpyadhātu.]
This should be proved, say some Schools, for we maintain that
there is some physical matter, rūpa, in the Ārūpyas.
But then why are the ārūpyas called ārūpyas, "absences of
physical matter"?
They are called this because their rūpa is reduced, in the same
way that a little red (īșatpingala) is called "reddish" (āpingala,
"absence of red”) (i.17, English trans. p. 75).
So be it; but what type of physical matter is in Ārūpyadhātu?
i. If you say that this physical matter is neither the body nor the
voice, but merely the physical matter that constitutes bodily and
vocal discipline (kāyavāksaṁvaramātra, the rūpa that forms part
of the dharmayatana, iv. p. 561), then how can this discipline exist
in the absence of body and voice? And how can a rūpa derived from
the primary elements (bhautika), namely discipline, exist in the
absence of these same primary elements (mahābhūtas)? If you
answer that bodily and vocal discipline exists in Ārūpyadhātu
without the cooperation of primary physical matter, in the same
way that pure discipline exists without primary elements of their
same, i.e., pure, nature, then this answer does not hold, for pure
discipline has impure primary elements for its support, elements
in the sphere in which the Aryan is born (iv.6).
This proof for the absence of physical matter does not hold
only for existence in Ārūpyadhātu, but also for the absorption of
Ārūpyadhātu,22 [in which samvara or discipline, which is rūpa, is
also absent].
ii. If you attribute material organs (rūpindriya) to the beings in
Ārūpyadhātu, how can you say that the physical matter of
Ārūpyadhātu is subtle?
Because their dimensions are very small; the beings are
therefore of reduced rūpa (īṣadrūpa), so the beings are then1222 Chapter Eight
"without physical matter."
But if you reason in this way, then the tiny and invisible aquatic
animals [of which the Vinaya speaks] would also be "without
rũ pả.”
Would you say that the physical matter of Arūpyadhātu is
transparent (accha, ii. English trans. p. 173)? But intermediate
beings and the beings in Rūpadhātu also possess transparent
physical matter.23
Would you say that the physical matter of Ārūpyadhātu is more
transparent and so merits being called "absence of physical
matter"? But then you should only call the highest stage of
Ārūpyadhātu "absence of physical matter," for bodies will be all
the more transparent the more distinguished is the absorption of
the stage to which they belong. 24
Furthermore, the physical matter of Rūpadhātu (or of the
Dhyānas) cannot be perceived by an eye in a lower sphere, since it
is too transparent. How does this differ from the physical matter
that you attribute to Ārūpyadhātu?
Finally it is a gratutitous affirmation to maintain that the name
of the first two Dhātus (i.e., Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu)
correspond to their objects (anvarthasaṁjñā),²5 but that this is not
so in the case of Ārūpyadhātu.
iii. It is maintained that physical matter exists in Arūpyadhātu.
There are four arguments in favor of this position:
1. It is said that life and warmth are interconnected (saṁsṛṣṭa).26
2. It is said that nāman (i.e., the four nonmaterial skandhas)
and physical matter support one another, like two bunches of
roses.27
3. It is said that nāmarūpa (both the material and nonmaterial
skandhas) are caused by the consciousenss (vijñāna). 28
4. It is said that consciousness does not come or go independ-
ently of physical matter, sensation, ideas, or the samskāras.29The Absorptions 1223
These texts are not decisive, for there is reason to interpret
them:
1. The Sūtra says that life (äyus) is associated with warmth,
which is physical matter. But does this refer to all types of life or
only to life in Kāmadhātu? 30
2. The Sūtra says that nāman and rūpa (the nonmaterial and
the material skandhas) support one another. But does this refer to
all of the Dhātus or only to Kāmadhātu and Rūpadhātu?
3. The Sūtra says "vijñānapratyayaṁ nāmarūpam” (“the
nonmaterial and material skandhas are conditioned by the
consciousness").31 But does this text teach that all consciousness-
either a consciousness caused by the samskāras of Kāmadhātu or
Rūpadhātu, or a consciousness caused by the saṁskāras of
Ārūpyadhātu, (that is, a consciousness caused by actions retributa-
ble by an existence in Kāmadhātu . . . )—is a cause of the material
and nonmaterial skandhas? Rather, it teaches that all material and
nonmaterial skandhas have consciousness for their cause.32
4. The Sūtra denies that consciousness comes and goes
independently of the four "abodes of consciousness” (vijñānasthiti,
iii.7), that is, independently of rūpa, vedanā, saṁjñā, and the
saṁskāras. But should this Sūtra be understood as meaning
"independently of all of these abodes together"?
We would say that the Sūtra expresses itself in a general
manner: we do not have to interpret it, and we do not have the
right to think that it refers to Kāmadhātu, etc.
The answer does not hold, for to hold to the letter of the Sūtra,
one would come to absurd conclusions:
1. Life would necessarily accompany all warmth, even if it be
external warmth.
2. External physical matter would be supported by the
nonmaterial skandhas.
3. External physical matter would be caused by consciousness.1224 Chapter Eight
4. There would be material food (lit.: "food taken by the
mouthfuls") in Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu, for the Sūtra says, in
a general way, that there are four types of food (iii.40), in the same
way that it says in a general way that there are four "abodes of
consciousness": from whence you conclude that the "abode of
physical matter" exists in Ārūpyadhātu.
No, for the Sutra, while expressing itself in a general way
concerning the four types of food, formulates exceptions to the
rule: it speaks of a being "who surpasses the gods who nourish
themselves with material food";33 and it speaks of beings "who
nourish themselves with joy".34
Very well, but does not the Sūtra also say, and categorically so,
that there is no physical matter in Ārūpyadhātu? It says, 1) "One
departs from the rūpas through the Ārūpyas”; 2) "These states of
calm deliverance, beyond the rūpas, namely the Ārūpyas . . .”;³5 3)
"There are existences without physical matter, absolutely passing
beyond the ideas of physical matter": 36 now, if physical matter
were to exist in the existences or the absorptions of Ārūpyadhātu,
beings who are in Ārūpyadhātu would have ideas of their own
physical matter. And the Sūtra would not say that an ascetic
obtains these existences and absorptions by passing beyond all
ideas of physical matter.
Our opponent answers that the Sūtra, in these different
passages, intends to speak not of physical matter in general, but of
gross physical matter of a lower sphere.
We answer that, in this hypothesis, 1. one should understand in
the same sense the text relative to material food, which would
exist, albeit subtly, in Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu; 2. one should
say that an ascetic leaves the rūpas through the Dhyānas, and that
the Dhyānas belong to Ārūpyadhātu, for the Dhyānas are beyond
the coarse rupas of a lower sphere, namely Kamadhātu; 3. one
should say that, through the Ārūpyas, the ascetic leaves sensation
(vedanā), etc., for the Ārūpyas are beyond the sensations of lower
spheres, and one should call them "without sensation," etc. But theThe Absorptions 1225
Sūtra does not express itself in this way. We then assume that the
Ārūpyas are beyond any and all physical matter.
[Objection.] How can the Arūpyas be the "leaving" of the
rupas? The Blessed One, in fact, denies that existence (bhava) can
be the leaving of existence: “I say that one cannot leave bhava
through bhava."37 The Blessed One expresses himself in this
manner with reason, for one cannot leave a certain existence (or
mode of existence, bhava) by means of this same existence, and
one can neither leave all of the existences nor definitively leave any
existence by means of any existence whatsoever.
Finally the Blessed One says that there is rūpa, vedanā, saṁjñā,
the saṁskāras, and vijñāna in the Dhyānas, and that there is
vedanā . . . and vijñāna in the Ārūpyas. If there were truly rūpa in
the Ārūpyas, why did not the Blessed One say that there is rūpa in
them, as he did for the Dhyānas?
Hence,
3c. There is no rūpa in the Ārūpyas.
[From the two arguments given above, it follows that there is
no physical matter in Ārūpyadhātu. The masters who maintain the
existence of physical matter in Ārūpyadhātu maintain a thesis that
is false and in contradiction to reason.]
If this is the case, then when a being obtains an existence in
Ārūpyadhātu, his series of physical matter is cut off for numerous
cosmic periods (iii.81). When this being is finally reborn in a lower
sphere, where does his physical matter come from?38
3d. Physical matter arises from the mind (citta).
A cause was formerly produced-a certain action, etc.,-which
should ripen in physical matter; a trace (vāsanā) of this cause1226 Chapter Eight
remains in the mind: its efficacy now matures; 39 the physical
matter that now arises arises from the mind.
But how can a mind in Ārūpyadhātu exist without being
supported by physical matter, rūpa?
Why could it not exist without physical matter?
Because it never happens here below that a mind exists
without a body.
But, by virtue of this same reasoning, you should deny that
beings in Rūpadhātu live on material food. Moreover we have
already explained 4⁰ how a mind in Ārūpyadhātu has nikāya
("genre") and jivita (“life") as its support.
Do the Ārūpyas receive their different names,—Ākāśānan-
tyāyatana, etc., from the fact that they have space (ākāśa) etc., for
their objects?
No. The first three,
4a-c. Ākāśānantya, Vijñānānantya, and Ākimcanya are
named after their preparatory exercises.
The three lower Arūpyas receive their names from the fact
that, in their preparatory exercises, one considers space, etc.41
ñākaḥ).42
4c-d. Because of its weakness, the (next) absorption is called
Neither-Ideas-Nor-Absence of Ideas (nasaṁjñānāpyasaṁj-
The Fourth Ārūpya receives its name from the fact that
saṁjñā, “ideas," is very weak in it. Ideas are not active in it, but
neither is it completely without ideas.The Absorptions 1227
Without doubt, one prepares himself for this Ārūpya by
considering, "Ideas43 are a sickness! Ideas are an ulcer! Ideas are an
arrow! The absence of ideas (āsaṁjñika, compare ii.41b) is
stupidity (sammoha)!44 This is calmness, this is excellent, the
Faculty of Neither-Ideas-Nor-Absence of Ideas!" But it is not by
reason of this preparatory exercise that the Fourth Ārūpya receives
its name.
And why is the Fourth Ārūpya conceived of, by the ascetic who
finds himself in the preparatory absorptions, as Neither-Ideas-Nor-
Absence of Ideas?45
It is because of the slightness of the ideas in it. This is the
explanation of its name.
5a. There are then eight things that are basic absorptions;
The Four Dhyānas and the Four Ārūpyas are the eight basic
absorptions.46
5b. The (first) seven are threefold.
The first seven of these eight are threefold.
5c. Enjoyment, pure, and free from the defilements.
They are associated with enjoyment, are pure, and are free
from the defilements.
5d. The eighth is twofold.
Bhavagra is associated with enjoyment and is pure, but it is not1228 Chapter Eight
free from the defilements.
6a. The absorption of enjoyment is associated with thirst;
(a pure absorption is of a worldly order of good; it is the
object of enjoyment of the first; the absorption free from
the defilements is transworldly.) 47
For enjoyment is itself thirst (=desire).
6b. A pure absorption is of a worldly order of good;48
Worldly good is also termed "good," because it arises in
conjunction with the pure dharmas, such as non-desire, etc. (iv.9a).
6c. It is the object of enjoyment.
Pure absorption is the object enjoyed by the absorption of
enjoyment. As soon as the pure absorption disappears, the
absorption of enjoyment that enjoys it arises. (The ascetic has then
left the pure absorption that he is enjoying; but he is concentrated
by virtue of the fact of the absorption of enjoyment which he
enjoys).49
6d. The absorption free from the defilements is trans-
worldly.
The absorption free from the defilements is transworldly. (It
cannot be the cause of or the object of desire; hence it is not
enjoyed).
***The Absorptions 1229
The Dhyānas are filled with "parts" or items, but not the
Ārūpyas (because calmness and insight are in equal measure in
them; below, note 77 ).
How many parts 5⁰ are there in each Dhyāna?
7-8. There are five parts in the First: [vitarka, vicāra, joy
[prīti], happiness [sukha], and samādhi; four in the Second:
faith and joy, etc.; five in the Third: equanimity, mindful-
ness, awareness (samprajñāna), happiness, and samadhi;
and four in the last: mindfulness, equanimity, the sensation
of neither suffering nor happiness [aduḥkhāsukha], and
samadhi].51
There are five parts or items in the First Dhyāna.52
7b. Vitarka, vicāra, joy, happiness, and samadhi.
The teaching of the School is that samādhi or concentration is
at one and the same time both Dhyāna and a part of this Dhyana,
whereas the other parts are only parts of Dhyāna, but not Dhyāna
itself.
But in our opinion, it is the same for the five-part Dhyāna as
for a four-part army, which does not exist apart from its parts.5³
7c. Four in the Second: faith and joy, etc.
The Second Dhyana contains four parts: joy, happiness,
concentration of the mind on a single object (cittaikāgratā), and
internal purity of faith (adhyatmasamprasāda).
8a. Five in the Third: equanimity, mindfulness, awareness,
happiness, and stability (=samadhi).1230 Chapter Eight
The Third Dhyāna possesses five parts: 1) equanimity (not
vedanopeksa, the sensation of indifference, but saṁskāropekṣa),
joy which is free from movement towards any object(anābhogala-
kṣaṇa);54 2) mindfulness (that is, not losing sight of the motive or
reason [nimitta] for this equanimity, upekṣanimittāsampramo-
şa);55 3) samprajñānam (consciousness or awareness relating to
this mindfulness); 4) happiness; and 5) samādhi: sthiti or stability
is a synonym for samādhi, as the Sūtra says, "What is right
samādhi? It is stability of the mind."
8b. And four in the last: mindfulness, equanimity, the
sensation of neither suffering nor happiness, and samādhi.
The Fourth Dhyāna possesses four parts: 1) the sensation of
indifference (lit.: the sensation of neither suffering nor happi-
ness), 2) pure equanimity (upekṣapariśuddhi), 3) pure mindful-
ness, and 4) samadhi.
These are the eighteen parts of the Dhyānas: the First and the
Third Dhyānas have five parts each, and the Second and the
Fourth Dhyānas have four parts each. In respect to their names,
there are eighteen parts. (But how many of these eighteen are
distinct things?)
9a. Regarded as things, there are eleven parts.56
Regarded as things or substances (dravya), there are eleven
parts.
There are five in the First Dhyāna, plus 1) internal purity or
faith in the Second Dhyana; 3-5) equanimity, mindfulness,
awareness and happiness in the Third Dhyāna; and 6) the
sensation of neither suffering nor happiness in the Fourth
Dhyana.
There are then some parts of the First Dhyāna that are notThe Absorptions 1231
parts
of the Second Dhyana. There are four alternatives: 1) parts
of the First Dhyāna that are not parts of the Second Dhyāna,
namely vitarka and vicāra; 2) part of the Second Dhyāna that is not
part of the First Dhyāna, namely faith; 3) parts common to the
First and the Second Dhyānas, namely joy, happiness, and
concentration of the mind on a single object (cittaikāgratā); and 4)
parts that do not belong to either of the First or the Second
Dhyānas, namely all of the other parts.
The correspondance of the parts of the other Dhyānas is
established according to the same principles.
Why do you say that the happiness of the Third Dhyana
constitutes a separate thing?
Because the happiness of the Third Dhyāna is agreeable
sensation (sukhā vedanā), whereas
9b. In the first two Dhyānas, happiness (sukha) signifies
well-being (prasrabdhi).57
In the First and Second Dhyana, prasrabdhi (=karmaṇyatā,
"aptitude" or well-being," ii, English trans.p. 191) is called
happiness: here we have prasrabdhisukha, happiness which
consists of prasrabdhi.In the Third Dhyana, there is only the
sensation of happiness (sukhā vedanā).58
In fact, in the first two Dhyānas, there can be no faculty of
happiness (sukhendriya).
The reason for this is: 1) the happiness attributed to these
Dhyānas cannot be bodily happiness,59 in light of the fact that the
five sense consciousnesses are absent in a person who has entered
into contemplation;60
2. the happiness attributed to these Dhyānas cannot be mental1232 Chapter Eight
happiness because these Dhyānas possess joy. Now joy is
"satisfaction" (saumanasya) and it is inadmissible for joy and
happiness, even happiness of sensation, to coexist; they cannot
even succeed one another, for the First Dhyāna possesses five
parts, and the Second, only four.
[Thesis of the Dārṣṭāntikas:]
i. In the first three Dhyānas, there is no mental sensation of
happiness, but only a bodily sensation of happiness, which
constitutes the part called "happiness" of these Dhyānas (and is
activated in the course of the absorption).61
Objection: In this hypothesis you should explain how the Sūtra
could say, "What is the faculty of happiness (sukhendriya)? The
bodily and mental sensation of happiness produced by reason of an
agreeable contact is what is called the faculty of happiness."
This reasoning is not authentic, answer the Dārṣṭāntikas, as
the word "mental" (caitasika) has been added. In all the sects the
text merely reads "bodily happiness."
Further, they continue, regarding the part of the Third Dhyana
called happiness, the Sūtra says in its own words that, in this
Dhyana the ascetic "experiences happiness through his body"
(sukham . . . kāyena sampravedayate).6² Would one maintain that
the word "through the body" (kāyena) signifies “through the body
of the mind" (manaḥkāyena = manaḥsamudayena, "through the
accumulation which is the mind"), and that one should translate,
"the ascetic experiences happiness through this complex which is
the manas"?63
ii. [The explanation of the Vaibhāṣikas,] that the happiness
part of the first two Dhyānas is well-being (prasrabdhi, kar-
maṇyatā) is untenable, for the well-being of the Fourth Dhyāna is
certainly greater than the well-being of the first two Dhyānas, and
the Sūtra does not attribute a happiness part to the Fourth
Dhyāna.64
[If the Vaibhāṣikas answer,] "The well-being of the first twoThe Absorptions 1233
Dhyānas is called happiness because it is favorable to the sensation
of happiness, whereas the well-being of the Fourth Dhyāna does
not have this character," [then the Dārṣṭāntikas will answer,] “The
well-being of the Third Dhyāna, like that of the first two, is
favorable to the sensation of happiness; why do the Vaibhāṣikas
not attribute prasrabdhisukha, happiness which consists of
well-being, to the Third Dhyāna, but rather a happiness consisting
of an agreeable mental sensation (vedanāsukha)?”
[If the Vaibhāṣikas answer,] “In the Third Dhyāna, well-being
whose character is karmaṇyatā or aptitude (ii, English trans. p. 91)
is opposed by equanimity, whose character is akarmaṇyatā,” [the
Dārṣṭāntikas will deny the truth of this assertation:] for them
well-being is accumulated through equanimity, since it results from
the fact that the well-being of the Third Dhyana is greater than the
well-being of the first two Dhyānas.
Finally, the Sūtra says,"5"When the Noble Śrāvaka, having
realized the joy born of separation, abides in absorption, then five
dharmas have been abandoned by him, and he has achieved the
cultivation of five dharmas, namely joy, well-being, happiness,
prajñā, and samādhi.” In this Sūtra, well-being is listed separately
from happiness; it should be distinct from happiness in order for
the list of the five dharmas to be complete. Thus, in the first two
Dhyānas, happiness is not well-being.66
iii. [Objection of the Vaibhāṣikas:] In order for the happiness
of the first two Dhyānas to be agreeable bodily sensation, it is
necessary for the person in absorption to produce a consciousness
of touch (kayavijñāna). And this is not possible. [Answer of the
Dārṣṭāntikas:] In the state of absorption, the body is penetrated by
a wind born of excellent mental concentration (samādhi); this
wind is a tangible which is agreeably felt (sukhavedaniya) and is
called well-being. Hence there is produced a consciousness of touch
(together with the agreeable sensation associated with this
consciousness).
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] When this consciousness is produced, there
is "a distraction of the mind towards an external object": hence the1234 Chapter Eight
ascetic would fall away from his samadhi.
Answer of the Dārṣṭāntikas:] No, for agreeable or happy bodily
sensation which arises from samādhi, being internal, is favorable
to samadhi.67
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] But would the ascetic fall away from the
samadhi when he produces the consciousness of touch?
[Answer of the Dārṣṭāntikas:] No, and for this same reason:
this consciousness is favorable to samadhi. Immediately after the
appearance of this consciousness, the samādhi is taken up again.68
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] How can the body (kāyendriya), which is in
Kāmadhātu, give rise to a touch consciousness (i.e., prasrabdhi),
which is, according to you, a type of wind in Rūpadhātu (i.47c)?
[The Dārṣṭāntikas:] This criticism does not hold, for this
consciousness of touch is produced by reason of well-being.69
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] There is a difficulty in regarding well-being
as a tangible.70 Let us suppose that the ascetic is in possession of
transworldly, undefiled Dhyāna: the tangible (well-being) and the
consciousness of touch (kayavijñāna) which he has will be
undefiled, for some of the parts of defiled Dhyana cannot be
undefiled, while the others are defiled. [Now the Sūtra
says that
"All eyes ... all tangibles are defiled".]
[The Dārṣṭāntikas:] There is no contradiction here. In fact
physical well-being (kāyasya karmaṇyatā) is defined as "a part of
Bodhi."71 If the Vaibhāṣikas answer, "Even though it is not a part
of Bodhi, it is so defined because it is favorable to the part of Bodhi
called well-being and which is mental well-being," we would say
that, for the same reason, one can consider bodily well-being as
undefiled. [If the Vaibhāṣikas answer,] "Bodily well-being cannot
be undefiled, for the Sūtra declares that all tangible things are
defiled,"72 we would say that this Sūtra is of intentional meaning
and refers to all tangible things with the exception of physical
well-being, to the consciousnesses of touch with the exception of
the consciousness of touch which cognizes well-being.The Absorptions 1235
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] Do you admit that certain parts of
undefiled dhyāna are undefiled, and that certain parts are not
undefiled?
[The Dārṣṭāntikas:] The undefiled part is not simultaneous to
the non-undefiled part; we know indeed that (bodily) happiness
does not exist at the same time as (mental) joy.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] Then the First Dhyāna will not have five
parts, and the Second Dhyāna will not have four parts.
[The Dārṣṭāntikas:] If Scripture attributes the parts of
happpiness and joy to the first two Dhyānas, this is because these
Dhyānas are susceptible, successively, to happiness and joy; in the
same way Scripture attributes vitarka and vicāra-which can only
exist successively-to the First Dhyāna.
[The Vaibhāṣikas:] We affirm that vitarka and vicāra coexist;
but the example that you cite to prove the non-coexistence of the
parts is not proved.
[The Dārṣṭāntikas:] This example is proved; for vitarka, which
is a coarse mental state, and vicāra, which is a subtle mental state,
are contradictory and cannot coexist.73 And you did not say what
harm there is in their not coexisting.74
Let us consider the theory of the "parts": one determines the
specific features of the Second Dhyana and of those following by
eliminating two, three, or four parts: it is for this reason that the
First Dhyāna is said to contain five parts, because the other
Dhyānas are defined by the elimination, successively and in order,
of the first four of these parts. This is why ideas (saṁjñā) and the
other dharmas of the First Dhyana are not considered as parts, for
they are not cut off in the following Dhyānas. If you do not accept
this explanation, then why does the First Dhyana have only five
parts?
But, [say the Vaibhāṣikas,] the five parts are only called parts
because they are useful to the Dhyāna. No, this cannot be the case,
[answer the Dārṣṭāntikas,] since mindfulness and prajñā are more1236 Chapter Eight
useful to the Dhyāna than are vitarka and vicāra.
A certain school maintains the system that has been
presented, but the ancient masters (pūrvācāryas) are not in
agreement on this.76 Consequently the point should be further
examined.77
What is the dharma called "internal purity (or faith)"
(adhyatmasamprasāda)?78
When the agitation of vitarka and vicāra has come to an end,
the series flows calmly and clearly: this is what is called internal
purity. As a river agitated by waves, so too the series, by reason of
the agitation of vitarka and vicara, is not calm or clear. [This is the
explanation of the Sautrāntikas.]
9c. Purity is faith.79
But if we admit this explanation, then internal purity is not a
thing in and of itself. Thus there will not be eleven things in the
Dhyānas. Then one must say
Purity (prasāda) is a thing in and of itself, namely faith
(śraddhā). When the ascetic acquires the Second Dhyāna, he
produces a profound faith: he admits that the spheres of
absorption themselves can be abandoned. This faith is called
internal purity. Faith, having purity (prasāda,. vi.75) for its
characteristic, is called purity. Having abandoned externals, it
flows equally and so prasāda is internal and equal; hence it is
termed "internal purity" or adhyatmasamprasāda.80
According to other masters [the Sautrāntikas], vitarka, vicāra,The Absorptions 1237
samādhi, and internal purity are not separate things.
[The Sarvāstivādins:] If these are not separate things, how can
one say that they are mental dharmas?
[The Sautrāntikas:] Some special states of mind receive the
name of mental states because they arise in the mind.81
But the system of the Abhidharma does not admit this theory.82
[Objection of the Sauträntikas:] You have said that joy is
satisfaction (saumanasya), a happy or agreeable mental sensation.
How would you establish this definition?
If joy is not satisfaction, then what is the dharma that is called
joy?
We follow another school.83 According to this school, there
exists a dharma distinct from satisfaction, a mental state called joy.
The hapiness of the three Dhyānas is satisfaction; hence joy, which
is distinguished from happiness, is distinct from satisfaction. It is
not admissible that happiness, in the Dhyānas, is satisfaction.
9c-d. Joy is satisfaction. This is proved by two texts.84
The Blessed One says in the Viparītasūtra,85 "In the Third
Dhyana the faculty of satisfaction (saumanasyendriya) which has
previously arisen is destroyed without remnant; in the Fourth
Dhyāna, the faculty of happiness (sukhendriya) is destroyed
without remnant."
He says in another Sūtra,86 "By reason of the abandoning of the
faculty of happiness and the faculty of suffering, and by reason of
the previous disappearance of the faculty of dissatisfaction
(daurmanayendriya) and the faculty of satisfaction."1238 Chapter Eight
These two texts prove that there is no faculty of satisfaction in
the Third Dhyāna. Hence joy is satisfaction, and not happiness.
Does defiled dhyāna possess the parts that we have just
studied?
No.
What are the parts that are absent in each defiled dhyāna?
10a-c. In the defiled Dhyānas there is no joy, happiness,
faith, sampradhīḥ (=awareness, samprajanya), mindfulness,
pure equanimity nor pure mindfulness.
When it is defiled, the First Dhyāna does not contain joy and
happiness "arisen from separation", because it is not separated
from the defilements of Kāmadhātu (see Vibhāṣā, TD 27, p.
814a23).
The Second Dhyana does not contain internal purity (=faith),
because it is troubled by the defilements; the defilements cause it to
be unclear.
The Third Dhyāna does not contain mindfulness and aware-
ness, because it is confused by a defiled happiness.
The Fourth Dhyāna does not contain the purity of equanimity
or the purity of mindfulness, because it is soiled by the defilements.
That is what some say.
10d. According to some, (there is no) well-being and
equanimity.
According to others, there is no 1) well-being in the first twoDhyānas, and 2) no equanimity in the last two, because well-being
and equanimity are dharmas that are only found in a pure mind
(kusalamahābhūmika, ii.25).
The Absorptions 1239
The Blessed One teaches that three Dhyānas are "disturbed"
(sa-injita) because of “faults” (apakṣālas).87
What are the eight faults?
lla-b. As it is free from the eight faults, the Fourth is
undisturbed.
llc-d. Vitarka and vicāra, the two breaths, and the four of
which happiness is the first.
The eight faults are vitarka, vicāra, happiness, suffering,
satisfaction, dissatisfaction, inbreathing, and outbreathing. None
of these eight is found in the Fourth Dhyāna: this is why it alone is
termed "undisturbed." It is true that the Sūtra says that the Fourth
Dhyāna is undisturbed because it is not agitated by vitarka and
vicāra, by joy and happiness.88 (But the intention of this passage is
not to attribute the breaths, etc., to the Fourth Dhyāna; the Sūtra is
merely noting its difference from the other Dhyānas.)
According to others, the Fourth Dhyāna is "undisturbed"
(aneñjyam) because it is like a lamp which, in a sealed place, is not
agitated by the wind.
Do the arisings of dhyana existences (dhyānopapattayaḥ) or
existences in Rūpadhātu, possess the same sensations (vedanās) as1240 Chapter Eight
do the absorption of the Dhyānas?
No, they do not.
Why is this?
12. In the dhyāna existences, there is satisfaction, happi-
ness, and equanimity; equanimity and sumanaṣkatā (=sau-
manasya, satisfaction); happiness and equanimity; and
equanimity.89
a. In the First Dhyāna existence, there are three sensations: 1)
the sensation of happiness (sukhavedanā) associated with three
consciousnesses (eye, ear, and body consciousness); 2) the
sensation of satisfaction of the sphere of the mind consciousness
(manovijñāna); and 3) the sensation of equanimity associated with
four consciousnesses (eye, ear, body, and manas).
b. In the Second Dhyana existence, there are two sensations,
namely satisfaction and equanimity, both of the sphere of the
manas. There is no happiness here, because the five sense
consciousnesses are absent.9⁰
c. In the Third Dhyāna existence, there are two sensations,
namely happiness9¹ and equanimity, both of the sphere of the
manas.
d. In the Fourth Dhyana existence, there is a single sensation,
the sensation of equanimity.
Such is, with respect to the sensations, the differences between
the Dhyāna existences and the absorptions of dhyāna.
If, from the Second Dhyana on, three consciousnesses (eye, ear,
and body consciousness) are absent, as well as vitarka and vicāra,
how can beings born in the three higher Dhyānas see, hear, andThe Absorptions 1241
touch? How can they produce the bodily or vocal act of informing
(vijnaptikarman, iv.7d; see also i.46 and following)?
We do not say that beings who are born in these Dhyānas lack
visual consciousness, etc. They possess these consciousnesses, but
not in the Second, the Third or the Fourth Dhyānas:
13a-c. In the Second Dhyana and above, the body, eye, and
ear consciousnesses, and the consciousness that sets the act
of informing into motion belong to the sphere of the First
Dhyāna.⁹2
The eye consciousness, etc., and the consciousness that sets into
motion the act of informing do not exist in the Second Dhyana and
above.⁹³ But the beings of these Dhyānas manifest these con-
sciousnesses, in the same way as they manifest a fictive mind of
creation (nirmāṇacitta) of a lower sphere, 94 and, by means of these
consciousnesses, they see, hear, touch, and produce the action of
informing.
13d. These consciousnesses are undefiled-neutral.
The four dhyānas which beings in the Second Dhyana and
above manifest, belong to the sphere of the First Dhyāna. Hence
they are not defiled, because these beings are detached from the
lower spheres; but they are not good, because the good of a lower
sphere is less good.⁹5
How does the acquisition of the absorptions of Rūpadhātu and
Ārūpyadhātu take place accordingly as they are pure, undefiled, or
defiled? (see viii.5).1242
Chapter Eight
14a-b. One who does not possess them acquires them, pure,
through detachment or through birth.
One who does not possess these absorptions obtains them by
detaching oneself from a lower sphere or by taking up birth in a
lower sphere (adhobhūmyupapattitas)," with the exception of the
fourth absorption of Arūpyadhātu, or Bhavāgra, which one
acquires solely by detaching oneself from the third absorption.
What is the meaning of the expression, "He who does not
possess them"?
This signifies "One who has not acquired them or who has lost
them." In fact a person who possesses these pure absorptions of
the falling (hānabhāgīya) class, etc. (viii.17) can, through
cultivation, obtain pure absorptions of a higher class (i.e., of
penetration, nirvedhabhāgīya); one who possesses pure absorp-
tions of the duration (sthitibhāgiya) class can, through falling,
obtain pure absorptions of the falling class.
The Vibhāṣā⁹7 also says, "Can one acquire a pure dhyāna
through detachment? Can one abandon a pure dhyāna through
detachment? Can one acquire a pure dhyāna through falling? Can
one abandon a pure dhyāna through falling? Can one acquire a
pure dhyana through birth? Can one abandon a pure dhyana
through birth? Yes, in the case of the First Dhyāna of the falling
class."
In fact, 1) one obtains this dhyana through detachment from
Kāmadhātu; 2) one loses it through detachment from Brahmaloka
(: by passing through the Second Dhyana); 3) one obtains it by
falling from detachment in Brahmaloka; 4) one loses it by falling
from detachment in Kāmadhātu; 5) one obtains it by rebirth from
here up to Brahmaloka; and 6) one loses it by rebirth into
Kāmadhātu. [Hsüan-tsang: The same for the absorptions of the
other spheres].
14c. One acquires them, undefiled, through detachment.The Absorptions 1243
That is, "one who does not possess them." The Aryan who
detaches himself from a lower sphere acquires the undefiled
absorption of a higher sphere. This rule only refers to the ascetic
who has completely abandoned the absorption in question.
One who already possesses an absorption acquires this same
absorption of undefiled quality under other conditions. Through
the knowledge of extinction (ksayajñāna, vi.44d), one acquires the
undefiled absorption of an Asaikṣa; through the perfectioning of
his faculties (indriyasaṁ cāra, vi.60), one acquires an undefiled
absorption of a Śaikṣa or an Aşaikṣa, according to the case.
[Hsüan-tsang: The undefiled absorption, already possessed, is
again acquired through cultivation or through falling, as explained
above.]
But cannot one say that the ascetic, through entry into the
certitude of the acquisition of absolute good (samyaktvaniyāma,
vi.26a), acquires undefiled absorption for the first time?⁹8
No, for the ascetic who, before pursuing the acquisition of the
result of the state of Sakṛdāgāmin, has obtained the result of the
state of Srotaāpanna (an ānupūrvana, ii.16c) can enter into this
certitude in the state of Anāgamya (viii.22c); he does not
necessarily acquire the basic absorption. [Hsüan-tsang: Now the
Treatise only examines the case that necessarily includes the
acquisition of the absorptions.]
14d. One acquires them, defiled, through falling and
through birth.
One who falls from the detachment of a sphere acquires the
defiled absorption of this sphere. One who, dying in a higher
sphere and reborn in a lower sphere, acquires the defiled.
absorption of this second sphere.
***1244 Chapter Eight
How many types of absorptions arises after how many types of
absorptions?
1. Six absorptions can arise after the first undefiled dhyana:
1-2) pure and undefiled absorption of the same sphere;99 and 3-6)
pure and undefiled absorption of the Second and Third Dhyānas.
2. Seven absorptions can arise after undefiled Ākimcanyāya-
tana: 1-2) pure and undefiled absorption of the same sphere; 3-6)
pure and undefiled absorption of Vijñānānantyāyatana and
Ākāśānantyāyatana; 100 and 7) pure absorption of Naivasaṁjñānā-
saṁjñāyatana, because this ayatana does not contain any undefiled
absorption.
3. Eight absorptions can arise after the Second undefiled
Dhyāna: 1-2) pure and undefiled absorption of the same sphere;
and 3-8) pure and undefiled absorption of the Third, Fourth, and
First Dhyāna.
4. Nine absorptions can arise after undefiled Vijñānānantyāya-
tana: 1-2) two of the same sphere; 3-6) four, namely two of
Ākāśānantyāyatana and two of the Fourth Dhyāna; and 7-9) three,
two of Ākimcanyāyatana and one of Naivasamjñānāsaṁjñāyatana.
5. According to these same principles, one will see that ten
absorptions can arise after the dhyāna and ārūpya absorptions not
specified above. 101
The rule is formulated briefly:
15a-c. After the undefiled, up to the third sphere above or
below, there arises the good.
[The word "good" designates the pure absorption and the
undefiled absorption, for both are morally good (iv.8).]
After an undefiled absorption, we have: 1) either two types of
absorption of the same sphere as this undefiled absorption, namelyThe Absorptions 1245
pure and undefiled; or 2) two types of absorption, pure or
undefiled, of a higher sphere or of a lower sphere until the third in
either direction. In fact, by reason of its too great distance, the
ascetic is not capable of jumping over two spheres.
After inferential knowledge (anvayajñāna, vii.3c), one can
enter into the absorptions of Arūpyadhātu, but not after the
knowledge of the dharmas (dharmajñāna), because this has a lower
sphere for its object.
We have seen which absorptions arise after the undefiled
absorptions.
15c-d. The same after the pure, by adding the defiled of its
sphere.
A defiled absorption of the same sphere can arise after any
pure absorption. The rest as for the undefiled absorption. 102 A
defiled absorption cannot arise after an undefiled absorption.
16a. After the defiled, the pure and the defiled of its sphere.
A pure or a defiled absorption of the same sphere can arise
after a defiled absorption.
16b. And the pure of a lower sphere.
Wearied of the defilements of the sphere in which one finds
oneself,-defilements belonging to the defiled absorption of a
higher sphere,—the ascetic produces an esteem for the pure
absorption of a lower sphere. Therefore, after the defiled
absorption of a higher sphere (the Second Dhyāna), a pure
absorption of a lower sphere (the First Dhyana) can arise.
There is a difficulty. If an ascetic were in a position to distinctly1246 Chapter Eight
know a defiled absorption and a pure absorption, he would be able
to pass from the higher defiled absorption to the lower pure
absorption. But, being defiled, he is not capable of this distinct
knowledge; how then can he, after a defiled absorption, produce a
pure absorption?
By the force of a previous resolution (pranidhāna). He made
the resolution, "May I be able to obtain a lower pure absorption!
What have I to do with a higher defiled absorption?" The "series"
develops of itself by reason of this resolution, and, as a conse-
quence, the lower absorption arises after the higher defiled
absorption, in the same way as a person forms the resolution to
sleep until a certain time, falls asleep, and then wakes up at that
fixed time.
The undefiled absorptions, of whichever sphere, never arise
after a defiled absorption. [There is no reciprocal generation
between these two types, whereas a pure absorption is in
reciprocal generation with both the undefiled and defiled
absorptions.]
We have said that the defiled absorption that succeeds the pure
or defiled absorption is always of the sphere of the absorption
which it follows. This rule should be understood of life in the
course of the absorption; but
16c-d. At death, after the pure, the defiled of any type can
arise. 103
At death, a defiled mind of any sphere can arise following a
pure absorption obtained through birth.
16d. After the defiled, nothing higher.
ma so vThe Absorptions 1247
At death, only a defiled mind of the same sphere or a lower
sphere can follow Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu.
We have seen that the undefiled absorption can follow the pure
absorptions; but it cannot follow all types of pure absorptions.
17a-b. The pure absorption is of four types, of falling, etc.
The pure (suddhaka) absorption is of four types: of falling
(hānabhāgiya), of duration (sthitibhāgīya), of progress (višeṣabhāg-
iya), and of penetration (nirvedhabhāgiya). Nevertheless, the pure
absorption of Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana is only of three types,
excluding the category of the pure absorption of progress, because
it has no higher sphere. 10.
What are these four types?
17b-d. In order, they are suitable to the arising of the
defilements, to its own sphere, to a higher sphere, to the
undefiled.
When the pure absorption is of such a nature that it tends to
lead to the arising of the defilements, it is called an absorption "of
falling."
When the pure absorption tends to lead to its own sphere, it is
called an absorption "of duration."
When the pure absorption tends to lead to a higher sphere, it is
called an absorption "of progress."
When the pure absorption tends to lead to the undefiled
absorption, it is called an absorption "of penetration" (vi.20a).1248 Chapter Eight
Therefore it is from this last category of pure absorptions that the
undefiled absorption arises.
What is the reciprocal generation of these four categories of
absorption?
18a-b. After the absorption of falling, etc., two, three, three,
one.
After the absorption of falling, there can arise absorptions of
falling and duration.105
After the absorption of duration, three can arise, with the
exception of the absorption of penetration.
After the absorption of progress, three can arise, with the
exception of the absorption of falling.
After the absorption of penetration, only an absorption of
penetration can arise.
We have seen (viii.15a-c) that immediately after a pure
absorption or an undefiled absorption of a certain sphere, there
can arise a pure absorption of an undefiled absorption of the third
sphere above or below. When this is produced, the ascetic passes
over a sphere and changes the characteristics of his absorption: he
cultivates what is called the "transitional absorption" (vyutkranta-
kasamāpatti). How is this absorption actualized?
18c-19b. Going and coming in two ways over the eight
spheres, in immediate succession, by passing over one
sphere, going to the third sphere of a different type, is
called "transitional absorption".106The Absorptions 1249
"Going and coming": "to go" is to take up the absorptions in
ascending order; "to come" is to take up the absorptions in
descending (or reverse) order.
"In two ways" refers to undefiled absorption and defiled
absorption. This refers to the pure absorptions, not to the defiled
absorptions.
"The eight spheres" means the Four Dhyana absorptions, and
the Four Ārūpya absorptions.
"In immediate succession" signifies by degrees.
"By passing over one sphere" means by skipping a sphere.
The preparatory exercise (prayoga) includes four successive
disciplines: 1) cultivation of the eight defiled absorptions in
ascending and descending order; 2) when this cultivation is
assured, there is cultivation of the seven undefiled absorptions in
ascending and descending order; 3) when this cultivation is
assured, then the ascetic, in order to gain mastery in absorption,
passes from the first defiled dhyāna into the third dhyāna of this
same quality; from this he passes into Ākāśānantyāyatana, from
this into Ākimcanyāyatana; and he then descends in the same way,
since all of the absorptions are defiled; 4) when this cultivation is
assured, there is cultivation in the same way, and in the two ways,
of the undefiled absorptions.
When the ascetic is capable of passing from the first defiled
dhyāna into the third undefiled dhyāna, from this into defiled
Ākāśānantyāyatana, from this into undefiled Akimcanyāyatana,
and to return in the same way, then he has realized the entry into
the third absorption of a different quality and has returned from
this absorption: the transitional absorption has been achieved.¹07
It is impossible to skip over two spheres and enter into a
fourth, because a fourth sphere is too distant.
The transitional absorption is cultivated only by humans of the
Three Dvipas; by Arhats who are non-circumstantially delivered,
that is, those who realize absorption of their own accord, those1250 Chapter Eight
who are delivered independently of circumstances (the asamaya-
vimukta Arhats, vi.57) because they possess mastery in absorption.
The Dṛṣṭiprāptas (vi.31c), that is, the ascetics in whom prajñā
dominates, (who are informed by speculative views, dṛṣți), are of
keen faculties and possess mastery in absorption; but they lack the
first condition. Arhats whose liberation is occasional and
circumstantial (the samayavimukta Arhats, vi.56c) have destroyed
the defilements, but the second condition is absent. Both are
therefore incapable of cultivating the transitional absorption.
How many dhyana and ārūpya absorptions can be actualized by
beings in different spheres?
19c-d. The dhyana and ārūpya absorptions have for their
support (aśraya) beings of their own spheres or of a lower
sphere.
A being in Bhavāgra (=Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana) can
actualize the absorption of Bhavagra. Beings in lower spheres
down to Kāmadhātu can actualize it also. In the same way the
absorptions of the other spheres can be actualized by beings who
are in the sphere of these absorptions or in lower spheres. But a
being reborn in a higher sphere cannot actualize the absorption of
a lower sphere:
19d. A lower absorption has no usefulness.
An absorption of a lower sphere does not have even the
smallest amount of usefulness for a being born in a higher sphere,
because this absorption is, by comparison, mediocre.108
Such is the general rule, which admits of one exception:The Absorptions 1251
20a-b. But, in Bhavägra, it is by entering the Aryan
absorption of Ākimcanya that one destroys the defilements.
A being born in Bhavagra realizes the Āryan, that is, the
undefiled absorption of Akimcanyāyatana in order to destroy the
defilements relating to Bhavagra. In fact, the pure (=undefiled)
Path cannot be cultivated in Bhavāgra;¹09 but on the other hand,
Ākimcanya is very close to it.
What is the object of the Dhyana and Ārūpya absorptions?
20c. Associated with thirst, absorption has its own exis-
tence (bhava) for its object.
"Absorption associated with thirst" (=desire) signifies the
absorption of enjoyment (viii.6). It has for its object "its own
bhava," that is, the bhava of its sphere. Bhava signifies "that which
is defiled" [This is another manner of presenting the doctrine of
viii.6: the absorption of enjoyment has for its object a pure but
defiled absorption, not an undefiled absorption]. It does not have a
lower sphere for its object, for the ascetic that cultivates the
absorption of enjoyment of a certain sphere is detached from the
lower sphere.¹10 He does not have a higher sphere for his object,
for the spheres are delimited by desire.111 He does not have an
undefiled absorption for his object, which would imply that it is
pure, 112
20d. Pure absorption has all that exists for its object.
The pure or undefiled absorption takes as its object all of the1252 Chapter Eight
dharmas that exist, conditioned (saṁskṛta) and unconditioned
(asaṁskṛta).113 Nevertheless
21a-b. The pure Ārūpya absorptions of the principal
spheres do not have lower defiled absorptions for their
object.
The pure absorptions cultivated in the principal spheres of
Ārūpyadhātu-in opposition to the Dhyana absorptions and to the
absorptions cultivated in the samantakas of Ārūpyadhātu (viii.22)
-do not have for their object the defiled dharmas of lower
spheres, but the dharmas of their own sphere or of a higher
sphere.
The undefiled dharmas grasp all inferential knowledge
(anvayajñāna, vii.3c) for their object, the sarvānvayajñānapakṣa;
they do not concern themselves with the knowledge of the
dharmas (the dharmajñāna, whose object, namely Kāmadhātu, is
too distant); they no longer concern themselves with the
extinction (which is undefiled) of a lower sphere, which would be
possible only if they were concerned with this sphere.
The absorptions cultivated in the sāmantakas of Ārūpyadhātu
have for their object the lower sphere, for they include an
irresistable Path (ānantaryamārga) whose sole object is the lower
sphere.114
Among the three types of dhyāna and ārūpya absorptions,-
undefiled and supermundane (anāsrava), pure (śuddhaka), and
defiled (klista), which one destroys the defilements (klesas)?
21c-d. The defilements are abandoned through the unde-
filed absorptions.
CThe Absorptions 1253
Any undefiled absorption is capable of cutting off the
defilements; not the pure absorptions, nor even less, the defiled
absorptions.
The pure absorption does not cut off the defilements of a lower
sphere, for the ascetic can only obtain the pure absorption of a
certain sphere because he is detached from a lower sphere; he does
not cut off the defilements of his sphere, for he does not oppose
these defilements;115 he does not cut off the defilements of a
higher sphere, because they are more subtle than he himself.
21d. And also by means of the sāmantakas, (likewise pure).
If the sāmantakas of the dhyānas and the ārūpyas are pure, they
cut off the defilements, because they are opposed to a lower sphere.
How many samantakas, prefatory or threshold absorptions, are
there?
22a. There are eight sāmantakas in the basic absorptions.
Each basic absorption has a samantaka or prefatory absorption,
through which one enters into the basic absorption.
Are the samantakas of three types,-undefiled, pure, or
defiled, like the basic absorptions? Do they possess the same
sensations (vedanā, namely joy or priti in the first two Dhyānas,
happiness or sukha in the Third, and equanimity or upeksa in the
Fourth) as they do?
22b. They are pure; they possess the sensation of equanimi-
ty.1161254 Chapter Eight
The samantakas are exclusively pure and are associated with
the sensation of equanimity, because one traverses them through
effort, because the abhorance of the lower sphere has not yet
disappeared,117 and because they are the Path by which one
detaches oneself from the lower sphere.118 Therefore they only
contain the sensation of equanimity and they are not associated
with enjoyment.
22c. The first is also Āryan.
The first samantaka is called Anāgamya.119 It is of two types,
pure and Āryan, that is, undefiled.
The samantaka mind through which one enters an existence is
defiled; but the samantaka mind through which one enters
absorption cannot be defiled, for this thesis has been refuted
(above, p. 1253, line 16).120
22c. Some say that it is threefold.121
Other masters say that the Anāgamya samantaka is also
associated with enjoyment. 122
Does dhyānāntara, the intermediate dhyāna, differ or not from
samantaka?
It differs from it. In fact sāmantaka is the door to detachment
from a lower sphere, but this is not the case for dhyānāntara.
Furthermore
22d. Dhyānāntara is without vitarka.123The First basic dhyana and the first samantaka are associated
with vitarka and vicara. In the seven higher absorptions (the basic
Dhyānas and their sāmantakas), there is neither vitarka nor vicāra.
Only dhyānāntara is filled with vicāra without being filled with
vitarka; consequently it is superior to the First Dhyana but inferior
to the Second. This is why it is called dhyānāntara, or intermediate
dhyāna. 124
Consequently in the higher spheres there is no dhyānāntara,
for the other spheres do not have, like the First, a higher and a
lower (viseṣābhāvāt). ¹25
The Absorptions 1255
23a. To three;
To how many categories does dhyānāntara belong? What
sensation does it have?
It can be associated with enjoyment, a pure absorption, and an
undefiled absorption.
23b. It has the sensation of equanimity.
Like the prefatory or threshold absorptions (sāmantakas), it
has the neither-disagreeable-nor-agreeable sensation, for it is
associated with the faculty of equanimity (iv.48). One progresses
through it through effort (abhisaṁskāravāhin) 126 and therefore it
cannot be associated with satisfaction (saumanasya). Hence it is
considered to be a "difficult path" (duḥkha pratipad, vi.66).
What is the result of dhyānāntara?1256 Chapter Eight
23c. It has Mahābrahmā for its result. 127
Whoever cultivates this absorption to the highest degree is
reborn as Mahābrahmā.
[We have explained the absorptions or samapattis. 128
What are the samādhis?]
The Sūtra ¹2⁹ says that there are three types of samādhi: 1)
samadhi with vitarka and vicāra, 2) samādhi without vitarka but
with vicāra, and 3) samādhi without vitarka and vicāra. Dhyānān-
tara is samādhi without vitarka but with vicāra.
As for dhyānāntara,
23d-e. Up to it, samādhi exists with vitarka and vicāra;
(beyond, samādhi exists without either). 130
All samadhi that is below dhyānāntara contains vitarka and
vicāra. This refers to the First Dhyāna and to any other samadhi
supported by the First Dhyana.131
23e. Beyond, samadhi exists without either.
Above dhyānāntara, all samādhi is without vitarka and vicāra,
from the samantaka of the Second Dhyana to the Fourth Ārūpya
absorption.
The Sūtra ¹32 teaches that there are three absorptions, the
absorption of emptiness (śūnyatāsamādhi), the absorption of the
absence of characteristics, (ānimittasamādhi), and the absorption
of the absence of intention (apraṇihitasamadhi).The Absorptions 1257
24a. The absence of characteristics has the aspect of the
Tranquil. 133
The absorption associated with the aspect of the Truth of
Extinction (nirodhasatya),—that is, the absorption in which the
ascetic considers extinction,-is called the absorption of the
absence of characteristics. This absorption has four aspects. 134
Why does it receive this name?
Because Nirvāņa or extinction, being free from ten characteris-
tics (nimitta) is called animitta. The absorption that has Nirvāṇa
for its object is thus ānimitta. 135 The ten characteristics or marks
(nimitta) are: 1-5) the five āyatanas, external sources of the sense
consciousnesses, physical matter (rūpa), sound, etc.; 6-7) male and
female; and 8-10) the three characteristics of conditioned things
(the saṁskṛtalakṣaṇas, ii.45), arising, duration-and-change, and
death.
24b-c. Emptiness has the aspects of emptiness and non-self.136
The absorption associated with the two aspects of emptiness
(śünya) and of non-self (anātman) is called the absorption of
emptiness (fūnyatāsamādhi). There are thus two aspects, the last
two aspects of the Truth of Suffering.
24c-d. The absence of intention is associated with the other
Truths.
The absorption of the absence of intention is the absorption
that grasps the other ten aspects.
On the one hand, there are aspects of impermanence (anitya)
and suffering (duḥkha, the first two aspects of the Truth of1258 Chapter Eight
Suffering) and the four aspects of the Truth of Origin, which
provoke dread (udvega), and on the other hand, the four aspects of
the Path, for the Path is like a raft and should necessarily be
abandoned, 137
The absorption that grasps these ten aspects is turned toward
the passing beyond of things that are impermanent, suffering,
arising, and the Path; it is then called apranihita, free from
pranidhāna, the will or desire for something.
On the contrary however, Nirvāṇa, under these four aspects
and as the object of the absorption of the absence of intention,
should not be abandoned; and the last two aspects of the Truth of
Suffering, namely emptiness and non-self, the object of the
absorption of emptiness, do not provoke dread, for these two
aspects belong to Nirvāṇa as well as to conditioned things.
These three absorptions (samadhi) are of two types
25a. Pure or immaculate (amala).138
They are pure (śuddhaka) or immaculate, that is undefiled
(anāsrava), acordingly as they are worldly or transworldly.
Worldly, they exist in eleven spheres; transworldly, they exist in
the sphere of the Path.¹39
25b. Immaculate, they are the three gates to deliverance
(vimokṣamukha). 140
When they are undefiled, they are also called "the gates to
deliverance", because they are effectively the gates leading to
Nirvāṇa or deliverance (mokṣa). We have emptiness as a gate to
deliverance (śünyatāvimokṣamukha), the absence of characteristics
554The Absorptions 1259
as a gate to deliverance
(ānimittavimokṣamukha), and the absence
of intention as a gate to deliverance (apranihitavimokṣamukha).
25c-d. There are also three other absorptions (samadhi)
called "emptiness of emptiness", etc.141
They are also called the absorption of the emptiness of
emptiness (sūnyatāśūnyatāsamādhi), the absorption of the absence
of intention in the absence of intention (apraṇiḥitāpraṇihitasa-
mādhi), and the absorption of the absence of characteristics in the
absence of characteristics (ānimittānimittasamādhi), because they
have respectively, and in a manner that we shall explain, the
absorptions of emptiness, the absence of intention, and the
absence of characteristics for their objects.
26a-b. The first two refer to the Aśaikṣa under the aspects
of emptiness and impermanence.
They have for their object the absorption of the Aśaikṣa; that
is, they have respectively the absorption of emptiness and the
absorption of the absence of intention as realized by an Arhat for
their object (see viii.27a).
The absorption of the emptiness of emptiness considers the
absorption of emptiness, which considers the dharmas as empty
and non-self, as empty but not as non-self, because a view of
non-self does not provoke the same dread as does a view of
emptiness. 142
The absorption of the absence of intention in the absence of
intention (apraṇiḥitāpraṇiḥitasamādhi) has the absorption of the
absence of intention of the Aśaikṣa for its object, an absorption
which considers things under ten aspects, impermanence,
suffering, etc. (viii.24c), by considering them as impermanent. It
does not consider them as suffering, nor as cause (hetu), origin
(samudaya), condition (pratyaya), or appearance (prabhava), for1260 Chapter Eight
the absorption of the absence of intention, being undefiled, is not
suffering or cause; and although the absorption of the absence of
intention is the Path, the absorption of the absence of intention in
the absence of intention (apranihitāpraṇihitasamādhi) no longer
considers it as a Path, the truth (nyāya), the route, (pratipad), nor
as pertaining to the truth (nairyāṇika), because the goal pursued by
the ascetic is that of becoming disgusted with the absorption of the
absence of intention, 143
26c-d. The absence of characteristics in the absence of
characteristics has for its object extinction (kṣayam) not
attained through conscious effort, and considers it as
tranquil (śānta). 144
This is to say that the absorption of the absence of characteris-
tics in the absence of characteristics has for its object the extinction
that is not attained through conscious effort (apratisamkhyāni-
rodha) of the absorption of the absence of characteristics, 145 and
considers this extinction under the aspect of tranquility, thinking,
"This extinction is tranquil”.
It does not have for its object the extinction attained through
conscious effort (pratisamkhyānirodha) of the absorption of the
absence of characteristics, for this absorption is undefiled, and
there is no extinction attained through conscious effort of anything
that is pure.146
And of the four aspects under which one can consider
extinction attained through conscious effort, namely extinction
(nirodha), tranquility (śānta), excellent (praṇīta), and leaving
(niḥsaraṇa, 9vii.13a), the aspect of tranquility is the only one that
is appropriate here. 147 In fact, the characteristic of extinction
belongs to the extinction not attained through conscious effort, as
well as to the extinction brought about by impermanence; ¹48 the
extinction not attained through conscious effort is not excellent,
for it is morally neutral (avyākṛta);149 it is not leaving, for it is not
disconnection from the defilements. 150***
The three absorptions (samadhi) are exclusively
27a. Defiled (lit: possessing the defilements, sāsrava).
Where do they arise?
The Absorptions
Because they hate the Path [: they turn away from it, regarding
it as empty, etc.] Now such absorptions are not pure, or undefiled
dharmas.
27a-b. Among humans, (among the Unshakeable Ones).151
27b. Among the Unshakeable Ones.
They are cultivated only by humans of the Three Dvipas, and
not by the gods.
Among whom do they arise?
Only among the Arhats of the Unshakeable (akopya, vi.56a)
class, and among no other Arhats.
In what sphere (bhūmi) do these also exist?
27c. With the exception of the seven samantakas.
These absorptions arise ("have for their support") eleven1262 Chapter Eight
spheres, namely Kāmadhātu, Anāgamya, the eight basic absorp-
tions (Dhyāna and Ārūpya absorptions, with the exception of the
prefatory absorptions, sāmantakas) and dhyānāntara.
The Sūtra says that there are four cultivations of absorption
(samādhibhāvanā): "There is a cultivation of the absorption that
cultivates, practices, repeatedly cultivates, which has for its result
the possession of happiness in this world," and the rest. 152
27c. The First good Dhyāna is the cultivation of the
absorption that has for its result happiness; (the super-
normal knowledge of the [divine] eye has sight for its
result; the cultivation of good arisen from exercise has
comprehension for its result; the absorption likened to a
Vajra (= Vajropamasamadhi) of the Fourth Dhyana has the
extinction of the defilements for its result.)153
1. The "First good Dhyāna" is the first pure (śuddhaka) or
undefiled dhyana. Through this dhyāna, the ascetic obtains
"happiness in this world" (dṛṣṭadharmasukhaviḥāra). 154 This
holds for the other three Dhyānas as for the First Dhyāna.
This absorption does not necessarily have for its result
happiness beyond this world, for the ascetic who possesses it can
fall from it, he can be reborn higher, or he can obtain Nirvāṇa: in
these three cases he does not enjoy happiness in a future life.
28a. The supernormal knowledge (abhijñā) of the eye has
sight for its result.
2. The second cultivation of the absorption has for its result the
acquisition of the seeing of knowledge (jñanadarśana). 155 This is the
supernormal knowledge of the divine eye (divyacakṣurabhijñā). ¹5
maturidad por parte de Dalthy netes kara larvas mat28b. The cultivation of good arisen from exercise has
comprehension for its result.
The Absorptions 1263
3. The third cultivation of the absorption has for its result the
attainment of the excellent forms of prajñā (prajñāprabheda).157
This is the samādhibhāvanā of the superior qualities which arise
from cultivation, that is, the qualities of the three spheres and
pure, undefiled qualities. 158 The samādhi that produces these
qualities is called the samādhibhāvanā of these qualities.¹59
28c. The absorption likened to a Vajra of the Fourth
Dhyāna has the extinction of the defilements for its result.
4. In the Fourth Dhyana there is produced an absorption that is
called the cultivation “like a Vajra” (vajropama). This absorption
destroys all of the defilements.
According to the School, the Blessed One, in setting forth this
fourfold cultivation of the absorptions, teaches his own cultivation.
How is this?
Because he places himself in the Fourth Dhyāna in order to
realize the Vajropamasamādhi (vi.44b) which, as we have seen,
can be realized in other states of absorption. 160
We have explained the absorptions. Let us explain the qualities
(guna) that the ascetic realizes by being in the absorptions.1611264
Chapter Eight
29a. The Immeasurables (apramāṇas) are four in number. ¹62
They are goodwill or friendship (maitri), compassion (karuṇā),
joy (muditā), and equanimityā(upekṣa). They are called the
Immeasurables (apramāṇas) because they apply to an immeasura-
ble number of beings, drawing after them an immeasurable merit,
and producing immeasurable [retributive] results. 163
29b. Because they oppose ill-will, etc.,¹64
In order the four Immeasurables oppose ill-will (vyāpadā),
harm (vihimsā), dissatisfaction (arati), and sensual craving
(kāmarāga) and hostility (vyāpadā). Goodwill causes persons who
are given over to ill-will to abandon ill-will, and so on.
We have seen that the meditation on loathsome things
(aśubhabhāvanā, vi.9c) opposes sensual craving (kāmarāga); we
learn here that equanimity also opposes it.
What is the difference between the meditation on loathsome
things and equanimity in their opposition to sensual craving?
According to the Vibhāṣā (TD 27, p. 427c), there is reason to
distinguish, with respect to sensual craving, craving for the visible
things (varṇa) of Kāmadhātu, and sexual craving (which is craving
for a certain tangible thing). Now meditation on loathsome things
opposes the first of these two craving, whereas equanimity is
opposed to the second. 165
We would say rather that meditation on loathsome things is
opposed to sexual craving, (for this meditation eliminates all
desire relating to color, shape, aspect, contact, or bearing); whereas
equanimity is opposed to craving that has for its object father,
mother, children, and parents.[What are the Immeasurables?]
29c. Goodwill is the absence of hatred.
29d. So too compassion.
The nature of goodwill is the absence of malice.
This is also the case for compassion.
29e. Joy is satisfaction.
The Absorptions
The nature of joy is satisfaction (saumanasya, ii.8a).
30a. Equanimity is the absence of desire.
The nature of equanimity is the absence of desire.
[But if equanimity is the absence of desire,] how can it oppose
ill-will?
[The Vaibhāṣikas answer:] Because ill-will is provoked by
desire.
We would say rather that equanimity is both the absence of
desire and the absence of ill-will.166
[What are the aspects or the objects of the Immeasurables?]1266
Chapter Eight
30a-c. Their aspects are happiness, unhappiness, joy, and
beings.
Happy beings (sukhita) are the object of goodwill. The ascetic
produces with regard to them a mind having the following aspect,
"Beings are happy!"167 and by this, he enters the meditation of
goodwill (maitrībhāvanā).
Suffering beings (duḥkhita) are the object of meditation. With
regard to them the ascetic thinks, "Beings are unhappy!”168 and, by
this, he enters the meditation of compassion (karuṇābhāvanā).
Joyful beings (modantāṁ) are the object of joy. With regard to
them, the ascetic thinks, "Beings are joyful!"169 and, by this, he
enters into the meditation of joy (muditabhāvanā).
Beings considered merely as beings and without making any
distinction, are the object of equanimity. With regard to them the
ascetic produces a mind having the following aspect, "Beings!"
and, by this, by means of what can be called "impartiality"
(mādhyasthya), 170 he enters into the meditation of equanimity
(upekṣābhāvanā).
Yet, to consider the beings who do not possess happiness as
happy is an intentional view (adhimokṣa) 17¹ not conforming to the
facts, and is erroneous (viparīta).
No; it is not erroneous: 1) when the ascetic thinks, "Beings are
happy!" the sense is "May beings be happy!" 2) there is no error in
his intention, for 3) the ascetic indeed knows that he conceives an
intentional view. And even though the ascetic himself is mistaken,
what harm in there in that? Would you say that the Immeasurables
are bad because they take beings as they are not? But they are the
roots of good since they oppose ill-will, etc.
1The Absorptions 1267
The Immeasurables have living beings for their object. More
precisely
30d. They have the living beings of Kāmadhātu for their
sphere.
In fact they oppose ill-will with respect to these beings.
However, according to the Sūtra,172 the ascetic produces the
mind of goodwill with regard to one cardinal direction, with regard
to two cardinal directions, The Sūtra speaks of the physical
world but it has in view the beings that are to be found in the
physical world.
In what spheres does the ascetic produce the Immeasurables?
31a. Joy in two Dhyānas.
One cultivates joy (muditā) in only the first two Dhyānas, for
joy is satisfaction (saumanasya) and satisfaction is absent in the
other Dhyānas.
31b. The others in six spheres.
The other three Immeasurables exist in six spheres: in
Anāgamya, in dhyānāntara, and in the Four Dhyānas.
31c. Or, according to some, in five.
However, according to other masters, they are in only five
spheres, with the exception of the Anāgamya.
According to still other masters, they exist in ten spheres, by
adding to the six 7) Kāmadhātu and 8-10) the three sāmantakas of1268 Chapter Eight
the higher Dhyānas. The number varies accordingly as one
attributes the Immeasurables to a state of non-absorption (i.e.,
Kāmadhātu) as to a state of absorption, or to the prefatory stages
(the sāmantakas) as to the principal Dhyānas.
We have said that the Immeasurables oppose ill-will, etc. Does
this mean that one could abandon the defilements by means of the
Immeasurables?
31d. There is no abandoning through the Immeasurables.
For the Immeasurables have the basic Dhyānas for their sphere
or places of their arising; 173 because they include an arbitrary or
voluntary (adhimukti-, ii.72) judgment and not an exact judgment;
and because they have for their object living beings and not the
general characteristics of things (dharmasāmānyalakṣaṇas, ii.72,
English trans. p. 320).
However in their preparatory stage (prayoga), the Immeasura-
bles disturb ill-will, etc., and the Immeasurables dispel (lit.:
"render distant") ill-will already abandoned: this is why we have
said above that the Immeasurables oppose ill-will, etc.
More specifically: 174 goodwill, compassion, etc., cultivated in
Kāmadhātu and in Anāgamya (viii.22c), the preliminary stages
(iv., p. 706), only resemble goodwill, compassion, etc. in a state of
absorption which will be cultivated in the basic Dhyānas, the
stages of the Immeasurables properly so called. After having
disturbed ill-will, etc., by means of preliminary goodwill, compas-
sion, etc., the ascetic produces, in the absorption of Anāgamya, a
path of abandoning (prahāṇamārga)-independent of goodwill,
compassion, etc.,—by which he abandons the defilements. Once
the defilements are abandoned, the ascetic obtains detachment
from Kāmadhātu, enters the basic Dhyāna, and then obtains the
1The Absorptions 1269
Four Immeasurables of the sphere of the basic Dhyāna. The
defilements are thus dispelled, and made distant, and the ascetic
will henceforth be invincible, even when he encounters powerful
causes of defilement.
How does the beginner (ādikarmika) cultivate goodwill?
He calls to mind the happiness that he himself has expe-
rienced; he hears one speak of the happiness experienced by
others, by the Buddhas, the Bodhisattvas, the Śrāvakas, and the
Pratyekabuddhas. He forms the vow that all beings shall obtain
this happiness.
When his defilements are too strong, the ascetic is not capable
of carrying out his intention impartially: he should then divide all
beings into three categories, friends, persons to whom he is
indifferent, and enemies. The first category is also divided into
three: good friends, medium friends, and lesser friends; and in the
same way the third (=enemies). The category of persons to whom
he is indifferent is not so subdivided: thus there are altogether
seven groups. Having made this division, the ascetic first forms
the vow of happiness with regard to his good friends; he then
follows this with a vow of happiness with regard to the medium
friends and lesser friends. Finally the ascetic no longer distin-
guishes the three categories of friends; he then forms the same
vow with regard to persons to whom he is indifferent and with
regard to his enemies. Through the force of all these, he produces,
with regard to his greatest enemies, the same vow of happiness as
with regards his dearest friends.
When this meditation or cultivation of the vow of happiness,
sevenfold and impartial, is achieved, the ascetic then progressively
enlarges the domain of this vow, embracing his town, his country,
one cardinal direction, and then all the universe. When all beings,
without exception, are embraced in his infinite mind of goodwill,
the meditation of goodwill is achieved.
Those who take pleasure in the qualities of others easily and
rapidly cultivate goodwill, but not so those who take pleasure in1270 Chapter Eight
discovering the faults of others. For even persons who have cut off
their roots of good (iv.79) are not without their good qualities, and
one can even find faults among the Pratyekabuddhas themselves:
the consequences of the ancient good deeds of the former, and the
bad deeds of the latter, are visible in their bodies, etc.
So too one should understand the meditation or cultivation of
compassion and joy. One sees beings falling into the ocean of
suffering: one forms the vow (adhimucyate): "May they be
delivered from suffering! May they enter into joy."175 In this way
one exercises himself in compassion and joy. One who cultivates
equanimity takes as his point of departure the category of persons
to whom he is indifferent, for the aspect of equanimity is, as we
have seen, merely "Beings!"176
In what sphere of rebirth does one cultivate the Immeasura-
bles?
31e. One produces them among humans.
Only humans can cultivate the Immeasurables and not beings
in any of the other spheres of rebirth.
When a person possesses one Immeasurable, does he necessar-
ily possess all of the others?
He does not necessarily possess them all.
31f. He necessarily possesses three.The person who has produced the Third Dhyāna or the Fourth
Dhyana cannot possess joy, since satisfaction is absent in these
Dhyānas. When one possesses one Immeasurable, one always
possesses three.
The Absorptions 1271
What are the Deliverances (vimokṣa)?
32a. The Deliverances are eight in number.¹77
According to the Sūtra:178 “One endowed with physical matter
sees physical matter" (rūpi rūpāṇi paśyati): 179 this is the First
Deliverance; 2) not having the idea of internal visible things, he
sees external visible things: this is the Second Deliverance; 3)
bringing forth agreeable Deliverance, he dwells in this absorption:
this is the Third Deliverance (see below, note 196).
The Fourth to the Seventh Deliverances are the four absorp-
tions of Ārūpyadhātu (Ākāśānantyāyatana, etc.). The Eighth
Deliverance is the absorption of the extinction of ideas and
sensations (samjñāveditanirodhasamāpatti).
32a-b. The first two are meditations on loathsome things;
(in two Dhyānas). ¹ 180
The first two Deliverances are, by their nature, meditations on
loathsome things (vi.9), for they have for their aspect the idea of a
corpse turning blue, etc. [The ascetic considers internal and
external visible things, his body or external bodies, under the
aspects of a corpse turning blue, etc.] Consequently the rules that
concern the first two Deliverances are the same as for the
meditations on loathsome things.1272
Chapter Eight
32b. They are in two Dhyānas.
They are cultivated only in the first two Dhyānas; when they
are cultivated in the First Dhyāna, they oppose¹81 attachment to
the visible things (varṇarāga) of Kāmadhātu; cultivated in the
Second Dhyāna, they oppose attachment to the visible things of
the First Dhyāna. [In the Second Dhyana there is no attachment to
visible things that should be opposed in the Third Dhyāna, viii, p.
32c. The Third in the last Dhyāna.
The Third Deliverance can only be cultivated in the Fourth
Dhyāna.
32d. It is the absence of desire.
It is by nature the root of good absence of desire, not a
meditation on loathsome things; in fact it takes for its object a
thing that it considers as good: it therefore has the aspect of
something good.
These three Deliverances, with the dharmas that are associated
with them, are the five skandhas. As for the Deliverances of
Ārūpyadhātu:
32d. They are good Ārūpyas and absorption.
The Third to the Seventh Deliverances are the good ārūpyas,The Absorptions 1273
that is, they are pure or undefiled (viii.5), and they pertain to
absorption (samahita), but not the ārūpya that is produced at the
end of life ¹82 [viii.16c, note 103].
According to others, the mind and mental states produced by
retribution among beings born in Ārūpyadhātu are not concen-
trated.
The name of "Deliverance" is also given to the Path of
Deliverance (Vimuktimārga) of the prefatory stages of the
absorptions of Ārūpyadhātu (ārūpyasāmantakasamāpatti, viii.22),
but not to the Irresistable Path (the path of abandoning,
Anantaryamārga) of these same prefatory stages: for these have
for their object the lower sphere that they abandon, and the
Deliverances receive their name from the fact that they turn away
from the lower sphere. 183
33a. The absorption of extinction (nirodhasamāpatti).
The Absorption of Extinction, or more fully the absorption of
the extinction of ideas and sensations (samjñaveditanirodhasamā-
patti) is the Eighth Deliverance. We have already mentioned it.184
It is called "Deliverance" because it turns away from ideas
(samjñā) and sensations (vedita = vedana); or rather because it
turns away from all conditioned things. 185
According to others, the Eight Deliverances ¹86 are called
deliverances because they deliver one from the obstacles to
absorption. 187
The absorption of extinction is realized
33b. Immediately after a subtle-subtle mind. 1881274 Chapter Eight
A mind in Bhavagra (=Naivasaṁjñānāsaṁjñāyatana), which
belongs to the ascetic who is in a position to realize the absorption
of extinction, is subtle in comparison with any mind associated
with ideas (samjñā).189 “Subtle-subtle” (sūkṣmasūkṣma) signifies a
mind more subtle, but yet one which enters the absorption of
extinction [that is to say, "upon which there immediately succeeds.
33c-d. Going out into a pure mind of the sphere of the same
absorption, or into a lower Aryan mind.
The absorption of extinction comes to an end when there
appears either a pure mind (viii.5) of the sphere of Bhavagra, the
Fourth Ārūpya-the sphere to which the absorption of extinction
belongs—or an Āryan, that is, an undefiled mind of the sphere of
the Third Ārūpya. Then there is entry into the absorption of
extinction by a defiled mind, and going out by a defiled or undefiled
mind. 190
What is the object of the Deliverances?
34a. The first ones have for their object the visible things of
Kāmadhātu.
The first three Deliverances have for their object the physical
matter (rūpāyatana) of Kāmadhātu, unpleasant physical matter in
the first two, pleasant physical matter in the Third.
34b. As for those that are non-material, all that which
belongs to the Knowledge, the Suffering of their sphere
and of a higher sphere, etc.The Absorptions 1275
The Deliverances of Ārūpyadhātu have for their object the
Suffering of their sphere and a higher sphere,191 the cause and the
extinction of this Suffering, the totality of Non-dual Knowledge
(anvayajñāna), the extinction not attained through conscious effort
(apratisamkhyānirodha) 192 and space (ākāśa).193
We have seen (32a-c) that the first two Deliverances belong to
the first two Dhyānas, that the Third Deliverance belongs to the
Fourth Dhyāna. Why is there no Deliverance in the Third
Dhyāna?
Since body consciousness is absent in the Second Dhyāna, there
is no craving for the visible things of this Dhyāna [which should be
opposed in the Third Dhyāna], because the Third Dhyāna is
"agitated by its excellent pleasures".
But if there is no craving for visible things in the Third
Dhyāna, what purpose does the ascetic pursue in producing the
Third Deliverance [which is a meditation on an agreeable physical
object]?
The ascetic should gladden his mind which the meditation on
loathsome things has depressed; or rather he should take into
consideration his achievement or his lack of achievement. He asks
himself if the first two Deliverances have been achieved or not. If,
in his contemplation on an agreeable object (the Third Deliver-
ance), defilements do not arise, then the first two Deliverances
have been achieved.¹94 In fact the ascetic cultivates the Deliveran-
ces, the Dominent Ayatanas, etc., with a twofold purpose: 1) to
remove, to render more distant, the defilements; and 2) to obtain
mastery in absorption. This mastery has for its result the
production of the qualities, such as Absence of Contention
(Araṇā), etc., and the production of the supernormal powers
(ṛddhi) of the Āryans: the supernormal power by which a saint1276 Chapter Eight
transforms objects or causes them to last, by which he gives up his
life, etc. 195
Why does the Sūtra use the expression “having experienced
[through the body] ([kāyeṇa] sākṣātkṛtvā) in the definition of only
the Third and the Eighth Deliverances? 196
It is because of their excellence and because they are found to
exist in the final sphere of the two Dhātus.197
35a. The Dominant Ayatanas (abhibhvāyatanas) are eight
in number. 198
1. There is the idea of internal physical matter,¹99 and there is
the seeing of a small amount of external attractive and unattractive
physical matter: [at this time there is the thought, "I have
succeeded in (abhibhūya) in knowing all of the rūpas, I have
succeeded in seeing all of the rūpas.200 This is the First Dominant
Ayatana.] 2. There is the idea of internal physical matter, and there
is the seeing of an unlimited amount of external physical matter. 3.
There is an absence of any idea of internal physical matter, but
there is the seeing of a small amount of external physical matter. 4.
There is an absence of any idea of internal physical matter, but
there is the seeing of a large amount of external physical matter.
These are the first four Dominant Āyatanas.
5-8. There is an absence of any idea of physical matter, but
there is the seeing of external blue, yellow, red, and white. These
make a total of eight.
35b. Two are like the First Deliverance.The Absorptions 1277
The first two Dominant Āyatanas are similar to the First
Deliverance.
35c. The following two are like the Second.
The Third and the Fourth Dominant Ayatanas are like the
Second Deliverance.
35d. And the last four are like the Third Deliverance.
And the last four are like the Third Deliverance.
What is the difference between the Deliverances and the
Dominant Ayatanas?
Through the Deliverances, one is only "delivered", but through
the Dominant Āyatanas, one attains domination of their object.
This domination includes the view of the object as one desires and
the absence of any defilement provoked by the object.201
36a. There are ten All-Encompassing Āyatanas (kṛtsnāya-
tanas). 202
They are called all-encompassing" (kṛtsna) because they
embrace their object in its totality and exclusively.203
They are ten in number: this is the totality of earth, water, fire,
and wind; blue, yellow, red, and white; plus the uninterrupted
ayatanas (ānantyāyatanas) of space and consciousness (the First
and the Second Absorptions of Arūpyadhātu).
36b. Eight are the absence of desire.1278 Chapter Eight
The first eight are, by nature, the root of good which is absence
of desire: (with their concomitant dharmas, they are the five
skandhas).
36c. They belong to the last Dhyāna.
They are realized by an ascetic in the Fourth Dhyāna.
36d. They have Kāmadhātu for their object.
They refer to the visible things (rūpāyatana) of Kāmadhātu.
However some think that the Fourth, the All-Encompassing
Ayatana of Wind (vāyukṛtsnāyatana) has for its object the tangible
thing that is called the wind element (vāyudhātu). Some think that
the first four have tangible things for their object, while the last
four have visible things for their object.204
36e. Two are pure ārūpya.
The last two are pure absorptions of Ārūpyadhātu.
36f. They have the four skandhas of their sphere for their
object.
Their objects are the four skandhas of the sphere to which they
belong (the First and Second absorptions of Ārūpyadhātu).
The Eight Dominant Āyatanas have the Eight Deliverances for
their "entry" and the Ten All-Encompassing Ayatanas have theThe Absorptions 1279
Eight Dominant Ayatanas for their entry: the following, in fact,
are superior to the preceding ones.
All these qualities can have the mental series of a Pṛthagjana or
the mental series of an Aryan for their support, with the exception
of the Deliverance of Extinction (nirodhavimokṣa) which can only
be produced by Aryans.
(Concerning the acquisition of these qualities and the persons
who can produce them:)
37a. Extinction has been explained.
All of the types of the Deliverance of Extinction have been
previously mentioned.
37b. The others are obtained either through detachment or
through cultivation.
The qualities other than the Deliverance of Extinction are
obtained either through detachment (vairāgya) or through
cultivation (prayoga) accordingly as they have been, or have not
been, habitually cultivated.
37d-c. The qualities of Ārūpyadhātu are obtained by beings
of the Three Dhātus; the others, only by humans.
The Deliverances and the All-Encompassing Ayatanas of
Ārūpyadhātu are cultivated by beings born in any of the Three
Dhātus. But only humans can cultivate the other absorptions, the
three Deliverances, the Eight Dominant Ayatanas, and eight1280 Chapter Eight
All-Encompassing Ayatanas, because these absorptions arise
through the power of the Teaching.
If this is the case, how can beings born in the spheres (bhūmi)
of Rūpadhātu and Ārūpyadhātu realize the dhyāna and ārūpya
absorptions higher than the spheres in which they are born?
They can do this be reason of the power of cause, of actions
(karma), and the nature of things (dharmatā).
38a-b. In two spheres, it is through the power of cause and
of action (karma) that one produces the absorptions of
Ārūpyadhātu.205
In Rūpadhātu and in the lower spheres of Arūpyadhātu, the
higher absorptions of Arūpyadhātu arise through the power of
cause,206 when they have been, in the course of a previous
existence, closely and intensively cultivated. 207 They also arise
through the power of action (karma), that is to say, by reason of
the imminent retribution of a previous action of the category "to
be retributed later," including a sphere of retribution higher than
that (Rūpadhātu or the lower spheres of Arūpyadhātu) in which
one is born. This is because someone who is not detached from a
lower sphere cannot be reborn in a higher sphere. 208
38c-d. In Rūpadhātu, it is through these two powers, and
also by reason of the nature of things, that one produces the
dhyānas.
Beings born in a lower stage of Rūpadhātu produce dhyānas
higher than the stages in which they have been born because of the
two powers described above. Also, at the period at the end of the
world,209 they are produced through the force of dharmata.210 In
this period, all the beings of lower spheres produce higher
dhyānas, for the efficacy of good dharmas becomes fully develo-
ped.211***
The Absorptions 1281
How long will the Good Law (saddharma) of the Blessed One
last, during which time these different types of dharmas2¹2 can be
clearly known and seen?213
39a-b. The nature of the Good Law of the Master is twofold,
āgama and adhigama.214
Agama ("the traditions”) is the teaching, the Sūtra, the Vinaya
and the Abhidharma.215 Adhigama ("holiness"216 or understand-
ing) are the dharmas aiding Bodhi (the bodhipākṣikadharmas,
vi.67b, cultivated by the Āryans of the Three Vehicles, and the
results of the religious life, vi.51, obtained through the Three
Vehicles.) Such is the Good Law, twofold in its nature.
39c-d. Those who preach it and who cultivate it support
it.217
Those who preach the Good Law, the Sūtras, etc., support the
Good Law which is āgama. Those who cultivate or who realize the
Good Law, the dharmas aiding Bodhi, etc., support the Good Law
which is adhigama. As long as such persons exist in the world, the
Good Law will last.
It is said (in the Samyuktāgama, TD 2, p. 177b19) that the
Good Law will last one thousand years after the Parinirvāṇa.
This number refers to the adhigama;218 but according to others,
the āgama will last longer.219
***1282 Chapter Eight
This present treatise is based on the treatises of the Abhid-
harma [and includes the sense of the Abhidharma, i.2c]. [There are
many ways of explaining the Abhidharma:] according to which
interpretation is the Abhidharma explained in this treatise? 220
40. The Abhidharma that is established through the
interpretation of the Vaibhāṣikas of Kaśmīr is, in its
totality, what I have explained. That some ideas, poorly
grasped, are reproduced here is our fault, for only the Munis
are authoritative (pramāṇa) in the interpretation of the
Good Law, 221
For the most part, this Abhidharma, which has been spoken by
me, is the Abhidharma as established by the Vaibhāṣikas of
Kaśmiir. That which, herein, has been poorly grasped, is my fault:
for the Buddhas and the sons of the Buddhas alone are the
authority for the interpretation of the Good Law, 222
41. The Master, the eye of the world, is closed; the
witnesses, for the most part, have perished; the Law is put
into confusion by persons who have not seen the Truth;
and by bad sophists, independent, from whom nothing is
gained.
42. For he who knows for himself has departed on the
Supreme Path, as well as the supports of the Law of the one
who knows for himself: the world no longer has a Protec-
tor. The defilements, which destroy spiritual qualities, now
have full liberty.
43. Seeing that the Law of the Muni is in its last breath, and
that it is the hour of the forces of defilements, those who
desire liberation should be diligent.223
This concludes the Eighth Chapter of the Abhidharmakośabhā-
syam, entitled “Instruction in the Absorptions."
Refutation of the pudgala
Om. Homage to the Buddha.
Is there any liberation outside of Buddhism?¹
No, there is not.
What is the reason for this?
There is no liberation outside of this teaching, because other
doctrines are corrupted by a false conception of a soul. The word as
other doctrines conceive it is not a metaphoric expression for a series
of skandhas. By the power of their belief in this soul as a substantial
entity, there arises clinging to the soul, the defilements are generated,²
and liberation is impossible.
How do we know that the word "soul" is only a designation for a
series of skandhas, and that no soul exists in and of itself?3
We know this because no proof establishes the existence of a soul
apart from the skandhas, no proof by direct perception, nor any proof
from inference.4 If the soul were a real entity, separate like other
entities, it would be attained (i.e., known) either by direct perception
as are the objects of the five sense consciousnesses and the object of
mental consciousness, or by inference, as are the five indriyas.
In fact, the five organs are known through inference. In the world,
despite the presence of general causes, a result is not produced if
certain specific causes are absent: for a sprout to be generated, one
needs not only water, earth, and human effort, but also a seed. In the
same way, even though general causes - the presence of an external1314 Chapter Nine
object, attention, etc.,—are present, the blind and the deaf do not
see and hear to the extent that the non-blind and the non-deaf see
and hear. The first are lacking, whereas the second have the
specific causes for visual and auditory consciousness: these are the
organs, material organs that are made of an invisible and
intangible matter, and which is known only through inference."
There is neither direct perception nor inference of a soul
independent of the skandhas. We know then that a real soul does
not exist.
The Vätsiputriyas admit a pudgala which is neither identical to
the skandhas nor different from them.8 We should examine
whether this pudgala exists as an entity or as designation of a
nominal existence. If it has a separate existence, like physical
matter, then the pudgala exists as an entity. If it is only a collection,
like milk, then it exists as a designation."
[The Vätsiputriyas:] What is wrong with admitting the first or
the second hypothesis?
If the pudgala is an entity, it will be different from the
skandhas, because its nature is separate, as the skandhas are
different one from another (or it will be produced by causes and
then it will not be eternal as you say), and you will have to name its
causes; or it will be unconditioned: and this is a non-Buddhist
opinion; and if it is unconditioned, the pudgala will be useless.¹⁰ (It
is thus false to believe that the pudgala is an entity.) But if you
admit that the pudgala exists only as a title of designation, you will
abandon your doctrine and you will be placed within our doctrines.
[The Vätsiputriyas:] We do not say that it is an entity, and we
do not say that it exists only as a designation of the skandhas: for
us the designation pudgala occurs in necessary relationship to
present, internal skandhas (skandhān upādāya).¹1Refutation of the pudgala 1315
A blind response, containing little to enlighten us! What does
the expression "in relation to" mean? If you explain skandhān
upādāya as skandhānāṁ lakṣate (characterized by the skandhas),
you must then say "The designation pudgala occurs by taking the
elements as an object": this is to recognize that pudgala is a word
designating the skandhas, the same as the designation "milk"
occurs taking as its object the constituents of milk-color, etc. If
you explain skandhān upādāya as skandhan pratitya "conditioned
by the skandhas," the same conclusion follows. You admit, in fact,
that it is the skandhas which are the cause of the designation
pudgala.
[The Vātsīputrīyas:] This is not the way that we conceive of
the pudgala and its relationship with the skandhas, but rather as
the world conceives of fire and its relationship with fuel.
How does it conceive of fire and its relationship with fuel?
The world conceives of fire "in relation to fuel": they do not
conceive of fire independent of fuel; they believe that fire is not
identical with fuel nor different from fuel. If fire were different
from fuel, fuel would not be hot; if fire were the same as fuel the
consumed would be the consumer. In the same way we do not
conceive of the pudgala as independent of the skandhas; we hold
that the pudgala is neither identical to the skandhas nor different
from the skandhas: if it were different from the skandhas, it would
be eternal and thus unconditioned; but if it were identical to the
skandhas, it would then be susceptible of annihilation.
Define the terms "fire" and "fuel," so that I can better
understand what the expression "fire in relation to fuel" signifies.
[The Vätsiputriyas:] What shall we say to you? The consumed
is the fuel, the consumer is fire.
But that is precisely what I want to know with precision: what1316 Chapter Nine
is the thing consumed, and what is the thing that is the consumer?
[The Vätsiputrīyas:] In the world, a thing to be burned, not on
fire, wood, is called the combustible matter (i.e., fuel), the
consumed;¹² the thing that exercises the action of burning, bright,
very hot, in flames, is called the consumer or fire. The series that
constitutes the fuel, is ignited by the fire, and it is reduced to
ashes; ¹3 by means of fire, each moment of existence of the series of
fuel is made different from the preceeding moment. The fire and
fuel are both made up of eight substances;14 consequently, fire is
generated by reason of the fuel, as milk ferments and vinegar is
created by reason of milk and wine. This is why the world agrees in
saying that fire exists "in relation to fuel."
If this were the case, fire is different from the fuel, as their
time-periods are different: there is first fuel, and then fire. If your
pudgala exists in relation to the skandhas, as fire exists in relation
to fuel, you then have to admit that, since it is produced by reason
of the skandhas, it is different from the skandhas, and that it is,
moreover, transitory.
[The Vätsiputrīyas:] In the thing set on fire, wood, etc.,¹5 one
of the substances, namely a tangible object which is heat, is the
fire; the other substances are the fuels. Then your remark on the
priority in time of the fuel does not hold.
But fire and fuel, generated at the same time, are “separate,”
since their characteristics are distinct. 16 The meaning that you
attribute to the expression “in relation to" has not yet been
explained. ¹7 Since fire and fuel are generated at the same time, how
can one say that fire exists in relation to fuel? Fire, which is one of
the substances of the object on fire, does not have fuel for a cause,
which is the other substances of the said object, since all these
substances were generated at the same time, each from its own,
separate cause. One can say no more than that the term "fire" had
for a cause (or object) fuel, since this term is applied to the tangible
"heat."18
[The Vätsiputriyas:] The expression "fire in relation to fuel"Refutation of the pudgala 1317
means that the fire has fuel as its basis, or that the fire coexists
with fuel.¹9
This means that the pudgala coexists with the skandhas or that
it depends on the skandhas: this then admits that it differs from
the skandhas. And logic demands also that, as fire does not exist
when fuel is absent, likewise the pudgala does not exist without
skandhas. You do not admit these conclusions; then your
explanation is worthless.
Fire is not different from fuel (p. 1315, line 18), because, in this
hypothesis, fuel would not be hot.
What does "hot" mean? If "hot" is defined as being the
tangible "heat" (namely fire), as has been done above, then fuel
will not be hot (since fuel is the object on fire, without the tangible
element "heat"). If “hot” is that which is associated with heat (i.e.,
if one admits that fuel is termed hot by reason of its association
with heat), then this means that different things (of “heat") are
called "hot": the one tangible "heat" is designated by "fire" and all
that is associated with this tangible is designated by the name
"hot." To think thus is to confess that fuel is termed hot although
it is different from fire or from the tangible "heat."20 The
Vātsīputriyas are thus justified in saying that "fire is not different
from fuel since fuel is hot."
[The Vätsiputrīyas:] Wood on fire is called fuel; it is also called
fire.
Explain then the meaning that you attribute to the expression
"fire in relation to fuel"! The pudgala (the active data of relation,
of the upādāya) will be identical to the skandhas (passive data of
the said "relation"): no reasoning can establish the non-identity
(of these two). The thesis of the Vātsīputrīyas, that the pudgala
exists in relation to the skandhas as fire exists in relation to fuel,
cannot be rationally established in any hypothesis.1318 Chapter Nine
The pudgala is ineffable in that which concerns its relation-
ship-its identity or non-identity-with the skandhas. How can
they distinguish "five categories of things susceptible of being
known":21 1-3. conditioned things, in other words, past, present,
and future things; 4. unconditioned, or non-caused things, and 5.
the ineffable (or pudgala)"?
The pudgala, in fact, should also be ineffable from this point of
view: if it is ineffable, one cannot say either that it is a fifth
category, nor that this is not a fifth category. 22
Let us examine what this word "pudgala" depends on. If it
depends on the skandhas, then the pudgala exists solely as a
designation, as the expression pudgala depends on the skandhas
and not on a real pudgala. If it depends on a real pudgala, why did
the Vātsīputriyas say that the designation "pudgala" is "in relation
to the skandhas"? Then would have had to say "in relation to the
pudgala." But, in fact, they do not maintain that the pudgala is
established in relation to a pudgala. Moreover the expression
pudgala is a simple designation of skandhas.
[The Vätsiputrīyas:] Given the skandhas, the pudgala is
perceived: 23 that is why we say that the designation "pudgala" is
"with relation to the skandhas."
But color is perceived when diverse causes are present, the eye,
light, etc.; may we thereby conclude that the designation "color" is
"with relation to these diverse causes”?
Another point. By which of the six consciousnesses-cons-
ciousnesses of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, or mental
consciousness-is the pudgala perceived?Refutation of the pudgala 1319
[The Vätsiputriyas:] It is perceived by all six consciousnesses.
When the eye consciousness recognizes physical matter (=a body),
it indirectly discerns the pudgala,24 and then we can say that the
pudgala is known by the eye consciousness. But the relationship of
the pudgala with physical matter, be it identical or different, is
inexpressible. The same for the other consciousnesses: when the
mental consciousness recognizes the dharmas (mind and mental
states), it indirectly discerns the pudgala; it is then known by the
mental consciousness, but its relationship with these states is
inexpressible.
It follows from this explanation too that the pudgala exists
solely as a designation exactly like milk. When the eye conscious-
ness recognizes the color of milk, it indirectly discerns the milk:
the milk is then known by the eye consciousness and one cannot
say that the milk is the same thing as its color or is different from
its color. The same for ear, nose, tongue, and body consciousness:
the body consciousness recognizes tangibles; from whence there is
the consciousness of milk; the milk is then known by the body
consciousness without which one could only say that the milk is
identical to the tangible, or different from the tangible. In fact milk
is not fourfold: then it is not color, smell, taste, tangible; but
furthermore, one cannot say that the milk is not made of these
four. The conclusion is that one metaphorically designates a
complex of elements by "pudgala," the same as the designation
"milk" is understood as a coming together of color, smell, etc. They
are merely names without reality.
What meaning do you therefore attach to the phrase, "When
the eye consciousness recognizes physical matter, it indirectly
discerns the pudgala"? Do you want to say that physical matter is
the cause of the perception of the pudgala, or that the perception
of physical matter and the pudgala takes place at the same time?
If the Vätsiputriyas answer that physical matter is the cause of
the perception of the pudgala but that, nevertheless, one cannot
say that the pudgala is different from physical matter, then the
condition and the causes of the perception of physical matter-eye,1320 Chapter Nine
light, an act of attention-would not be different from physical
matter.
If the Vätsiputrīyas answer that one perceives the pudgala at
the same time as one perceives physical matter, 25 we would
question whether one perceives the pudgala by the same operation
which perceives physical matter, or by a different operation.
In the first hypothesis, the pudgala is only physical matter and
the designation "pudgala" applies only to physical matter. It is
then impossible to distinguish "This is physical matter; that is
pudgala." Without this distinction, how can one prove that there is
physical matter and that there is a pudgala? The existence of the
pudgala cannot be proven by this distinction.
In the second hypothesis, since the time of the two perceptions
is different, the pudgala will be as different from color and shape
as yellow is from blue, as former is from latter.
The same reasoning follows for the other skandhas.
[The Vātsīputrīyas:] As one cannot say that the pudgala is the
same thing as color and shape, nor that it is different from color
and shape, likewise the perception of the pudgala is not the same
as the perception of the color and shape, nor different from this
perception.
This point of view obliges you to say that the perception of the
pudgala, being ineffable, is not made part of the category of
"conditioned things": but now you do not admit this thesis, since,
for you, all perception is "conditioned".
If the pudgala is an entity that one cannot define as beingRefutation of the pudgala 1321
matter (the rūpa skandha,) nor as being non-matter (the four
non-material skandhas, vedanā skandha, etc.), why did the Blessed
One say that "matter and the other skandhas are not self"?26
The pudgala, you say, is attained by the eye consciousness. Is
this consciousness generated by color and shape, or by the pudgala,
or both? In the first hypothesis, one cannot maintain that this eye
consciousness perceives the pudgala, because the pudgala is not the
object of this consciousness, as neither is sound. In fact, all
consciousnesses that are produced having as their condition a
certain thing, has this same thing as an "object as condition": now
the pudgala, not being a condition of the eye consciousness, cannot
be its object. Thus the visual consciousness does not perceive the
pudgala.
The other two hypothesis contradict the Sūtra which says that
the eye consciousness is generated by reason of two things,²
namely, by the eye and by physical matter and shape. The Sūtra
says"Oh Bhikṣus, eye consciousness is generated having the eye as
its cause (hetu) and physical matter as its condition (pratyaya =
alambanapratyaya). All eye consciousness is by reason of the eye
and physical matter."28
If the pudgala is the cause of the eye consciousness, it will be
impermanent, because the Sūtra says, “All causes and all conditions
that produce consciousnesses are impermanent."
[The Vātsīputrīyas:] We admit then that the pudgala is not an
object as condition (ālambana) of consciousness.
[Very well; but then it is not discernible (vijñeya), an object of
vijñāna, if it is not discernible, it is not cognizable (jñeya), the
object of jñana, if it is not cognizable, how can one prove that it
exists? If one cannot prove that it exists, your system collapses.]1322 Chapter Nine
You have said that the pudgala is discerned by the six
consciousnesses.29 But, if it is discerned by the eye consciousness, it
will be, like physical matter and shape, different from sound; if it is
discerned by the ear consciousness, it will be, like sound, different
from physical matter and shape. And thus for those (conscious-
nesses) that follow.
Moreover, your thesis is in contradiction to the Sūtra. The
Sūtra says, "Oh Brāhmin, the five organs (of sight, hearing, smell,
taste, touch) have distinct spheres (gocara) and objects (visaya).
Each one of them perceives its own sphere and its own object,30
and does not perceive the sphere or the object of the others. And
the mental organ perceives the spheres and the objects of the first
five organs, and they have the mental organ as their refuge."31 Or
rather would you say, in agreement with the Sūtra, that the
pudgala is not the object (of the five organs)? In this case, it would
not be discerned (by the five organs), and you put yourself in
contradiction to your own system. ³2
[The Vätsiputriyas:] (You affirm, according to the Sūtra, that
each of the five organs has its own object, and you thus conclude
that the pudgala is not the object of eye consciousness). But,
according to the Sūtra, the mental organ also has its own object
(and this is in contradiction to your system).33 In fact, the
Satprāṇakopama-sūtra says, "Each of these six organs has its own
object and its own sphere; each seeks after its object and its
sphere."34
This Sūtra does not intend to speak of the six organs, because
the five material organs and the five consciousnesses which are
dependent on them do not possess the desire to see, to hear, etc.Refutation of the pudgala 1323
This Sūtra understands, by organ of the eye, etc., the mental
consciousness which is induced and dominated by the eye, etc.³5 By
this fact, the mental consciousness which is isolated-that is to say,
which is not induced and dominated by one of the five material
organs, but solely by the mental organ-does not have any desire
with regard to the spheres and objects of the five organs, but solely
with regard to the dharmayatana. Thus the Saṭprāṇakopama-sūtra
does not contradict the Sūtra previously quoted.
The Blessed One has said, “Oh Bhikṣus, I declare to you all the
dharmas that should be penetrated (abhijñeya) and known
(parijñeya), namely: the eyes, physical matter, eye consciousness,
eye contact, the sensation which is produced having as a cause eye
contact, painful, pleasant, and neither painful nor pleasant
sensation.... And thus following to: "the sensation which is
produced having as its cause contact with the mental organ: these
are what should be penetrated and known."36 This text teaches us
that the dharmas to be penetrated and comprehended are only
those enumerated. The pudgala does not figure in this list: then it
is not susceptible of being discerned (vijñeya). In fact, the
speculative consciousness (prajña) by which one penetrates or
comprehends, has the same sphere (vişaya) as does ordinary
consciousness (vijñāna).37
The masters who maintain that the eye sees the pudgala should
learn that the eye sees only that which is real in the pudgala
(namely physical matter: the same for the other five organs). They
fall into the abyss of harmful views in saying that it sees a soul in
what is not a soul.38
Furthermore, the Buddha explained that the word pudgala1324 Chapter Nine
designates the skandhas. In the Sutra of Man,³9 he said, "Supported
by the eye, having physical matter for its object and condition, the
visual consciousness arises: by reason of the coming together of
these three, contact arises; at the same time there arises sensation,
thought, the act of attention, etc.”4⁰ The last four terms—vijñāna,
vedanā, saṁjñā, cetanā—are non-material skandhas: the eye and
physical matter are the rūpa skandhas. Here is then all that one
speaks of when one says "man." In order to express various
nuances, one inserts various words, such as sattva, being, nara,
man, manuja, born of Manu, manava, young man, poşa, he who is
nourished, jīva, vital principle, jantu, he who is born,41 pudgala,
person. One says to oneself, "My eye sees physical matter," and
according to current usage, “This venerable one is of such a name,
of such a family, of such a gotra, of such food, of such happiness
and of such suffering, of such length of life; he lasts a time; he
terminates his life in such a manner. 4² Oh Bhikṣus, know that
these are only manners of speaking, words, expressions conform-
ing to the usage of the world, because there are only impermanent
things in the pudgala, conditioned things, born of causes and
conditions, created through deeds.”
The Blessed One declares that the Sūtras of explicit meanings
are the authority. The Sūtras that we have quoted are of explicit
meaning; one cannot draw a divergent explanation from them.43
Moreover, 1. The Blessed One said to a Brāhmin, "When I say
that all exists, I mean that there are twelve sources of conscious-
ness (āyatana, i.20a)."44 Then if the pudgala45 is not included in the
twelve āyatanas, it does not exist; and if it is included one cannot
say that it is ineffable.
2. The Vätsiputrīyas read a Sūtra which says, "All that is of the
eye, all physical matter... the Tathāgata, Oh Bhikṣus, embraces this
group (namely the twelve ayatanas), terms them 'all,' establishes
that 'all' exists, so many dharmas in themselves." Now, there is noRefutation of the pudgala 1325
pudgala there: how can one say that the pudgala is a real entity?
3. The Bimbisāra-sūtra says, "A stupid, ignorant Pṛthagjana
becomes attached to words, and he imagines that there is a self; but
there is no self nor things pertaining to self, but only past, present
and future painful dharmas."46
4. The worthy (arhati) Šilā47 said to Māra, "You fall into wrong
views by wrongly maintaining that there is a being in the group of
conditions (samskāras) which is empty: the wise understand that
such a being does not exist. As the name 'chariot' is given to a
group of parts, the world uses the word 'being': one should know
that this is a group of skandhas.”
5. In the Ksudrakāgama,48 the Buddha said to the Brahmin
Daridra,49 "Daridra, those who understand the Truths can deliver
themselves from all fetters: through the mind (there is) defile-
ment, and also purification through the mind.50 The self, in fact,
does not have the nature of a soul; it is through error that one
thinks that a soul exists; there is no being (sattva), no soul, but
only dharmas produced through causes: skandhas, sources-of-cons-
ciousness (āyatana), dhātus, that constitute the twelve limbs of
existence; examined in depth, there is found to be no pudgala
there. Seeing that the interior is empty, see that externals are
empty;5¹ and there is no ascetic who meditates on emptiness."52
6. The Sūtra³³ says, “Five calamities proceed from the belief in
a soul: one creates a theory of the soul, of a being, of a vital
principal; one is not distinguished from heterodox teachers; one
takes a road which is not the Way; his mind does not enter into
emptiness, his faith does not satisfy him, he is not established in it
to his satisfaction, there is no propensity (for liberation); the
Aryan qualities are not purified in him.”
[The Vätsiputriyas:] These texts are not authoritative, because1326 Chapter Nine
they are not read in our tradition.
What then is the authority in your system, your tradition or the
words of the Buddha? If it is your tradition, then the Buddha is not
your teacher, and you are not a child of the Sakyan. If it is the word
of the Buddha, why do you not recognize the authority of all the
words of the Buddha?
[The Vätsiputriyas:] The texts you have quoted are not the
authentic word of the Buddha,54 since our tradition does not read
them.
That is not a good reason.
Why is this?
Because all the other traditions read these texts, and because
these texts do not contradict any other Sūtras, nor philosophic
truths.56 Also, when you embolden yourself to brutally reject them
by saying, "They are not authentic because we do not read them,"
this is only pure impudence contrary to all good sense.
The position of the Vātsīputriyas is moreover more inadmissa-
ble since their sect reads a Sūtra which says, "The dharmas are not
soul and do not contain a soul."57
[The Vätsiputrīyas:] Without doubt we read this Sūtra. But the
pudgala is neither the dharmas which serve as its support, nor is it
different from these dharmas; that is why it says that “no dharma
is a soul."
Very well; but it is taught that the pudgala cannot be discerned
by the mental consciousness, since the Sūtra establishes clearly that
the mental consciousness is produced by reason of two condi-
tions,58 the mental organ (manas) and the dharmas. Besides how
would you explain the Sūtra which says, "To recognize a soul in
what is not soul is a mistake of ideas, of mind, and of view"? 59Refutation of the pudgala 1327
[The Vätsiputriyas:] This Sūtra says that it is a mistake to
recognize a soul in that which is not a soul; it does not say that it is
a mistake to recognize a soul in what is a soul.
What is understood by "that which is not a soul"? Would you
say that it concerns the skandhas, āyatanas and dhātus? This
contradicts your theory that the pudgala is not identical to physical
matter, etc.6⁰ Further, a Sūtra says,6¹ "Oh Bhikṣus, know that all
the Brāhmins and monks that contemplate a soul, contemplate
only the five skandhas-of-attachment." Then this (contemplation)
is not a soul, because the self that one recognizes as a soul is solely
the dharmas that are not a soul but which one falsely imagines to
be a soul.62 Another Sūtra6³ says, "All those that have remembered,
do remember, or shall remember their various past existences-
their remembrance is solely with regard to the five skandhas-of-
attachment." Then there is no pudgala in any of this.
[The Vätsiputriyas:] But the same Sūtra says, "In the past, I
was handsome (literally: I possessed physical matter).”64
This declaration is for the purpose of indicating that the saint
capable of recollecting his past lives remembers the variety of
characteristics of his series of these existences. But the Buddha
does not mean that he sees a real pudgala possessing, in a past life,
such physical matter, etc.: for to think such is to fall into
satkāyadṛṣṭi. Or rather, if such is the meaning of this sentence,
then its sole purpose is to reject it as non-authentic.65 We conclude
that the Sūtra, insofar as it attributes the possession of physical
matter, etc., to a soul, has in view "a self of designation", as one
speaks of a pile which, being only an accumulation, has no unity; or
of a current of water which being only an accumulation, has no
unity; or of a current of water which, being only a succession (of
waters), has no permanence.66
[The Vätsiputriyas:67] The Blessed One would then not be1328 Chapter Nine
omniscient, since the mind and mental states are not capable of
knowing all the dharmas, seeing that mind and mental states
change, arising and perishing from moment to moment. Omnis-
cience can belong only to a soul, a pudgala.
We would reply that the pudgala would be eternal if it does not
perish when the mind perishes: a thesis which contradicts your
theory of a pudgala about which one can only say that it is eternal
or non-eternal. We do not say (as do the Mahāsāṁghikas) that the
Buddha is omniscient in the sense that he knows all the dharmas at
one and the same time:68 "Buddha" designates a certain series: to
this series there belongs this unique ability that, by a single act of
modulating his mind, he immediately produces an exact conscious-
ness of the object relative to which a desire for knowing has arisen:
one then calls this series "Omniscient." One moment of thought is
not capable of knowing everything. On this point, there is a verse:
"As fire, by the capacity of its series, burns all, so too does the
Omniscient One-but not by a universal, simultaneous knowl-
edge."69
[The Vätsiputriyas:] How do you prove that (the word
"Omniscient"should be understood as a series, and not as a
particular self of universal knowledge)?
It is spoken of in the Scriptures, on the subject of the Buddhas
of the past, present and future. For example the verse: "Buddhas of
the past, Buddhas of the future, and Buddhas of the present destroy
the sorrows of many."'7⁰ But, in your system, the skandhas of
existence belong to the three periods of time, but not the pudgala.
[The Vätsiputrīyas:] If the term pudgala only designates the
five skandhas-of-attachment, how can the Blessed One say, "Oh
Bhikṣus, I shall explain to you the burden, the taking up of the
burden, the laying down of the burden, and the bearer of the
burden."71
Page Te Funkt deRefutation of the pudgala 1329
Why may it not be explained in these terms?
[The Vātsīputrīyas:] Because, if the pudgala is only a name
given to the skandhas, it cannot be the bearer of a burden.
Why not?
Simply because it is unheard of.
Do not speak then of an ineffable pudgala. No one has ever
ascertained the existence of an ineffable thing. And moreover you
will have to account for the other statements of the Sūtra that
thirst (or desire) is the taking up of the burden: as thirst is a
skandha, the “burden” (is too), and it is unheard of that a burden
takes itself up. The "taking up of the burden" is included within
the skandhas, and so too the bearer of the burden. These are the
skandhas that the Blessed One designated by the name of "pudgala,
the bearer of the burden," as one sees in the explanation given a
little farther on in the same Sūtra.
After having said that the burden is the five skandhas-of-at-
tachment, that the taking up of the burden is thirst, and that the
laying down of the burden is the abandoning of thirst, it is said that
the bearer of the burden is the pudgala; but fearing that one
understands the pudgala inexactly, as an eternal, ineffable, real
entity, he explains, "(It is only to conform to the use of this world
that one says:) This venerable one, of such a name, of such a
gotra," and the rest (as in the Sutra on Man, above), in order that
one might well know that the pudgala is effable, impermanent,
and without a unique nature.72 The five skandhas-of-attachment
are painful in their nature: they receive then the name of
"burden"; each of the former moments of the series attract each of
the latter moments: it receives then the name of "bearer of the
burden."73 The pudgala is then not an entity.
[The Vātsīputriyas:] The pudgala exists [as an entity,] as the1330 Chapter Nine
Sūtra says,
view."75
"To say that apparitional beings74 do not exist is a false
Who denies the existence of apparitional beings? We admit the
existence of these beings in the sense that the Blessed One
understands them. For him, "apparitional beings" designates a
series of skandhas (the series of five skandhas of an intermediary
being), susceptible of going to another world without the
intervention of a womb, an egg, or of moisture forms of birth. To
negate the existence of an apparitional being so defined, is a false
view, because this type of series of skandhas truly exists.
If
you maintain that the negation of the pudgala is false, you
wil have to say how this false view is given up. It cannot be given
up by Seeing, nor by Meditation, for on the one hand, the pudgala
is not included within the Truths, and, on the other hand, false
views are not given up by Meditation but by Seeing.76
[The Vätsiputriyas:] But a Sūtra says, “A pudgala arises
(utpadyate) in this world..."77 Now this does not refer to the five
skandhas, but to an entity.
Such is not the meaning of the Sūtra that only metaphorically
designates as a unit that which exists only as a complex; as the
world speaks of a grain of hemp, or a grain of rice, or of a heap, or
a word.78 Further, since the Sūtra attributes an arising to the
pudgala, it is therefore conditioned (saṁskṛta).
[The Vätsiputrīyas:] When it refers to the pudgala, the word
"to arise" does not have the same meaning as when one speaks of
the skandhas arising. For the skandhas, to arise means to exist
after having been non-existent. One says that the pudgala arises
because, at that moment, it takes on different skandhas79 (for
example the manas of a human instead of the manas of an animal).
As one says in the world, when a certain person acquires a certain
knowledge, that a sacrificer, or a grammarian is born; when aRefutation of the pudgala 1331
layman takes on certain characteristics, one says that a bhikṣu, a
monk of a certain sect is born: one does not mean by these
expressions that there has really been a birth of a sacrificer, or a
monk. And again in the same way, through the acquisition of a
certain trait, one says: an old man is born, a sick person comes into
being.
This explanation of the phrase, “A pudgala arises in this
world" has been condemned by the Blessed One. In the Paramār-
thaśünyata-sutra,80 the Blessed One said, "There is action; there is
result;8¹ but, besides the causal production of the dharmas (which
give the impression of a permanent agent), one does not maintain
the existence of an agent which abandons these skandhas and
which takes up other skandhas."82 And in the Phālguna-sútra: “I
do not say that there has been one who takes."83 There is then no
pudgala that gives up or takes up the skandhas.
Nevertheless, let us examine your examples: “A sacrificer is
born." What is the nature of that which became a sacrificer?
Would you say that a "soul" became a sacrificer? But you have to
precisely prove the existence of a "soul." Would you say that it is a
series of minds and mental states? But minds and mental states
appear from instant to instant after having been non-existent84
and they are not capable of abandoning and grasping. Would you
say that it is the body (the organ of sense)? The same difficulty
holds. Notice then that the knowledge the acquisition of which by
a so-called person makes him a sacrificer, differs from this person:
it would be then, by a legitimate comparison, that the skandhas
acquired by a pudgala differ from the pudgala; and this goes
against your definition of a pudgala. As for the example of an old
man and a sick person, there is a succession of different bodies: to
hold that an old man is the transformation of a young man is the
Sāṁkhya thesis of transformation (pariņāma), a thesis already
refuted.85 Then your examples are without value. And if you say
that the skandhas arise, but that the pudgala does not arise, it
follows that the latter differs from the skandhas and is eternal.
You maintain again that the skandhas are five in number, but that
the pudgala is one: this is to again recognize that the pudgala1332 Chapter Nine
differs from the skandhas.
[The Vätsiputrīyas:] Your position is totally parallel (to ours),
since you say that the primary elements, earth, etc., are four; but
that secondary matter (upādāyarūpa)-color, for example-is one;
but that, nevertheless, secondary matter does not differ from the
primary elements.86
This objection does not go against us, but only against the
teachers who say that secondary matter is the four elements.87 But,
to adopt the opinion that you wrongly attribute to us, we say that
in the manner that secondary matter is made up of the four
elements, in that way the five skandhas constitute the pudgala.
[The Vātsiputriyas:] If the pudgala is only a word serving to
designate the five skandhas, why did the Buddha not declare that
the vital principal (jiva) is the body?88
Because the Buddha takes into consideration the intention
(āśaya) of whomever asks him questions. The person who asks this
question of the Buddha understood by jīva, not a being, a simple
designation of the skandhas, but a person, a real living entity; and
he was thinking of this person when he asked if the jīva is identical
to the body or different from the body. Now this jiva does not
absolutely exist; and so the Buddha only maintained that it is
neither identical to nor different from the body, and then the
Blessed One condemned the two answers. In like manner one
cannot say that the hairs of a tortoise are hard or soft.89
The ancient masters have already explained this difficulty.
There was once a venerable one named Nagasena, possessor of the
three knowledges (vidyās), the six higher knowledges (abhijñās),
and the eight liberations (vimokṣas). At that time, the King of
Kalinga went up to him and said, "I have come with the intention
of clearing up my doubts. But monks are verbose:⁹⁰ shall we agreeRefutation of the pudgala 1333
that you answer plainly to the questions that I ask?” Nāgasena
accepted his request and the King asked, "Is the vital principal
identical to the body or different from the body?" "To this
question," said Nāgasena, "there are no grounds for answer.'
"Haven't we agreed that you shall answer plainly? Why speak off
the point and not answer?" "I wish to ask the King concerning a
doubt. But kings are verbose: shall we agree that the King answers
plainly to the question that I shall ask?" The King consented and
Nāgasena asked, “Do the mangos in the King's palace give sweet
fruit or bitter fruit?" And the King answered him, "There are no
mango trees within my palace.” Nāgasena protested as the King
had protested, saying, "Haven't we made an agreement? Why
speak off the point and not answer?" "But," said the King, "as
there are no mangos in my palace, how could there be any sweet or
bitter fruits?" "In the same way, Oh King, the vital principal does
not exist: one cannot then answer your question and say that it is
identical to the body or different from the body."91
[The Vätsiputriyas:] But, if the pudgala does not exist, why
didn't the Blessed One answer that the jīva absolutely does not
exist?
Because he took into consideration the intention of the
questioner, that questioning on the jiva may be with the idea that
the jīva is a series of skandhas. If the Blessed One answered that
the jiva absolutely does not exist, the questioner would have fallen
into false views. Furthermore, as the questioner was not capable of
understanding "dependent origination" (pratītyasamutpāda), he
was not a fit receptacle for the Good Law: the Blessed One then did
not tell him that the jiva exists except by way of designation.
The explanation that we have given here is the same that the
Blessed One formulated: "Ananda, the wandering monk Vatsago-
tra came to me to ask a question thusly: 'Is there, or is there not a
soul (ātman]?' I did not answer him. In fact, to answer that there is
a soul is to contradict the truth of things, because no dharma is a
soul nor has any relationship with a soul; and if I had answered
that there is no soul, I would have increased the folly of Vatsagotra,1334 Chapter Nine
for he would have thought: 'I had a soul, but this soul does not now
exist.'⁹2 For, in comparison to the folly of the belief in the existence
of a soul, this second folly is graver. Whoever believes in the soul
falls into the extreme view of eternity; whoever believes that the
soul does not exist falls into the extreme view of annihilation.
Thoughtless error, heavy error9³...", and so on. It has been said:94
1. Taking into consideration the injury that heresy does and,
also, the falling off of good deeds, the Buddhas teach the Law in the
manner in which a tigress carries its young.95
2. Those who believe in the reality of the soul are torn by the
teeth of heresy; those who do not recognize the conventional self
let their good actions fall away, and perish.⁹6
And again:
1. Since a real jīva does not exist, the Buddha does not say that
the jiva is identical or non-identical; he does not say any more than
that the jiva does not really exist, fearing that one would only
negate the conventional jiva.⁹7
2. Series of skandhas, actions, and the results of actions are
what are termed jiva: if the Buddha were to negate the jiva, he
would negate actions and their results.
3. And if the Buddha does not say that the so-called jīva is in
the skandhas, it is because he sees that the questioner is not
capable of tolerating the teaching of emptiness.
4. It is then because of the state of mind of Vatsa that the
Buddha, asked if there was a soul, yes or no, did not answer. But if
the soul were to exist, why wouldn't he have answered that it
exists?98
The Buddha did not answer four questions relative to the
eternity of the world (loka):⁹9 again this is because he took into
consideration the intention of the questioner. If such a person
understands loka to be a soul (atman), the four alternatives are
incorrect, since the soul does not absolutely exist. If he understands
loka to be transmigration or saṁsāra, the four alternatives areRefutation of the pudgala 1335
incorrect: if transmigration is eternal, no one could obtain
Nirvāṇa; if it is not eternal, all would obtain Nirvana by
spontaneous annihilation, and not through effort: if it is both
eternal and non-eternal, some would never obtain Nirvāṇa,
whereas others would obtain it spontaneously; finally, to say that
loka, in the sense of saṁsāra, is neither eternal nor non-eternal, is
to say that beings both would and would not obtain Nirvāṇa: a
contradiction in terms. In fact, Nirvāṇa is possible through the
Way; then no categorical response is acceptable. In the same way
the Buddha did not answer the Nirgranthaśrāvaka who held a bird
in his hand and asked if this bird was dead or alive.100
The four questions as to whether the world is infinite, namely
if it has an end or not, has the same sense as the questions relative
to the eternity of the world,¹01 and present the same defect.
How do we know that “the infinity of the world” should be
understood in this sense? The wandering monk Uktika,¹02 after
having asked the Buddha about infinity, resorted to a ruse in order
to repeat his question and asked, "Does the whole world obtain
deliverance through the Way, or only a part of the world?"¹03 The
elder Ananda then said to him, "You have already posed this
question, Uktika. Why do you repeat it by changing the terms?"
If the Blessed One did not explain concerning the four
questions relative to the existence of the Tathāgata after death,
this is again because he took into account the intentions of the
questioner. Such a person understood the Tathāgata to be a "soul"
liberated from the defilements.
We ask in our turn those who hold to a "soul:" The Blessed
One, according to you, declared that the pudgala exists, indescriba-
ble: why did he not declare that the Tathāgata exists after death?
If [the Vätsiputriyas] answer that the Buddha kept silent on
this point because he feared that the disciple, by admitting the
survival of a pudgala named Tathāgata, would fall into the view of
eternity, we would then ask why the Blessed One predicted to
Maitreya, "In the ages to come, you will be a Tathāgata, an Arhat, a1336
Chapter Nine
Samyaksambuddha;"104 and speaking of one of his deceased
disciples, he said, "He is at present reborn in such a place."105 Are
not these discourses defiled by the opinion of permanence?
If [the Vätsiputrīyas] answer that the Blessed One does not say
anything concerning the deceased Tathāgata because, seeing at
first the pudgala, he now no longer sees the pudgala once it has
attained Nirvāṇa; it is then through ignorance that the Tathāgata
does not make any declaration concerning the deceased Tathāgata,
and to speak thus is to deny the omniscience of the Master. Rather
one should believe that if the Blessed One abstains from all
declarations, it is because the "soul" that the questioner alluded to
in speaking of the Tathāgata does not absolutely exist. If [the
Vātsīputrīyas] say that the Blessed One sees the pudgala, which is
in Nirvāṇa, but that he still does not make a statement on this
subject; and that the pudgala exists but is not, at the same time, an
object of a statement of the Blessed One, we then conclude that
[the Vätsiputrīyas] admit that the pudgala is permanent.
If [the Vätsiputriyas] say that "whether the Blessed One does
or does not see the pudgala" is indescribable, they then proceed to
say that all is indescribable, and that one can only say that the
Blessed One is omniscient or non-omniscient.
[The Vātsīputrīyas:] The pudgala really exists, as it is said, that
"To say that I really, truly do not have an atman¹06 is an incorrect
opinion."
This is not a proof, for it is also said that it is an incorrect
opinion to affirm the existence of an atman. 107 Scholars of the
Abhidharma think that a belief in the existence of an ātman and a
belief in its non-existence are two extreme opinions, as they
identify them with the two branches of "the opinion that consists
in believing in extremes." This doctrine is certain, as it is
formulated in the Vatsagotra-sutra, "Ananda, those who affirm aRefutation of the pudgala 1337
soul fall into the extreme of the belief in permanence; those who
deny a soul fall into the extreme of the belief in annihilation..." 108
[The Vätsiputriyas]: If the pudgala does not exist, what is it
that wanders in saṁsāra? In fact, one can only allow that samsāra
itself wanders. Further the Blessed One has said, “Beings misled by
ignorance, bound by thirst, wander here and there, either among
beings in hell, among animals, among pretas, humans, or the gods;
thus for a long time they experience all suffering."10⁹
How does the pudgala wander in saṁsāra? Would you say that
this wandering consists in abandoning old skandhas and in taking
up new skandhas? But we have shown that this explanation is
inadmissable. A good explanation is simple: one says that when a
flame burns a field it travels, although they be only moments of
flame, because it constitutes a series; in the same way the harmony
of the skandhas which is constantly repeated receives, metaphori-
cally, the name of being; supported by thirst, the series of skandhas
travels in saṁsāra.
[The Vätsiputriyas]: If only the skandhas exist, we do not see
how one can explain these words of the Blessed One, “In the past, I
was the teacher Sunetra."110 In fact, in the hypothesis of the
existence of the individual skandhas metaphorically termed "soul,”
past skandhas are not the same as present skandhas, and so the
Blessed One cannot express himself in this manner.
But what is the thing that the Blessed One calls "soul"? The
pudgala, you would say: then, since the "soul" is permanent, a past
"soul" is identical with a present "soul". For us, when the Blessed
One said, "I was the teacher Sunetra," he teaches us that the
skandhas that constitute his present “soul" formed part of the1338 Chapter Nine
same series as the skandhas that constituted Sunetra. In the same
way one says, "This fire has been burning here."
You affirm the existence of a real soul: we hold that only the
Buddhas, Tathāgatas would see it (because it is subtle). But if the
Buddhas see a soul, they would produce a firm belief in a soul; from
this belief in a soul there would be produced among them a belief
in things pertaining to a soul; from these two beliefs there would
be produced among them affection for the soul and for things
pertaining to a soul. The Blessed One said in fact that "whosoever
believes in a soul, believes in things pertaining to a soul; believing
in things pertaining to a soul, they become attached to the
skandhas as they form a soul and things pertaining to a soul."
There would be then satkāyadṛṣṭi among the Buddhas; they would
be bound by affection for a soul and for things pertaining to a soul;
and they would be very far from liberation.
[The Vätsiputriyas]: Affection is not produced with regard to a
soul. We explain: when one recognizes a soul in what is not the
soul, as do the non-Buddhists, one feels affection for this pretended
soul; but, when one sees the soul in that which is truly the soul,
namely the ineffable pudgala, as do the Buddhas, no affection is
produced with regard to the soul.
This statement has no support. The Vātsīputrīyas, without any
shadow of reason, introduce the sickness of heresy into the
teachings of the Master. Whereas there are those who admit an
ineffable pudgala, others deny the existence of all the dharmas;1¹¹
non-Buddhists imagine a soul apart from all other substances. All
these doctrines are wrong and present the same flaw in that they
do not lead to liberation.
***Refutation of the pudgala 1339
If the soul does not absolutely exist,¹12 how can a mind-which
perishes as soon as it is generated-be capable of remembering an
object perceived a long time before? How is it able to recognize an
object similar to what it has formerly perceived?
Memory and recognition are generated immediately, in a
series, from a certain type of mind, when this type of mind arises
from the idea of object already perceived and which one calls
"object of the memory."
[Now then, let us first examine memory.]
What is the type of mind from whence memory immediately
shoots up?
We answer: It's a certain mind (citta-višeșa), bent towards the
object of memory, a mind in which one finds ideas related to that
thing or resembling that thing, or even "resolutions" of a certain
nature, etc.; with the condition however that the power that this
mind possesses to produce memory is not paralysed by a psycho-
somatic change arising from sickness, from grief, from mental
trouble, or the disturbing influence of magic formulas, etc.113
1. It is necessary that a bending of the mind be produced, an act
of attention, towards the object; 2. it is necessary that the mind
involves an idea resembling the object, in the case where one
remembers by reason of resemblance (for example, I remember
fire perceived a long time ago because the idea of fire is placed in
my mind by the sight of present fire); 3. or it is necessary that the
mind involves an idea in relation to the object, in the case where
one remembers without there being resemblance (for example, I
remember fire because the idea of smoke is placed in my mind by
the sight of smoke); 4. or it is necessary that the mind involves a
praṇidhāna, or resolution, an abhyāsa, or habit (for example, the
resolution has been placed in the mental series, “I shall remember
this at such a time"); 5. also when it is of this nature-that is to
say, when it presents the characteristic 1. and one of the
characteristics 2 - 4-if the thought does not proceed from the idea
of the object of memory-that is to say, if the mind so envisaged is1340 Chapter Nine
not produced in a series where the idea of a certain object has been
placed by perception, if this mind does not proceed from this
idea-the mind cannot produce memory; 6. when it is not of this
nature, even though it proceeds from an idea of the object of
memory, it cannot produce memory.
[The Vätsiputriyas:] How can one mind see and another mind
remember? It is contrary that Yajñadatta remembers an object that
Devadatta has seen.
That is right. There is no connection between Devadatta and
Yajñadatta: Their minds are not in the relationship of cause and
effect, as is the case for minds which form series. Indeed, we do not
say that one mind sees an object and that another mind remembers
this object, because these two minds belong to the same series. We
say that one past mind, bearing a certain object, brings about the
existence of another mind, the present mind, capable of remem-
bering this object. In other words, a mind of memory is generated
from a mind of seeing, as fruit is generated from the seed through
the force of the last stage of the transformation of the series. This
point has been clarified. Memory is generated after recognition.
[The Vätsiputriyas:] In the absence of a soul, who remembers?¹14
[Vasubandhu:] What do you understand by "to remember"?
[The Vätsiputriyas:] To grasp an object by the memory.
[Vasubandhu:] Does "to grasp" differ from memory? [The
Vätsiputrīyas:] Memory is the agent of the action "to grasp."115
[Vasubandhu:] We have explained what is the agent of this
action: it is the cause of memory, namely a certain type of mind.
[The Vätsiputriyas:] But, if it is only a certain type of mind that
is the cause of memory, how can one say that Caitra remembers?
[Vasubandhu:] One gives the name Caitra to a series; a mind of
memory is generated, in this series, from a mind of seeing, and by
reason of this fact one says that Caitra remembers.
[The Vātsiputriyas:] In the absence of a soul, whose is theAlts
memory?
Refutation of the pudgala 1341
[Vasubandhu:] What is the sense of the genitive "whose"?
[The Vätsiputriyas:] This genitive designates its master.
[Vasubandhu:] Explain by an example how you understand
that someone is the master of memory. [The Vātsīputrīyas:] As
Caitra is the master of the cow.
[Vasubandhu:] In what is Caitra the master of the cow?
[The Vätsiputriyas:] In that he directs and employs the cow as
he pleases.
[Vasubandhu:] To what then is the memory directed and
employed by a master, for whom you search with great pains.
[The Vätsiputriyas:] It is directed and employed on the object
that one wants to remember (that is to say, it is employed on
remembering).
[Vasubandhu:] To what purpose?
[The Vätsiputriyas:] For the purpose of
memory.
[Vasubandhu:] What idle talk! I direct and employ a certain
thing with a view to the same thing! Explain to me then how
memory is employed: do you want to say that one transmits it to a
certain place? Do you want to say that one causes it to be
produced?
[The Vätsiputrīyas:] Memory does not die out; it is then not
transmitted. One causes it to be produced.
[Vasubandhu:] What you call "master" is then simply the
cause, and what you call "subject" is simply the result. In fact the
cause, by its command, operates the result; it is then "master"; and
the result, in that it is subordinate to the cause at the moment of its
arising, is called "subject." Since the cause suffices as master, why
require a self to which you could attribute memory? Memory
belongs to whatever causes memory. Complexes of samskāras, or
the five skandhas forming a homogeneous series, are called1342 Chapter Nine
"Caitra" and "cow." One says that the Caitra-series possesses the
cow-series, because the Caitra-series is the cause of the geographic
displacement and the various changes of the cow-series. There is
not there any one, real entity "Caitra," nor another entity called
"cow;" there is not, for the Caitra-series, any quality of owner or
master outside of its quality of cause.
[As with memory, so too with recognition.]
We would answer, mutatis mutandis, to the questions: "Who
knows? To whom do we attribute consciousness?" and to other
similar questions, "What feels, what makes ideas?" as we have
responded to the questions, "What remembers? To whom do we
attribute memory and recognition?"
Certain scholars¹¹6 say that the soul (ātman) exists, as existence
(bhāva) depends on an existing being (bhavitar), as the walking of
Devadatta depends on Devadatta. Walking is an action, and
Devadatta is the active being. In the same way consciousness
(vijñāna) and all action depends on a "base of support” (āśraya),
"one who knows (vijñatar)," the agent.
We would ask what it is that they understand by “Devadatta.”
If they regard Devadatta as a real individual, we have discussed and
refuted this theory. Devadatta is an imaginary individual and not
an individual entity; Devadatta is only the name that one gives to
the series of saṁskāras. In the sense that one could say that such a
Devadatta walks, in the same sense we can say that Devadatta
knows.
How does Devadatta walk? "Devadatta" is only a homogene-
ous series of saṁskāras, moments of existence replaced without
interruption and roughly similar one to another. The foolish see
within this series an entity which would be the cause of the action
that this series generates in a different place, the cause by the
efficacy of which the successive moments of the existence of the
*Refutation of the pudgala 1343
body of Devadatta is produced in different places. In fact, the
walking of Devadatta is simply the act of the generation of the
series which is the body in different locations; the cause of this
action that is to say, the previous moment of the series-receives
the name of "walker."
It is in this sense that we say that Devadatta walks, in order to
designate a walk totally similar to that of fire or sound: the fire
walks, the sound walks, that is to say, the fire-series and the
sound-series go being generated from one place to another.117 In
the same way the world says that Devadatta knows (vijānāti)
because the complex which is Devadatta is the cause of conscious-
ness (vijñāna); and, in order to conform to received usage, the
Aryans also express themselves in this ma
themselves in this manner, which is inexact.
Nevertheless, a Sūtra says that the consciousness knows the
object. What does the vijñāna do with regard to the object?
Nothing: It is simply produced resembling the object. In the
same way that fruit, although it does nothing, 118 is said to
correspond to the seed, to reproduce the seed, because it is
produced resembling the seed;¹¹9 the vijñāna also, although it
accomplishes no action with regard to the object, is said to know
the object because it is produced resembling the object. This
resemblance of the vijñāna consists in that it has the appearance of
the object. 120 By reason of this appearance one says that the
vijñāna knows the object which is only one of its causes; the organ
is also a cause of the vijñāna, but one does not say that the vijñāna
knows the organ because the vijñāna does not take the aspect of
the organ. This manner of speaking, “The vijñāna knows,” is again
justified from another point of view. Several successive moments
of vijñāna are produced with regard to the object: the previous
moment is the cause of the later moment; the vijñāna is then a
cause of vijñāna; it is then called the agent (kartṛ) since it is the
cause:12¹ one attributes the action of knowing to it as one attributes
the action of ringing to a bell or the action of moving to a lamp.
One says that the lamp moves: here is what the moving of the
lamp consists of: "lamp" is the name metaphorically attributed to1344 Chapter Nine
the uninterrupted series of moments of the flame that one sees,
wrongly, as a "unity." When one of these successive moments is
produced in place other than that of the preceeding moment, one
says that the lamp moves. But there does not exist a "mover" apart
from and distinct from the moment of the fire. In the same way,
one metaphorically designates a series of minds by vijñāna, or
consciousness: when one moment of mind is produced relative to a
new object, one says that the consciousness knows this object. One
says that the consciousness knows: the same way that one says that
"physical matter" exists (bhavati), is produced, lasts, without there
being an “exister” (bhavitṛ), a “producer,” “anything that lasts,"
distinct from what is called its existence, etc. ¹22
[The Sāmkhya]: 123 If the later consciousness (vijñāna) is
produced from the previous consciousness and not from a soul
(ātman), why is not the later consciousness always similar to the
previous consciousness? Why do not consciousnesses succeed
themselves in a determined order, as do shoots, stems, leaves,
etc?124
Answer to the first question: Because everything that is
produced through causes, i.e., conditioned things, presents the
character of "transformation" (sthityanyathātva); this is the
nature of conditioned things: in the series which they form, the
latter should differ from the former. If it were otherwise, the
ascetics who had entered into meditation in which the body and
the consciousness are always produced in the same way, the
successive moments of the series being identical-would not
spontaneously get out of meditation. 125
As for the second difficulty: The production of consciousness is
subject to a certain order. If a certain mind should be produced
after a certain mind, it will be produced after this mind.¹26 On the
other hand, certain consciousnesses present a partial similarity
that obliges them to produce one another by reason of theRefutation of the pudgala 1345
particular character of their gotra. 127 For example, upon the idea of
"woman"¹28 there immediately arises the idea (among ascetics) of
detesting the body of a woman, but (among non-ascetics) there
immediately arises the idea of a wife or daughter. Later, following
upon the differing development of the succession of ideas, the idea
of a woman reproduces itself.¹29 This second idea of a woman
would have the capacity of producing the idea of the detesting the
body, or the idea of wife or daughter, accordingly as it has either of
these ideas as gotra, that is to say, as a seed; but not when it does
not have a similar gotra.¹30 And again innumerable different ideas
can succeed the idea of a woman, and that by reason of multiple
causes. Among all these ideas, those are produced first which are
the most "numerous"-having formed a series in the past-the
most "alive," the "nearest"-as these ideas have most strongly
impregnated the mental series: 131 except, of course, at the moment
when other ideas are produced by a certain state of the body or by
certain external objects.
But why does the consciousness, which has most strongly
impregnated the mental series, not continue to so impregnate it
without ceasing?
Because, as we have said, transformation is a characteristic of
the mental series; this characteristic is eminently propitious for
the production of the result of ideas, having medium or small
force.
Here we have, in an incomplete and summary manner,
explained the causes and conditions of the order of the reciprocal
generation of different categories of consciousness. Complete
knowledge of these causes belongs only to the Buddha. Thus the
stanza says,
"All the types of causes which go to produce a peacock
feather-no one can know them except the Omniscient Ones: this
is the power of knowledge of Omniscience (to know a thing
completely)."132 The causes of the variety of material things are1346 Chapter Nine
difficult to know; how much more difficult is it to penetrate the
variety of causes and conditions of non-material things, minds and
mental states! 133
A certain non-Buddhist¹34 believes that the consciousnesses are
produced from a soul. One can successfully oppose his objections
vainly formulated against us: Why isn't the latter consciousness
the same as the former consciousness? Why aren't the conscious-
nesses produced in a fixed order?
This master¹³5 explains the variety of consciousnesses and the
absence of a fixed rule to their arising by the diversity that he
terms "the conjunction (samyoga) of the soul with the manas or
mental organ." This explanation does not hold. No type of
conjunction is proved. 136
On the other hand, reasoning shows that two things in
conjunction should be delimited, that is to say, localized in distinct
places. Judge if your definition of conjunction, "possession
succeeding upon non-possession,137 admits of the same conclusion
as our reasoning, namely that the soul is delimited, localized.138
(Whence it follows that the soul is not omnipresent: and this
contradicts your system.) 139
It also results from your definition of conjunction that, when
the manas moves-it goes to such and such a part of the body-the
soul should also move to make a place for it (and then it is not
niskriya, or exempt from action) or that it should perish (and then
it is not nitya, or eternal).140 On the other hand, you cannot admit
that the soul is in partial conjunction¹4¹ with the manas, for,
according to you, the soul is an entity without parts.
42Supposing also that there is conjunction between the
permanent soul and an always immoveable manas, how does one
explain the diversity of the conjunction (necessary for the diversity
of consciousness)? Would you say that this diversity results fromRefutation of the pudgala 1347
the diversity of the buddhi, "intelligence," (which is a quality, guna,
of the soul)? But the buddhi presents the same difficulty as the
manas: if the soul is not diversified, how would buddhi be
diversified? Would you say that the diversity of the buddhi results
from the diversity of conjunction of the soul and the manas, a
variety which results from the saṁskāras? In this hypothesis, the
soul serves no purpose; why not say that the diversity of
consciousnesses comes from the consciousness itself which is
diversified by the saṁskāras? The soul does not intervene in the
beginning of consciousness, and to say that consciousness comes
from a soul is to be as the charlatan who, although drugs suffice for
the healing of the sickness, pronounces some magic syllables:
Phuṭ! Svāhā!
You would say without doubt that consciousness, like the
saṁskāras, exists through conjunction with the soul: but this is
merely a statement without proof. But you would insist, saying that
the soul is its support (āśraya): please explain by an example the
nature of the relationship of the support and the supported. The
consciousness (that the saṁskāras influence) and the saṁskāras
themselves are not a picture or a fruit that the soul supports as a
wall supports a picture or as a plate supports fruit: in fact, on the
one hand, one would have to admit physical contact (between the
soul and the thought-saṁskāras); and, on the other hand, the
picture and the fruit exist independently of the wall and the plate.
You say that you do not understand the support that the soul
furnishes the thought-saṁskāras to be thus: the soul supports
thought-saṁskāras as earth supports smell, color, taste, touch. We
rejoice in this comparison, for it establishes the non-existence of
the soul. In the same way that one cannot perceive the existence of
earth independently of smell, etc.—what one designates by the
word "earth" is only a collection of smells, etc.-in this same way
there is no soul existing apart from the thought-saṁskāras: the
thought-samskäras are what one designates by the word "soul".
Who can obtain the idea of "earth" apart from smell, etc.?
But, if "earth" does not exist apart from smells, etc, how can
one qualify certain smells, etc., as properties of earth: "The smell,1348 Chapter Nine
the taste of earth?"
One expresses oneself thus with a view to distinguishing: in
other words, one wants to indicate that certain smells, tastes, etc.,
are what is termed “earth,” not other smells or tastes which are
termed "water." In the same way, one designates a certain thing as
being "the body of a wooden statue" indicating by that that it is of
wood, and not of baked clay. 143
If the soul produces the consciousnesses by reason of the
variety of the saṁskāras, why doesn't it produce all the conscious-
nesses at the same time?
[The Vaiśeşikas:] Because the strongest saṁskāra opposes the
weakest samskära in producing its result. And if the strongest
saṁskāra does not constantly produce its result, it is for the same
reason that you have given in explaining the traces (vāsanās)
abandoned by the consciousness in the series: we think that the
saṁskāras are not permanent and are subject to change.
But then of what use is a soul? Diverse consciousnesses would
be generated by the diverse force of the samskāras, since there is
no difference in nature between your samskäras and our vāsanās. 144
[The Vaiśeşikas:] One cannot do without the soul. Memory,
the samskāras, etc., 145 are things (padārthas) that are termed
"attributes" (guna); these attributes must of necessity have for
their substratum, or support (āśraya), a “substance” (dravya) and,
among the nine substances (earth, etc.), the soul, since it is
inadmissable that memory and the other mental qualities would
have for their substratum any substance other than the soul
(namely earth, etc.), since the soul alone is intelligent.
But this system of substances and attributes is not proved. [You
say that memory, the samskāras, etc., are things included within
the category of "attributes" and are not substances: we doall de
pullaqueos
PANORAMA
Refutation of the pudgala 1349
not agree.] We think that all that exists is "substance." A Sūtra
says that "the result of the religious life consists of six substances
(namely the five pure skandhas and pratisaṁkhyānirodha).” It is
false that memory, etc., has the soul as its substratum: as we have
criticized the idea of a substratum.
[The Vaiśeşikas say:] If the soul does not really exist, what is
the result of actions?
The result of actions is that the "soul" experiences pleasure or
pain.
[The Vaiseșikas:] What do you understand by “soul"?
It is what one speaks of when one says “I," the object of the
idea of self, the skandhas or object.
How do we know this?
It is to the series of skandhas, that is, to the skandhas—to one's
body, to one's sensations that one becomes attached; as the idea
of "I" is generated with reference to the idea of white and other
similar ideas: in the world does one not say "I am white, black, old,
young, thin, fat"? What one regards as white, etc.,-evidently the
skandha of physical matter is also what one regards as "I." The
"soul" imagined by the Vaiseșika is different from white, etc.; but,
in fact, the idea of “I” is relative only to those skandhas and not to
any "self" imagined [by the Vaiśeṣikas.]
[The Vaiśeşikas:] It is through metaphor that the world
designates the body by the word "I" when it says, “I am white."
This metaphor is justified because the body is in the service of the
true “I.”
So be it: one metaphorically calls what is used by the "I" by the1350 Chapter Nine
name of "I." But one cannot explain in this manner the conscious-
ness that says "I" (with regard to the body, sensations, conscious-
ness, etc.)146
[The Vaiśeşikas:] If the idea of “I” has the body for an object
why is not this idea generated with regard to the bodies of others?
Because there is no relationship between the series of skandhas
of others and this idea. When the body or mind is in a relationship
with the idea of "I"-a cause and effect relationship-this idea is
generated with regard to this body and this mind; but not with
regard to the skandhas of others. The habit of considering “my”
series as "I" exists in "my" series from the very beginning.
[The Vaiseşikas:] If there is no "soul," to what do you attribute
the idea of "I"?
We have answered this question when we explained what
memory belongs to.¹47 The master of memory is simply the cause
of memory. It is the same for the idea of "I".
[The Vaiśeşikas:] What is the cause of the idea of "I"? It is a
defiled mind, impregnated by this same idea of self, and having for
its object the series of minds wherein it is produced.
[The Vaiseşikas:] In the absence of a soul, who has suffering or
pleasure? The aśraya within which suffering or pleasure is
produced, in the same way that a tree is said to have flowers, a
forest has fruit. And the aśraya in question may belong to any of
the six internal ayatanas, the eye-ayatana, etc. 148 This has been
explained [in the First Chapter.]
***Refutation of the pudgala 1351
[The Vaiśeşikas:] In the absence of a soul, who is it that does a
deed? Who is it that tastes the result?
What do you understand by "he who does," and "he who
tastes"?
[The Vaiśeşikas:] We understand this to be the agent, the
taster.
Your explanation is merely words and explains nothing. The
Vaiseşikas here invoke the doctrine of the Grammarians.150 They
say that the agent is he who has independent power, that the taster
is he who enjoys the result of the deed. In the world he who
possesses independent power with regard to a certain action is
considered as the "agent"; for example, Devadatta, having the
power to bathe himself, to seat himself, and to walk, is called "the
bather," "the sitter," and "the walker."
This definition is not admissable. What does one understand by
"Devadatta"? If one understands this to be a soul, the example is
not proved, and is without value. If one understands a certain
coming together or complex of skandhas, then Devadatta is indeed
an agent, but he is not "an independent agent and creator of
deeds." Action is threefold¹51 body, speech, and mind. That
which produces bodily action is the wind agitating the body; the
body and the mind depend again on their causes and conditions;
these causes and conditions depend in their turn on their causes
and conditions: in all this there is not any simple entity, a
"producer" dependent on itself or, in other words, independent.
For everything that exists depends on causes and conditions. The
soul as you understand it does not depend on causes and condi-
tions; furthermore, it does nothing: it is not then an independent
agent. Nowhere does anyone maintain the existence of an agent
conforming to your definition, "He who possesses independent
power is termed an agent." That which one terms the agent of a
certain action, is, amongst all its causes, that which is the principal
cause of this action. Now even if we were to define the agent in
this manner, your "self" is not an agent.1352 Chapter Nine
What is in fact the principal cause of the beginning of bodily
action? ¹52 Memory causes a wish or a desire for action to surge up;
from desire there proceeds imagination; from imagination there
proceeds effort which gives rise to a vapor which sets in motion
bodily action. In this process, what activity do the Vaiseșikas
attribute to a "soul"? This soul is certainly not an agent of bodily
action. Vocal and mental action can be explained in the same way.
You say that the "soul" enjoys the result, because it discerns or
knows the result: but soul has no role in discerning the result; it
does not figure among the causes that produce consciousnesses as
we have shown above. 153
[The Vaiśeşikas:] If there is no soul, why do good and bad
deeds not die out in "non-living things"?¹54
Because the "non-assumed" elements, not constitutive of living
beings, are not susceptible of serving as a support for sensation,
etc. Only the six internal organs are the support of sensation, etc.;
not a soul, as we have proved.
[The Vaiseşikas:] In the absence of a soul, how can past action,
which is now destroyed, produce a future result?
To this question we would answer now by asking how, even
though a soul were to exist, destroyed action can have the force of
producing the result. The Vaiseṣikas would have it that the result
is generated from merit or from demerit (dharma, adharma), 155
inherent attributes (guna) of the soul, supported by the soul: but
we have criticized the idea of a substratum or "support”¹56 and
shown that it is not rational.
According to the Buddhists, future results are not generated
from destroyed action;¹57 results are generated from the last
moment in the evolution of a series that has its origin in action. 158
How does fruit proceed from the seed? One says, in the world,Refutation of the pudgala 1353
that fruit is generated from a seed. But in speaking in this way, one
does not intend to affirm that the fruit is generated from a
destroyed seed, nor that the fruit arises immediately after the seed
(that is to say, from a "dying" seed). In fact, the fruit is generated
from the last moment in the evolution of a series that has its origin
in the seed. The seed successively produces a sprout, a stalk, a leaf,
and finally the flower that brings the fruit into existence. If one
says that the seed produces the fruit, this is because the seed,
through a series of intermediate stages, projects in the flower the
efficacy of producing the fruit. If the efficacy of producing the fruit,
efficacy which is found in the flower, did not have the seed as its
original cause (as its antecedent, or pūrva), then the flower would
not have produced a fruit resembling its seed. In the same way, one
says that although a result is generated from an action, it is not
generated from destroyed action, nor is it generated immediately
after the action: it is generated from an ultimate moment in the
evolution of a series issuing from the action.
Series, or samtāna, means the material and mental skandhas
succeeding without interruption in a row which has an action for
its original cause. The successive moments of this row are
different: there is then evolution (pariņāma), or transformation of
the series. The last moment of this evolution possesses a special
efficacy, the capacity of immediately producing the result: it is
distinguished, in this regard, from other moments; it is then
termed viseșa, or the ultimate moment of evolution.
For example, when the mind at death is "associated with
attachment," it possesses the capacity of producing a new
existence. This mind has for its antecedents many actions of all
types: nevertheless, it is the efficacy projected by a weighty action
that informs (or qualifies) the last thought; in the absence of heavy
action, the efficacy is projected by near action; in its absence by
habitual action; and in its absence by the action of a previous life.159
There is a stanza (by Rāhula) which says, "Weighty action, near
action, habitual action, old action: these four die in this order."160
There is good reason to establish a distinction between a1354 Chapter Nine
retributive result and an out-flowing result. When the force that
produces a retributive result has given forth its result, this force is
abolished. 161 But the force that produces an out-flowing result, a
force projected by a "cause similar to its effect" (sabhāgahetu),
does not perish by the production of its result; when it is defiled,
this force perishes by the force of its opposition; when it is not
defiled, it perishes through Nirvāṇa, which involves the abolition
of the series, both physical matter and mind.
Why is a new retribution not generated from the retributive
result as a new fruit is generated from the fruit of a tree, or as a
fruit is also a seed? 162
But a new fruit is not generated from the fruit seed.163
From what is the new fruit generated, if not from the evolution
of a new series?
The first fruit seed, encountering the conditions necessary for
evolution (water, earth, etc.), finally produces the ultimate
moment in the evolution-from whence the new fruit arises.
When it produces the shoot, the old fruit takes the name of seed. If,
before any evolution, (before any germinative processes), it is
given the name of seed, it is an anticipative name, a name justified
by the similarity of the ungerminated seed and the germinated
seed. In the same way here: when a retributive result ¹64 (body, etc.)
encounters the conditions that produce good and bad-good
teaching, bad teaching-it gives rise to minds that will be
rewarded, namely bad or good-impure minds. From these minds
there proceeds an evolution of their series that results in an
ultimate state from whence a new retribution will emerge. This is
not generated under any other conditions. The example then
justifies our thesis.
One can also take into account the nature of the retribution by
another example (that shows that a new retribution does not
necessarily succeed the first). If one colors the flower of a lemon
tree with milk, a certain evolution of the plant series will take
place which will cause the seed of the new fruit to be red. But theRefutation of the pudgala 1355
red seed, once planted, will not generate another red seed. In the
same way the retribution of an action does not produce a new
retribution. 165
I have, to the measure of my intelligence, taught in a summary
and outline manner the result of actions. Only the Buddhas know
how the series, impregnated by actions diverse in nature and in
force, evolve from such a type that, arriving at such a stage, it
produces a certain result: There is a stanza, "Action, the
impression caused by the action, the active entry of this impres-
sion, the result that results from it-no one if not a Buddha, knows
all this in the totality of its processes."166
Seeing then, by a path of demonstrative arguments, that the
doctrine of the teaching of the Buddhas is perfect, and rejecting the
opinion of those blind through bad views and through bad steps,
the non-blind see.167
In fact, this doctrine of the non-existence of the soul is the only
road to the city of Nirvāṇa; although illumined by the rays which
are the words of this sun which is the Tathāgata, although
followed by thousands of saints, and although it is without
obstacles, it is not seen by persons of weak insight.168
In this book one will find but a summary indication for the use
of intelligent persons: but poison (of belief in soul), once within a
wound, will spread itself everywhere by its own force.1691356 Chapter Nine
