1. Salutation be to Sambhu (the highest source of good),
who is the seat of eternal bliss, consciousness and mysterious
powers and who by His mere desire creates everything from the
tuft of grass to the personal creator of the universe.
2. I bow down to the wife of Bhava (Siva) whose locks
of hair on the fore-head are decorated by the crescent of the
moon and who is verily the river of nectar-the extinguisher
of the fire of all worldly sufferings.
3. I tender my salutation to the lord of Ganas (a class of
divine beings) who is the sun removing the darkness of obstacles
and whose feet are illumined by the rays of the crest jewels of
gods and demons.
4- The great work of Akṣapāda, the mine of precious gems
of arguments is superior to all such works since it has been
highly spoken of by Siva Himself (the demolisher of the cities
of demons).
5. Let the discerning wise people take their bath in this
great flowing river of Sarasvati which ardently flows into the
ocean of Akṣapāda's logic.
6. We make an appeal to the great scholars to the effect that
they may look kindly upon this work by a mere peep at it though
their mind is fatigued, being in constant touch with the great
works displaying wonderful skill in depicting matters of wide
interest and arousing strong emotion.
7. I have culled this essential herb from the wild garden
of herbs of logic and have churned this lump of butter from the
milk of Logic of Akşapăda.
8. We claim no originality of thinking to discover new truth
but have fascinating style to express the old ones in an attractive
form. Let the critics examine it for themselves.
9. The very flowers by which garlands have been repeatedly
prepared arouse curiosity even in the mind of those wearers
of garlands when they constitute a new garland, being arranged
in a new order.2
Nyayamanjari
10. The good men appreciate even a work of little worth
presented to them since they are unaware of turning down
the request of a supplicant.
II.
Let the great savants of learning who are about to enjoy
sportive walk in the garden of words adorr their ears with this
(Nyāyamañjarī) new blossom of logic.
12.
The tree of logic, planted by the great sage—Akṣapāda,
has grown in its bulk and is bent down under the burden of its
fruits of thick juice tasting like nectar.
13. I cannot climb up this tree because my powers are limited
and hence it is further beyond my powers to test its merits in
toto.
14. I take pains only to discuss some selected topics of that
great work. I make an appeal to the great thinkers who are
noted for their friendly appreciation to show me a great favour
by a kind perusal of this work.
15. The conduct of the great ones is very strange. They
do not feel happy even if their merits are innumerable. But
they are elated with joy if they find little merit in others.
16. Blessed are the authors who are fortunate enough to
behold the face of the great scholars beaming with joy when the
latter go through the works of the former and dive deep into the
topics of great interest, being personally approached for the
favour of criticism.
Merit and Demerit, Haven and Hell are only knowable from the
Scriptures.
The intelligent persons know for certain that no earnest
man can reach the desired goal if he does not know the right
means to the end. Hence the people, desirous of attaining the
goal of life, are in search of the adequate means. The human
end is twofold, viz. tangible and intangible and hence the
means will be also of two kinds. Those who like to attain
the worldly end have been initiated into the proper means by
the practice of the senior experts and have learnt themselves
its efficacy by actual experiments, adopting the joint method of
agreement and difference. Whenever a person feels hungry he
does not make a search for the injunction of the sacred lore but
moves straight to eat something. The injunctions of the scrip-
tures such as a dirty man should bathe, a hungry person shouldSources of Knowledge
eat, etc., are not essential. But all persons are ignorant of the
invisible human ends such as Heaven and Final Emancipation
from all sorrows since their mind is enveloped by the innate
darkness of ignorance. In this case, the scripture alone throws
light to illuminate them. It serves the purpose of divine eyes
to find out the proper means. Like sages, we have no mystic
intuition which will reveal the intangible goal since such a vision
arises from the constant practice of deep meditation. Hence
if we are serious about the invisible human destination, we
should have to depend upon the scriptures alone.
The fourteen sources of knowledge.
The scriptures are divided into fourteen branches. The
learned scholars hold that there are fourteen sources of knowledge.
Among them the four Vedas are enlisted. The first of them is
the Atharva-Veda, the second is the Rgveda, the third is the
Yajurveda and the fourth is the Sâma-veda. These four Vedas
are essentially embodiments of the instructions of the means
to the summum bonum of human life, e.g. 'A man who covets
Heaven should perform Agnihotra sacrifice', 'The self should be
realised', etc.
The Smrti texts, composed by Manu and others, throw light
on the means to the invisible human ends, e.g., the aştakā
Sraddha ceremony, the tonsure-ceremony, the establishment
of a room for the free supply of drinking water, etc. The fruits
of the religious acts which have not been mentioned in the
scriptures will be discussed in the chapter on injunction. All
the acts enjoined by the scriptures ultimately lead up to the
human ends and should not be taken as they seem to be barren.
History and the Purāņas generally elaborate the Vedic matters
by means of the narration of various legends, etc.
It has been stated:-
3
One should elaborate the sense of the Vedas by means of
History and Purāņa Literature since the Vedas dread a man
of little learning who is apt to mar the sense of them. The
Vedas, the Puranas and the Law-books are the sources of know-
ledge since they are direct embodiments of the prescriptions of
the means to human ends. The auxiliary Vedic works such
as, Grammar, Astronomy, Phonetics, Ritualistic treatises,
Prosody and Etymology, are also sources of knowledge since4
Nyāyamanjarī
they throw light on the meanings of the Vedic words, etc.
(In other words, they help to understand the meaning of the
Vedic texts.) The very designation 'subsidiary Vedic texts'
shows that these works directly help the understanding of the
Vedic works. The Mīmāṁsā Literature is also a source of
knowledge since it solves all the seeming contradictions involved
in the Vedic sentences and clarify their meaning and supply
us with all the details that are required for the implementation
of the Vedic injunctions.
Bhaṭṭa says -
When a person ascertains the religious rites in and through
the Vedic texts the subsidiary acts which complete them are
supplied by the Mīmāṁsā treatisc.
Hence, it is not the seventh subsidiary work annexed to the
Vedic text since it is part and parcel of the Vedic texts, being
intimately connected with them. Some apparently disconnected
words of Vedic sentences yield us a consistent meaning when
the logical rules of interpretation contained in the Mīmāṁsā,
text are applied to them.
Confirmation of the Introduction of the Study of Nyaya (Logic).
The extensive Nyaya Literature is the main pillar upon which
all branches of learning rest since it establishes the validity of
the Vedic rites confidence in which may be shaken if the validity
of the Vedas is gainsaid by the unfair criticism of the bad logi-
cians. In that case, the people will hesitate to perform the
Vedic rites which mean a lot of expenditure of hard-earned
money and stupendous labour. If the Vedas themselves (the
lord) are at a discredit then their off-shoots (the attendants)
have no solid ground to stand upon in order to improve the
position of the Vedas. That is why Akṣapāda has composed
his great logical treatise which teaches us canons of logic by
means of which all the bad logicians will be easily silenced and
the validity of the Vedas will be re-affirmed. This glorious
achievement is due to the greatest branch of learning which is
called the source of knowledge since it throws light on the means
to the highest human end. Though the term 'Vidyā' denotes
knowledge yet it does not mean the awareness of an ordinary
object such as a jar and so on but the knowledge of the
means to the highest end. The compound word 'Vidyā-sthāna'The Logic of Gautama as a Source of Knowledge
conveys the source of such knowledge. In some of them this
character is directly grasped and in others it is indirectly grasped.
These branches of study are fourteen in number. It is stated
thus -
"The sources of knowledge and dharma are fourteen in
number, viz., the Purana, Tarka (logic) Mimāṁsā, Dharma-
sastras and the four Vedas together with the six auxiliary
sciences.'
5
It is also stated in some other work.
"These fourteen branches of study are the six ancillary sciences,
the four Vedas, Mīmāṁsā, the extensive literature of logic, the
Purāņa and the Dharma-śāstra.
Among the Fourteen sources of knowledge the Logic of Gautama only
has been enumerated.
The term "Tarka' in the first verse is synonymous with the
term 'Nyāyavistara' in the second verse. They denote the
same science of logic. 'Nyaya' and "Tarka' denote inference.
Inference has been elaborately discussed in this science of logic.
The Sänkhyists, the Arhats (the Jainas) and the Kṣapaṇakas
(the Buddhists) superficially initiate a very small section of
their disciples into the deep science of inference. The validity
of the Vedas cannot be established if we make use of their logic
to do so.
Thus the logic of these schools does not deserve the
title of logic.
The Buddhists are very proud of the superiority of their power
of argumentation. But as the drift of their logic is to cotradict
the truth of the Vedas so their logic cannot be included in the
branches of learning headed by the Vedas etc. We shall also
demonstrate the hollowness of the arguments, advanced by the
Buddhists at every step. The wretched Cärvākas, on the
other hand, should only be neglected since their unworthy
logic has no scope for being enumerated as one of the branches
of learning.
But the Vaišeşikas closely follow the Naiyāyikas. "Tarka'
or "Nyayavistara' which figures in the six systems of logic
widely known among people denotes the science of Logic of the
Vaiseşikas as well.
Moreover, the logic of Gautama which bears the designation
*änvīkşiki' is counted as one of the four branches of learning.6
Nyayamanjarī
Anvikṣiki, the three Vedas, Vārttā (Commerce) and the eternal
Political Science constitute the four branches of study. The
term 'anvīkṣşā' signifies inference since it corroborates the evi-
dence of perception and verbal testimony. The science which
aims at the elaboration of such inference is called 'Ănvīkşikî'.
Now, a question arises if the four-fold branches of study ex-
haust the entire curriculum then how is it that the fourteen
different kinds of learning have been already mentioned.
There is no real contradiction between these two divisions of
learning. Commerce and Political Science are only of secular
interest and consequently cannot find a place in such branches
of learning as have spiritual significance as well. The three
Vedas and Ānvīkṣikī being also included in the former list of
study, the branches of learning are truly fourteen.
The justification of the study of the Logic of Gautama-
Preliminary statement about its usefulness.
Now, if the function of logic is only to establish the validity
of the Vedas then there is no need of it since Mīmāṁsā can
easily replace it. In the Mimāṁsā literature the vedic rituals
as well as the validity of the Vedas have been discussed. This
contention is true on its surface. But we should bear in mind
that the principal subject-matter of Mimāṁsă is the interpre-
tation of the Vedas and the discussion of validity is a side-issue.
Every branch of study has its own province. Mimāṁsā is the
science of interpretation but is not a work on Logic and Epis-
temology. The Mīmāṁsakas are not adept in defending the
validity of the Vedas. We shall show later on that they have
exhausted all their energy, traversing the blind alleys of logic,
beset with thorns. The evidence of no single source of know-
ledge, even including perception, is conclusive unless and until
it is strongly corroborated by other independent proofs. The
unaided verbal testimony which depends upon perception
for its existence is certainly unreliable. A sentence can
only independently convey its meaning on the strength of
the established convention but for the determination of the
truth of its meaning the knowledge about its author is
indispensable.
The meaning of a sentence is true if the author of it is trust-
worthy but not otherwise. This point will be elaboratelyThe Logic of Gautama-its usefulness
discussed later on. Before the advent of Akṣapāda who was
there to establish the validity of the Vedas? (The purport of
the objection is that if the Vedas do not carry their own validity
then all attempts will fall through to prove their extrinsic vali-
dity). But it is indeed a feeble objection.
Who has interpreted the Vedas before Jaimini?
Who has given the analysis of words before Păņini? Who
has made a study of metres before Pingala? From the dawn
of creation these sciences are in vogue on earth like the Vedas.
The so-called authors do not invent logic, grammar etc. but
they discuss the existent subject-matters either in an elaborate
manner or in an abridged form. Now another question crops
up in our mind if the great minds admit that the validity of
the Vedas is intrinsic then does not our effort go in vain to
prove a settled matter? We say 'No' since we make an attempt
emoving a possible doubt or illusion of a layman. The
science of logic will prove to be a fruitful study to them who
are under the spell of doubt or illusion. That is why the study
of logic is introduced. The study of Mīmārisā is not meant for
them who are conversant with the sense of the Vedas. It has
been stated that 'the Mîmāṁsā Sūtra and its short commentary
are not intended for the Vedic scholars.'
at rem
There are four different types of people. The first type re-
presents the ignorant. The second one stands for the doubtful.
The third one embraces such persons as always misjudge. The
fourth one includes only the men of correct ideas. The author
of the Nyaya Sūtra is a sage whose mind does never err.
He
enlightens the ignorant by his logical treatise (the vehicle of
instruction). He hereby removes the doubt of an oscillating
mind and corrects the mistake of an illusory mind. It is proper
that the study of logic should be introduced for the benefit of
these three types. How does one know that the sage in ques-
tion sees objects in their true perspectives? An answer to the
question runs thus:-The acquisition of the true view of the
world may be due either to the practice of penance or to the
worship of deity or to the close study of some other books. Let
it be so, still the answer is not satisfactory. If the third alter-
native answer is accepted then we shall also be able to gather
the correct view of the world from that work and in that case
the work of Akṣapāda is useless. This point has already been
7Nyayamanjari
met. We have already stated that no author repeats the same
old story. A new author puts the old matters either elaborately
or briefly. This conduct of an author justifies his new enter-
prise. Moreover, the mentality of the readers is diverse. This
is what has been stated. The study of Akşapāda's logic is at
least fruitful to those who get their ignorance dispelled, doubts
solved and mistakes corrected by it. That is why the great
teacher has composed it.
8
A General Statement of the Subject-Matter in the first Aphorism of
Gautama's Logic (Objection and rejoinder).
The first aphorism of Gautama's Nyāya-Sūtra runs thus :
The final emancipation from all sorrows is attained through
the true knowledge of Pramāņa, Prameya, Samśaya, Prayojana,
Dṛṣṭānta, Siddhānta, Avayava, Tarka, Nirnaya, Vāda, Jalpa,
Vitaṇḍā, Hetvābhāsa, Chala, Jāti and Nigrahasthānas (these
terms will be explained by Jayanta himself. English equivalents
are not given here because Jayanta shows much independence
in their interpretation).
Why does the first sentence thus commence? What is the
drift of this question? If a teacher delivers a series of lectures
which result in a book then he cannot but commence his work
without beginning with a sentence since the whole of his lecture
cannot be delivered all at once. Without speaking out the
first sentence the second one cannot be given out. Now if you
find fault with the first sentence only because it is the first one
then the book which consists of a large number of such sentences
cannot be composed.
Now the objector replies:—'Do not think that I do not know
all these'. He holds that he has been misunderstood. The
purport of his question is this: "Why does the author give the
broad division of his subject-matter and the ultimate end of
his book, leaving aside the main topic at the outset. Now if
the objection amounts to this then a reply may be given to this
effect that the subject-matter of a book together with the broad
division of its contents and the end towards which it drives
should be given in the beginning in order to encourage the
listeners. The learned scholars decline to lend their ears even to
the contents of a small treatise if the broad outline of the subject-
matter and its end were not known to them at the initial stage.Subject-Matter
No learned man undertakes such an action the details and
the utility of which are not known to him. Bhaṭṭa says to this
effect, "Neither a person undertakes an action nor he cares to
read a book unless he realises the usefulness of either of
them."
Very well. How does a listener become acquainted with the
said utility at the out-set? It is a hard nut to crack. It re-
quires much reflection to tackle it. The question gives rise to
other difficult questions. Do we suddenly realise the utility
of a book as soon as we read the mere statement of its utility?
Or, does it flash in our mind whenever we follow the logic of
it? How do we make the correct estimates of its utility unless
we know the truth of the statement? If it is held that even
a man, who entertains a doubt as to the utility of a book pro-
ceeds to read it then a man may also proceed to perform a Vedic
rite without being sure of its efficacy. If it is held that when
a man understands the utility of a book following its logic he
reads the whole of it but not otherwise. Now, if he proceeds
to listen to a book, having thoroughly grasped its utility then
the fallacy of mutual dependence invalidates such a solution.
The fallacy of mutual dependence runs thus : If we listen to
the recitation of a book then we know its utility and if we know
its utility then we care to listen to the recitation of a book.
The final answer is this that a listener knows the utility of a book
from the very first sentence but cares to listen to it even if he
hesitates to accept the truth of all the statements of the book.
The purport of the solution is the statement of the psychologi-
cal condition of a reader which is favourable for a reader to read
a new book. The mere knowledge of the utility of the book
is necessary only for his movement. The reader may doubt the
validity of the statement of utility and the truth of the subject-
matter of the book. In spite of this irresolute condition of his
mind he proceeds to read the book.
If a man is not convinced of the validity of the Vedas then it
is not proper for him to undertake to perform very difficult
Vedic rites in a hesitant mood. An undertaking which demands
little, is easy to perform and does not entail tremendous labour
and heavy expense upon a performer but has a very bright
prospect is taken up. The intelligent persons, during the
course of their lecture, know for themselves within a few daysNyayamanjari
whether the study of the subject is conducive to a big result or
a small one.
10
1
If a person goes on to scrutinize the result of his undertaking
from the very start of an action then he will never make progress
but will surely court failure life.
A diseased person generally sends for a physician, gets him-
self examined by him and follows his prescription. But if he
doubts the efficacy of his prescription and hesitates to follow it
then his disease will simply wax strong.
Hence a man, knowing the utility and the broad outline of
the subject-matter from the first sentence, should listen to the
book in a reverential mood with the expectation that its study
may prove useful.
Some learned scholars have discussed the usefulness of the
first sentence of a book in a different manner. A sentence in
which the constituent words are not mutually connected is to
be rejected as it conveys no sense resembling in this respect an
expression like 'ten pomegranates' etc., of which words are not
syntactically connected. Even a sentence which conveys sense,
having its constituent words mutually connected, should be
rejected as worthless if it answers no purpose like the following
interrogatory one, "Are the teeth of a crow good or bad?" A
sentence which points to a useful object is accepted. A sentence
which serves no purpose is rejected. The first sentence of a book,
indicating the utility of the book, removes all our doubts as to-
its acceptability. If the first sentence had not described the goal
of the book then the objector would have rejected the book on
that very ground. The first sentence attracts the readers and.
silences the hostile critics, fulfilling all initial requirements.
The drift of the contention of these scholars is that the first sen-.
tence should convey the aim and object of a book.
The very statement of the aim and object of a book does away
with all our misgivings with regard to it since the condition which
prepares ground for rejection has been excluded. Others
hold that the first sentence calls up either a doubt as to the
realization of the end expressed in it or a feeling of probability
of its realization. But any one of these two feelings is roused.
up only by the expression of the end in question by the first
sentence. Either doubt or the possibility concerning the reali-
zation of the end gives impetus to us to read or listen to the book.Main Topics
But the first sentence makes us aware only of the end in ques-
tion since it expresses only its meaning but nothing else. But
a doubt arises in the mind of a listener in due course when he
thinks that a sentence of a man turns out to be sometimes true
and sometimes false. When he notices that the author is pure,
good and honest he thinks that the above statement may be
true. There, it has been stated well that the only object of
the first sentence is to express the usefulness of the book.
At the outset it is proper to speak out what attracts a listener
to lend his ears to it. There is no other motive than to convey
the end in question.
ir
The contents of a book should be narrated in order to prove
its utility which follows from their knowledge to invite the
attention of a listener.
The relation between a book and its contents and that between
the contents and the result of its study are not clearly stated
by its author. These two relations are easily grasped, since
they are implied though they are not explicitly stated by suitable
terms. The relation of the signifier and the signified holds
between the science of logic and its contents. So the knowledge
of the latter leads up to the final emancipation from all
sorrows (mokşa) and the relation of the means and the end
holds between the contents and moksa, the goal. The specified
relations are grasped by us to the exclusion of other possible
relations because the relations themselves as stated clearly indi-
cate their appropriateness.
The narration of the main topics of the science of logic.
The main topics of the science of logic are sixteen in number.
They begin with Pramāṇa (the source of valid knowledge)
and end in Nigraha-sthāna (the source of defeat in a debate).
An adequate treatment of them will take place later on. Let
us now give a rough sketch of them. The source of the true
knowledge of an object such as perception etc., is called Pra-
māņa. The object of such true knowledge is called Prameya
such as Atman etc. The form of consciousness which reveals
its substantive as simultaneously qualified by the two or more
incompatible predicates is called samsaya (a doubt). [In other
words, a doubt is a discursive judgment in which the subject is pre-
dicated by two or more incompatible predicates. It is really theNyayamanjari
semblance of a judgment since it ends in indecision.]
The realization of the good and the avoidance of the evil and
the means to such realization or avoidance is called Prayojana
(the spring of action). A positive instance by means of which
the invariable relation of concomitance holding between the
probans and the probandum is ascertained is called Dṛṣṭānta.
An object possesses two characters, viz. common and exclusively
particular. If it is known as such by means of proofs and
accepted as such then it is called Siddhanta. Whenever our
inferential knowledge is demonstrated we do so by means of a
syllogism consisting of a number of propositions designated as
Pratijňā etc. Each of these propositions is called Avayava.
When two rival hypotheses are offered to explain a fact one is
preferred to the other for its having stronger reasons. The
more reasonable one seems to us to be the probable explanation.
The knowledge of such probability is called Tarka. Nirnaya
is the arrival at a truth by means of the establishment of the
hypothesis of one's own school and the refutation of that of his
rival school. A dispassionate discussion which results in the
finding out of the truth is Vāda. Jalpa is such a debate in which
the contesting parties care only to win anyhow and in which
there is only a free play of intellectual powers. A species of
Jalpa is Vitandā. What is not a true mark but appears to be
so is called a Hetvābhāsa. The adverse criticism of a sentence
by means of the distortion of its meaning is called Chala, Jāti
means an opposition by a counter-argument simply based upon
resemblance or difference, but not upon sound grounds. Nigraha-
sthāna is such as never gives a true picture of a fact but always
a false one.
12
The first sūtra consists of compound words. The list of main
terms of logic has been given by a compound. These items
have been subsequently defined by appropriate sūtras. In
the light of those sútras we know that some of the component
words of the compound word have only singular number. In
the expounding sentence which explains the above compound
word the component words which have singular number should
have such inflexion as indicates the singular number. The
words such as Pramāṇa, Avayava and Hetvābhāsa should have
inflexion indicative of the plural number in the expounding
sentence. The remaining words of the above compound wordThe Compound Word in Sûtra I
should have only such inflexion as is indicative of the singular
nuinber. Thus, the thorough agreement between the general
statement and the specified ones has been perfectly maintained.
The compound in this particular instance is dvandva which
conveys the sense of mutual conjunction.
13
The above explanation is not satisfactory. The word 'tattva'
is a dependent one since it refers to Pramăņa etc. for the complete
expression of its meaning. Such a dependent word should not
be compounded with another word. The principal word in a
compound is allowed to be compounded though it is related
to an uncompounded word. In the sentence 'Rājapurusaḥ
sobhanah' the word 'śobhanah' relates to puruṣaḥ. The word.
'rajapuruṣaḥ' is a compound one. The word 'puruṣaḥ' plays
the main part since emphasis is laid on its meaning. But in the
compound word 'tattvajňāna' the word 'juana' is the principal
one and the word 'tattva' has the subordinate one. In that case,
the word 'tattva' which enjoys a subordinate status in the Sūtra
of Gautama cannot be compounded. A símílar case may be
cited viz. in the sentence 'rddhasya rājñaḥ puruṣaḥ' the word
'rajñaḥ' is not allowed to enter into a compound word as its
component. The drift of the argument is that the compound-
ing of the word 'tattva' is inadmissible.
The
Some commentators meet this objection in a different way.
They hold that the term 'jñāna' is also related to the words
*Pramāņa and others' since they are also objects of knowledge.
If the word 'tattva' is related to the words 'pramāṇa etc.,' the
above objection arises. But if the word 'jñana' is related to the
words "pramana etc.' then no such difficulty arises.
solution of the above problem is simply this, the word 'tattva'
which has no other 'correlative term' is compounded with “jñāna”,
a principal word in spite of its reference to other terms. The
proposed compound is 'karmadharaya'. The above linguistic
solution is not satisfactory since it goes against the conclusion
of the Nyāya Logic. No knowledge is in itself true or untruc.
If a piece of knowledge correctly reveals an object, it is truc.
If not, it is untrue. Truth or untruth is an extrinsic property
of knowledge but not intrinsic. The word 'tat' has a definite
meaning. It conveys the sense that the meaning in question
is either a positive or negative real well-determined by a source
of true knowledge. The essence of such a real is 'tattva'. TheNyāyamanjari
piece of true knowledge which reveals such an essence is called
tattva-jñāna. The essence of true knowledge i.e. truth is cog-
nized by another piece of knowledge. The sources of true
knowledge etc. are determined by a piece of knowledge other
than the objects of it. The use of tattva as an object of knowledge
is very significant since it throws light on the essential teaching
of Nyaya-Logic, commentators should not be perplexed by the
linguistic objections. The admissibility of such condemned terms
in a compound word is noticed in many instances. A well-
accepted example is 'Devadattasya gurukulam'. The place of
a word in a compound word is an important factor. The
mutual relation of words should be maintained. If the sense is
clearly expressed by a compound word of which any constituent
term, principal or subordinate, has relation to other uncompoun-
ded words, there is no bar to their forming a compound word.
The celebrated grammarians follow this diction.
Panini commences his work with the title
"The science of word'. The commentator asks
"of which words?"
14
An examination of the compound in the compound word Tattvajiāna.
it.
The compound word has the sixth case-ending attached to
It has syntactical relation with the word 'tattva'. The
sixth case-ending indicates the non-specified relation holding
between Pramāṇa etc. word and tattva. Then he explains the
two other compound terms, viz., tattvajñāna and niḥśreyasādhi-
gama. Tattva is the object of the verb to know since it is
being known and niḥśreyasa is being attained it is the object of
the verb to attain. The answer is 'of classical and Vedic Sanskrit
words'. Now, the complex sentence turns out to be the science
of classical and Vedic words. The Sanskrit sentence is like the
laukikānāṁ vaidikānāṁ ca śabdānuśāsanam'. Patañjali, the
great commentator of Panini approves of the compounding
of Sabda and anuśäsana in spite of the double relation of
the word śabda which has a subordinate place in the compound
word 'śabdanušāsana'.
-
Therefore the sixth case-endings in the three words, viz.,
Tattvanihśreyasa and śabda are quite correct, being in accor-
dance with the decision of the great commentator on Pāṇini.Tattvajñāna as a Means of Moksa
An examination of the hypothesis that Tattvajñāna is a means to the
attainment of Niḥfreyasa,
15
Now it should be proved how the true knowledge of the sixteen
topics of Gautama's logic leads up to the attainment of the highest
good (nihśreyasa). The declared purpose of it is to prove the
validity of the Vedas. Go on with your business. Why do
you take up the tedious task of discussing the sixteen topics?
Our answer to such a question is that the true knowledge of the
twelve objects beginning with the soul and ending in apavarga
(the absolute cessation of all sorrows) is the direct means to the
realisation of the final state of freedom from all sufferings and
that the true knowledge of other objects is not conducive to the
goal of life. We shall discuss all these points later on. When
our erroneous knowledge is dispelled by the true knowledge
of the soul etc., our cycle of worldly existence, based on errors,
comes to a stop. That is why the objects of the true knowledge
must be instructed. We learn only from the Vedas that the
true knowledge of objects such as the soul etc. leads to the
absolute cessation from all sorrows.
The validity of the Vedas is established by an inference. The
unfailing mark in that inference is the utterance of a trustworthy
person. We shall discuss the details of the mark later on.
Perception alone helps us to detect the relation of invariable
'concomitance holding between the probans and the probandum.
No other forms of knowledge help us in this matter since all
other forms of knowledge land in regressus ad infinitum which
baffles all attempts. If one has the direct experience of the good
results of the medical science then he will understand without
the least doubt that the utterances of an apta (a seer-a trust-
worthy person) are true. (Jayanta means to say that the
medical science is a branch of the Vedas. If the statements
of it tally with the facts, i.e., if the diagnosis, prognosis and treat-
ment as suggested by it prove to be true then its validity is
established. The Vedas, being the work of the same author,
will also be valid). Upamāna (comparison) also gives us
assistance in some sphere of activity (viz., the detection of the
relation holding between a word and its meaning). Therefore,
the four proofs should also find a place in logic like the real
objects such as the soul etc. Though doubt and other contentsNyayamanjari
piece of true knowledge which reveals such an essence is called
tattva-jñāna. The essence of true knowledge i.e. truth is cog-
nized by another piece of knowledge. The sources of true
knowledge etc. are determined by a piece of knowledge other
than the objects of it. The use of tattva as an object of knowledge
is very significant since it throws light on the essential teaching
of Nyaya-Logic, commentators should not be perplexed by the
linguistic objections. The admissibility of such condemned terms
in a compound word is noticed in many instances. A well-
accepted example is 'Devadattasya gurukulam'. The place of
a word in a compound word is an important factor. The
mutual relation of words should be maintained. If the sense is
clearly expressed by a compound word of which any constituent
term, principal or subordinate, has relation to other uncompoun-
ded words, there is no bar to their forming a compound word.
The celebrated grammarians follow this diction.
Pāṇini commences his work with the title
"The science of word'. The commentator asks
"of which words?"
14
An examination of the compound in the compound word Tattvaj iana.
The compound word has the sixth case-ending attached to
it. It has syntactical relation with the word 'tattva'. The
sixth case-ending indicates the non-specified relation holding
between Pramāņa etc. word and tattva. Then he explains the
two other compound terms, viz., tattvajñāna and niḥśreyasādhi-
gama. Tattva is the object of the verb to know since it is
being known and nihśreyasa is being attained it is the object of
the verb to attain. The answer is 'of classical and Vedic Sanskrit
words'. Now, the complex sentence turns out to be the science
of classical and Vedic words. The Sanskrit sentence is like the
laukikānām vaidikānāṁ ca śabdānuśāsanam'. Patañjali, the
great commentator of Pāṇini approves of the compounding
of sabda and anušāsana in spite of the double relation of
the word sabda which has a subordinate place in the compound
word 'sabdanuśāsana'.
Therefore the sixth case-endings in the three words, viz.,
Tattvanihśreyasa and śabda are quite correct, being in accor-
dance with the decision of the great commentator on Pāņini.15
"Tattvajñana as a Means of Mokşa
An examination of the hypothesis that Tattvajñāna is a means to the
-attainment of Niḥfreyasa.
Now it should be proved how the true knowledge of the sixteen
topics of Gautama's logic leads up to the attainment of the highest
good (niḥśreyasa). The declared purpose of it is to prove the
validity of the Vedas. Go on with your business. Why do
you take up the tedious task of discussing the sixteen topics?
Our answer to such a question is that the true knowledge of the
twelve objects beginning with the soul and ending in apavarga
(the absolute cessation of all sorrows) is the direct means to the
realisation of the final state of freedom from all sufferings and
that the true knowledge of other objects is not conducive to the
goal of life. We shall discuss all these points later on. When
our erroneous knowledge is dispelled by the true knowledge
of the soul etc., our cycle of worldly existence, based on errors,
comes to a stop. That is why the objects of the true knowledge
must be instructed. We learn only from the Vedas that the
true knowledge of objects such as the soul etc. leads to the
absolute cessation from all sorrows.
The validity of the Vedas is established by an inference. The
unfailing mark in that inference is the utterance of a trustworthy
person. We shall discuss the details of the mark later on.
Perception alone helps us to detect the relation of invariable
concomitance holding between the probans and the probandum.
No other forms of knowledge help us in this matter since all
other forms of knowledge land in regressus ad infinitum which
baffles all attempts. If one has the direct experience of the good
results of the medical science then he will understand without
the least doubt that the utterances of an ăpta (a seer-a trust-
(Jayanta means to say that the
worthy person) are true.
If the statements
medical science is a branch of the Vedas.
of it tally with the facts, i.e., if the diagnosis, prognosis and treat-
ment as suggested by it prove to be true then its validity is
established. The Vedas, being the work of the same author,
will also be valid). Upamâna (comparison) also gives us
assistance in some sphere of activity (viz., the detection of the
relation holding between a word and its meaning). Therefore,
the four proofs should also find a place in logic like the real
objects such as the soul etc. Though doubt and other contentsNyāyamanjari
16
of the sutra are included by their very nature either in the proofs.
or in the objects of the true knowledge, yet they have been sepa-
rately treated because they induce a person to the syllogistic rea-
soning. Syllogism which establishes the validity of the Vedas.
helps us to realise human ends.
No body uses syllogistic arguments to prove an unknown or a
well-established object but a doubtful one. Hence doubt is an
accessory of syllogism. No one uses syllogism if it serves no
purpose. A positive instance again helps us to detect the
relation of invariable concomitance holding between the probans
and the probandum. Thus, it is intimately connected with
induction and thereby with syllogism.
Siddhänta (the establishment of the subject) also is a neces-
sary condition of the demonstration of a syllogistic argument
since it fulfils one of the conditions of an inference. It correctly
asserts that the object to be inferred definitely belongs to the
subject of inference. Thereby it counteracts the fallacy that
the object to be inferred does not belong to the subject of infe-
rence. Now, a question arises in our mind, "Why do we pay
special attention to Siddhānta?' The purport of this objec-
tion is that if we entertain a doubt as to the belonging of an
object to be inferred to the subject of inference then the fallacy
stated above is surely negated by it (by the very doubt). There
is much sense in this objection. But we should bear in mind
that we do not always use syllogistic arguments to prove doubtful
cases but also prove established facts by means of syllogism.
There is no such rule that the syllogistic argument should only
be used to prove doubtful cases. Hence, Siddhanta should be
distinctly treated.
If we employ a syllogistic argument to convince others then
all the premises should be used since they are helpful to them for
their better understanding. A syllogistic argument, consisting
of 5 premises, is called parârtha-anumāna (an inference meant
for convincing others).
Now, another question arises in our mind. "Why should
Dṛṣṭānta (a positive instance) and Siddhanta (an object estab-
lished) be separately treated?' The drift of this objection is
that as they constitute the meanings of the first and the third
propositions (Pratijña and Udaharana) so it is superfluous to
reconsider them afresh. A tentative reply is that if you argueTattvajñāna as a Means of Mokşa
like this then Inference, a distinct source of valid knowledge,
should not be enlisted in the list of the sources of valid knowledge
since the second proposition which is called Hetu signifies it
(i.e. Inference). The objector may say, that it matters little
whether Inference finds a place in the list or not. The further
rejoinder to this objection is this :-Every item has its proper
place in the system of logic. All of the five constituent proposi-
tions together signify syllogism. They should only be discussed
when the turn of syllogism will come up. Siddhānta, Dṛṣṭānta
etc., precede syllogism. Hence, they should be separately
treated. If the order of this system is not obeyed then the system
of logic has no other topic to discuss than the five constituent
propositions of a syllogism.
Tarka is separately discussed because it has a special function.
to pave the way for one of the two rival hypotheses. When
two rival hypotheses are known to us to explain a fact our mind
naturally hesitates to cling to one of them under the supposition
that each of them is almost equally strong. Tarka steps in to
remove the state of indecision. It strengthens the arguments
in favour of one of these two rival hypotheses by removing all
doubts. At the same time, by exposing defects in the other
rival hypothesis, it relaxes the force of all arguments put forward
in favour of the alternative predicate. In a dispassionate debate
Tarka is used in order to eliminate the bias from the mind of one
of the two debators. The function of Tarka does not cease until
the truth of one of the two rival hypotheses is established. The
final ascertainment of truth (nirņaya) employs a tarka in order
to work out its result, viz., the termination of a syllogistic argu-
ment. If an unending chain of syllogism goes on for ever with-
out reaching a final conclusion then no body would have been
eager to seek the services of such a fruitless chain of syllogism.
Now an objection is raised as to the importance of nirnaya
as a distinct topic. The purport of it is that it is superfluous to
take up nirnaya separately since nimaya itself is tattvajñāna
(the true knowledge of the real nature of the specified objects
of logic). The rejoinder to this objection is as follows:-There
is really much force in the above objection. Still, the nirnaya
in question has a special feature of its own. The true knowledge
of the sixteen topics is acquired through the instrumentality
of a distinct valid source of knowledge, viz., an inference. As
1718
Nyayamanjari
it requires the operation of a syllogism for its very establish-
ment so it is a mover of a syllogism. But the nirnaya in ques-
tion arises when the debate has been concluded. (In other
words, when the dual fight of a thesis and its antithesis is over
and the antiparty is utterly crushed, nirnaya emerges). The
syllogistic process reaches its destination and comes to a stand-
still. Nimaya is the very goal. It stops the movement of a
syllogistic process. Hence, tattva-jñāna, the mover of a syllo-
gism, cannot be identified with this nirnaya. We cannot know
the true character of this nirnaya unless it is separately treated.
Another objection is raised against the separate treatment of
anumāna. The Nirnaya in question is no better than an
inference. But such an objection is untenable. Nirnaya is the
result of inference but in itself is not an inference. If it had been
an inference then it, like an inference, would only remain a pro-
cess and would have yielded no result and as a consequence
an inferential process would have continued interminably.
Now a further objection is raised. The objector holds that
inference coupled with tattvajñāna is nirṇaya. He gets over
the above difficulty since an inference has a goal to reach, viz.,
tattvajñāna. A reply to this objection is as follows:-If nirnaya
is not special then who will say that all inferences lead to tattva-
jñāna. Some inferences are right and the rest are wrong.
Inference does not imply that it is right. A fallacious reasoning
leads to a wrong conclusion. Thus instead of the true knowledge
of tattva we may get the erroneous knowledge of tattva. There-
fore the objection is not tenable.
Now, a further objection is raised. The purport of it is as
follows: Doubt precedes inference and inference, being a mental
process, reaches a definite conclusion by its very nature. Now
the act of inference which is preceded by a doubt and succeeded
by tattvajñāna is nirṇaya. Such an objection does not hold
good. All inferences are not correct. There may be a wrong
argument which though preceded by a doubt will yield only a
wrong conclusion (nirnayābhāsa).
that a doubt invariably precedes inference. In fine, in order
to establish that a definite conclusion which is drawn from a
syllogism, has a distinct character of its own, nimaya deserves
a distinct mention......
There is no such rule
Enough of it.Tattvajñāna as a Means of Moksa
Suppose two contesting parties put forward the two distinct
trains of syllogism in order to prove their opposite views on a
certain topic. Both of them cannot be correct. If one of them
refutes the other and arrives at a final conclusion, then this final
conclusion is Nimaya. We arrive at Nirnaya through a diffe-
rent process of thought. Hence it demands a special treatment.
In cases of dispassionate discussion a teacher employs a syllo-
gism in order to prove the soundness of his thesis, brings home
his point to the mind of the other debators by removing all
doubts and wins their approval. A teacher should hold such a
debate with his pupils and class-mates who are not prompted
by love and hatred. When the guileless honest people become
dejected and depressed by the unsound arguments fabricated
by the wild imagination of bad logicians, Jalpa (wrangling)
and Vitaṇḍā (cavil) are permitted to be employed even by the
honest logicians in order to restore conviction to the above
persons so that they will cling to their original hypothesis and
fortify it. On special occasions even to the persons desirous of
final emancipation such an unfair debate becomes serviceable.
We shall discuss it later on.
19
The study of defective marks renders some service to a
syllogistic argument since it helps us to discriminate between
the sound and the defective minor premises which constitute
a syllogism. If we know the defective marks then the marks
which are not so are easily recognised to be true. Now, an
objection arises in our mind viz. "Why do not we reverse the
order of treatment?" If we know at first the true mark then
the wrong mark can be easily detected. Though there is much
truth in it yet when a proposition containing a middle term is
to be used two things are to be noticed, viz., the employment
of the true mark and the avoidance of the false one. In order
to avoid the false mark we should know it to be such. Truly
speaking hetväbhāsas belong to a species of Nigrahasthāna.
But they are mainly pointed out in a dispassionate debate to
invalidate the counter syllogism. That is why they have been
separately treated. In cases of debate like Jalpi or Vitaṇḍā
type, Chala, Jāti and Nigrahasthana are freely employed. One
should know them thoroughly at first so that he will be able to
play better the game of defence by not allowing his opponent
to hurl them at the propositions employed by him.Nyāyamanjari
On special occasions one under painful necessity uses them
though it is not possible to use them always. Again, if his
opponent uses them, he will be able to remedy them. One
should know them as they invariably accompany Jalpa and
Vitanda and are their part and parcel. For this very reason,
they have been separately treated.
The Buddhists who have received wrong training in the
art of logic are very vociferous. Little bits of wrong premises
sound much. These logicians are skilled in the employment
of vitaṇḍā i.e. destructive criticism, having no positive stand of
their own. If one is not well equipped with the knowledge of
Jalpa, Vitaṇḍā etc. he cannot meet them and be able to win
victory in such debates over them.
A common man is generally uncritical in his acceptance of
views. He follows the beaten track of his fellowmen. Such
a person is generally led astray by the bad logicians. The
compassionate sage Gautama comes to their rescue and teaches
them all specimens of bad logic so that the simple minded people
may not be misled by these designing logicians.
Similarly, the other topics of logic, viz., a doubt etc. should
also be taught so that the knowledge of the validity of the Vedic
lore may be deeply rooted in their mind.
The science of Logic of Gautama rightly deserves a place
among the sources of knowledge since it restores the validity
of the Vedic scriptures.
20
The celebrated commentator says to this effect: The Logic
of Gautama which like a lamp illuminates all other sources of
knowledge, i.e., branches of learning, shows means to all actions
and acts as a support of all dharmas, has been rightly ennumerat-
ed in the list of the sources of knowledge.
The sage has shown the path which leads to the destination
of the absolute cessation of all sorrows. There are other objects
of knowledge in this world. They have no bearing upon the
final goal of life mentioned above. Hence he did not discuss
them.
The Three-fold procedure of the Nyaya-Logic
The procedure, adopted by the Nyayasutra to discuss its
topics, is three-fold, viz., the nomenclature of its topics, their
definitions and an examination of them. The introduction of22
Nyāyamanjari
ceed the division of its species. There is no ruling with regard
to an order of place. There may be first general definition and
then division or there may be first division and then general
definition. Thus the topic on nomenclature is exhaustively dis-
cussed.
Then the sutras which relate to definition will be explained.
The task of thorough discussion will be done to the best of our
intellectual powers alongwith the sutras which deal with defini-
tions in a relevant manner. We shall not take an extra trouble
of explaining and dicussing the sūtras which concentrate upon
the examination of a topic.
After the explanation of the first Sutra of Gotama's Logic the
second one will not be explained, since it neither embodies.
a definition nor contains such materials as are conducive
to a definition. It will be discussed in its appropriate place
alongwith apavarga (the absolute cessation of all sorrows) since
the content of this sutra is secondary to the treatment of
apavarga.
The definition of Pramāṇa
The definition of Pramâna will be discussed in the sutra on
the division of Pramāņa since it finds an appropriate place
therein.
Pramāṇa admits of four-fold division, viz. Perception, Inference,
Comparison and Verbal Testimony.
Now, the following matter is going to be discussed. What is
a pramāņa? What is the nature? What is its definition? The
matter of enquiry being discussed the bearing of the sutra upon
Pramāṇa will be taken up. The theme in question is being
discussed. Pramâņa is the collocation of the two types of ob-
jects viz., consciousness and unconscious ones which co-operate
to produce such an apprehension of objects as is other than an
illusion and a doubt. Pramāṇa consists of two opposite elements
viz. consciousness and unconscious objects. The definition of
Pramana is what produces such an apprehension as is other
than an illusion and a doubt. The etymological meaning
of a pramāṇa is what is an instrument of the true
knowledge. The suffix which is atttached to the root 'ma'
denotes an instrument. An instrument (Karaṇa) is defined to
be the causa sui of an act (sådhaka-tama). The nominal suffixThe definition of Pramāṇa
23
com-
'tamap' added to the stem 'sādhaka' indicates a sense of com-
parison. It presupposes the other objects with which it
pared. There must be other conditions of an act amongst which
it is the most efficacious. That is why it is called sādhaka-tama.
Now, if the collocation of all conditions is the instrument then
how can a comparison among them take place since the collo-
cation is one and there are no other conditions outside the
collocation? If the collocation of all conditions is the instru-
ment of the true knowledge of an object, then how can it make
room for comparison? The object which is being truly known is
also one of the conditions of such knowledge. In that case, it
becomes merged in the collocation of all condition and loses its
individuality. Thus, the object of knowledge itself, being one
of the members of the collocation, turns out to be the instru-
ment of the knowing process. Thus, all acts of true knowledge
become objectless from this stand-point since the object of
knowledge is included in the collocation like the sense-organ,
viz., eyes, etc. Who will be the subject of an act of knowledge?
The subject who knows an object by means of an instrument in
the shape of collocation is also one of the conditions of an act
of knowledge. As a condition it is engulfed by the collocation
of all conditions. Thus, the subject ceases to be the subject and
becomes an instrument.
If this absurd conclusion is accepted by the contender then the
fundamental position of Nyaya-Epistemology is at stake (jeo-
pardised). Nyaya epistemology embodies a pragmatic appeal.
If the subject of true knowledge, its object, its instrument and
the act itself maintain their individual distinction then and
then only the essence of Nyaya Epistemology finds its perfect
expression. The people at large do not approve of this hypothe-
sis, since in the conversion we find no indication of a colloca-
tion as being used in the shape of an instrumental case. No
body says that he sees an object by means of the collocation of
all conditions but he asserts that by means of his eyes he visua-
lizes an object. Therefore, no collocation of all conditions is an
instrument. Hence, the collocation of conditions is not pramāņa.
A reply to these objections is as follows :-
An instrument is such as gives the most efficient service to
produce an act. The word 'pramana' denotes the instrument of
true knowledge. Hence it is reasonable to hold that the colloca-
3024
Nyayamanjari
tion of all conditions of true knowledge is pramāṇa. No other
case excepting the aggregate of all of them can be the most effi-
cacious one to produce it. When all the conditions assemble,
the effect takes place. When one of them is absent the effect
does not come into being. Therefore, the assemblage of all condi-
tions is superior to all. None of them singly does get the credit
for making a special contribution towards its effectuation.
None of them alone wins the distinction of doing a special
service since all of them combine to do the effect in question
and share in common the credit for production.
Now, the objector may contend that a condition which is
directly connected with an effect has only a distinctive feature.
This contention does not hold good since what is indirectly con-
nected with an effect is also a condition. Moreover, all the con-
ditions of an act of knowledge are directly related to the act in
question. Let us take the example of an act of perception. All
the conditions, viz., the senseorgan, the inner organ, the object,
etc., combine together to produce the act of perception. Now,
the objector may contend that a condition, the immediate pre-
sence of which brings about the effect, possesses a distinction.
In other words, such a condition should be the instrument. Such
a solution is not tenable since sometimes the immediate presence
of an object is responsible for its perception. In a dark night
when the sky is enveloped by clouds heaped upon clouds and
pitchy darkness prevails a lady is suddenly revealed by a flash
of lightning. It is generally believed that in this case the flash of
lightning has a distinctive mark which no other condition
possesses. Therefore, the flash of lightning to the exclusion of all
other conditions is the instrument. But here is a point worth
noting that if all other conditions excepting the lady assemble
then the perception of the lady will not take place. As soon as
she appears on the scene the perception in question takes place.
The lady is the object of the act of perception. If we had struck
to the above proposition then in this case the object itself would
have been an instrument. The distinctive feature of an instru-
ment lies in this that its presence is invariably and immediately
followed by the appearance of an effect. No condition, in-
cluded in the collocation of all conditions, individually possesses
the exceptional mark of distinction. Now, the collocationThe definition of Pramana
of all conditions alone possesses that mark of distinction.
Therefore, it is logical to call it an instrument i.e. causation.
When the collocation of all conditions takes place the effect
invariably comes into existence in close succession. Therefore,
the collocation of all conditions is alone capable of being the
most effective producer of an act. An act of knowledge is not
an exception to the general rule.
Now, the objector may indulge in a further contention that
since the subject and the object of an act of true knowledge are
invariably connected with true knowledge, they should also
possess the distinctive mark recognized by all. A true knower
is the locus of the act of true knowledge. A true object is what
is grasped by the act of true knowledge. In other words, the
subject or the object of every piece of true knowledge are invari-
ably related to it as its subject or object. The contention is
true. But the objector does not dive deep into the nature of the
subject and the object. The subject and the object mentioned
above acquire their real relational character only through the
medium of assemblage of all conditions which produces true
knowledge in order to render the relation of the subject and
the object with true knowledge possible. In the absence of this
assemblage true knowledge does not come into being and the
subject and the object of true knowledge lose their primary
significance. They are so only in the secondary sense. None but
the collocation of all conditions deserves the distinctive mark of
effectuating true knowledge. Hence the assemblage of all its con-
ditions is the instrument of pramã (true knowledge)i.e. causa sui.
Now, a further objection is being raised. A collocation in it-
self has no process by means of which it can produce an act.
How can it be an instrument, having no process? The answer to
it is that it works not by an independent process of its own
but by means of the processes of all the conditions included
in it. The assemblage is a common property of all conditions.
Hence it cannot do away with their individual traits. When
these conditions assemble together each one of them retains its
own characteristic feature. The individual property of each one
is recognized.
Is collocation different from the individual conditions ?
If it is so then why is it not observed to be so? If it is identi-
cal with the conditions then all conditions turn out to be the
25Nyayamanjari
instrumental case. In that case, the usage such as a subject, an
object, etc., should be abolished. Such an objection does not
invalidate the hypothesis in question. When all the conditions
assemble at a point of time the property of assemblage is directly
perceived. If the objects such as the cooking pot, water, fire,
rice, etc., stand apart then the knowledge of assemblage does not
arise. But when they stand together they are known to possess
a common property, viz., assemblage. When many conditions
assemble they possess a common property of assemblage. But in
case of threads a bundle of threads being united a distinct type
of assemblage comes into being. It is called a piece of cloth.
The piece of cloth is distinct from its constituent threads
assembled. In spite of a distinction between the first and second
type of assemblage an assemblage irrespective of its types exists
as a matter of fact. An assemblage as compared to each of the
individual members that assemble is an instrumental case. The
objection, mentioned above, does not hold good. An object may
assemble in a collection. But the assemblage itself is the instru-
ment. Therefore the charge that a piece of true knowledge be-
comes objectless i.e. deprived of its object to reveal turns out
to be pointless. Similarly, the subject of an act of knowing un-
affectingly stands as a subject in the much debated assemblage
of the conditions. Thus the fourfold division involved in an act
of true knowledge is shown to be honoured.
26
Another objection has been raised from the linguistic point
of view that an assemblage does never take the third case ending
which is indicative of the instrumental case. An answer to it
is this that the term 'assemblage' is never used independently of
an assembling member. Hence in Sanskrit Literature no such
usage, viz. ‘I all with an assemblage' comes to our notice. But
a lamp or a sense- organ or anyother appropriate object takes
the third case-ending to convey the idea that the object denoted
by the stem to which the third case-ending has been added is
the instrument. The underlying secret is not known to all. Such
a usage is permissible only when the nature of producing an
effect, belonging to the assemblage of all conditions is attributed
to any member included in the assemblage. Not only in the
field of Epistemology but also in the common practice the
above-mentioned condition holds good. Let us cite an illustra-
tion viz. 'one cooks with a pot.' Such usages on the strength ofThe definition of Pramana
attribution come to our notice. When an assemblage acquires
the character of an instrument depending upon the conditions
included in it such an assemblage is the cause par excellence of
true knowledge.
27
The other critics come forward and take an exception to the
above hypothesis. They argue in the following manner:-An
assemblage is nothing but all the conditions assembled together.
The double character of the members is incomprehensible. One
of such conditions lying outside the assemblage may be an
object or a subject or something else. But when they assemble
together to produce an effect they become an instrumental case.
What is the underlying reason behind the formulation of such
a hypothesis. In the absence of a clear rational ground the sub-
ject and the object should be never an instrument. The other
conditions which generate true knowledge which is other than
an error or a doubt is an instrumental cause i.e. the cause par
excellence. In the Sanskrit grammar the third case-ending
signifies this character of the condition in question I see with a
lamp; I see with eyes; I know by means of a mark, I ascertain
with the help of a word, I determine with my inner organ and
so on. These are the classical examples in support of the second
hypothesis of the critics.
Now a question arises in our mind viz. 'should there be only
three kinds of conditions? The reply is that in Epistemology
these three types of conditions are enough and that this hypo-
thesis agrees with that of yours. In the actual world there may
be other types of conditions, having different contributions to
the effectuation of an act: Let us take concrete case viz. the
act of cooking. A container of the articles to be cooked is
necessary. The act of cooking is not possible without the remote
help received from the container and so on. Similarly, the other
types of conditions are to be assumed in consideration of their
necessary contributions towards the actualisation of an act.
In the production of the effect viz. a piece of true knowledge no
difference in the nature of contributive function is noticed
among the instrumental causes mentioned above, viz. a lamp,
eyes, an inner organ and so on. All such conditions are to
be included in the instrumental cause. The most contributive
condition is defined to be an instrumental cause. The meaning
of 'tamap', is the most' in English. The superlative should have28
Nyāyamañjari
significance. What is the significance of the suffix 'tamap' in the
effectuation of knowledge ? The answer is that there is some
significance. This significance is grasped by every body. Nobody
uses the subject or the object as an instrumental cause. But he
rightly uses 'eyes', 'an inner organ', 'a lamp', 'a word' and 'a
mark' as an instrumental cause as he notices the differences of a
subject and of an object from an instrumental cause. Thus we
conclude that the four-fold division of true knowledge generally
called a proof or a source of valid knowledge, the subject of true
knowledge, its object and the act of knowing truly, is completely
covered by the second hypothesis. Therefore we arrive at the
final complete definition of a proof of true knowledge that is the
collocation of all conditions other than a subject and an object
partaking of the nature of consciousness and unconsciousness and
productive of the knowledge of an object other than an error
or a doubt, is the instrumental cause of true knowledge.
An examination of the Definition of Pramāṇa of the Buddhist School
These who hold that some forms of consciousness are pramāṇas
lack deep insight into the Science of logic. Some kind of con-
sciousness is the result of pramāņa but cannot be itself a
direct pramâņa. The term 'pramâna' etymologically signifies an
instrument. A pramāṇa is that by which something is correctly
known. What is the meaning of the predicate 'is correctly
known'? The answer is that true knowledge is generated. The
people at large also hold that they know it by means of a
pramāṇa. They also lend their support to the view that an
instrument is really a pramāņa. In Sanskrit literature we find
that the word 'prama' is also synonymous with the word
'pramâna'. This 'pramāņa' is truly the result of pramāṇa, the
instrument. Thus a piece of knowledge which is other than a
doubt and an illusion is the result of a pramāņa. Such a piece of
knowledge generates an inference of the soul or that of the in-
ternal organ of such true knowledge as gives information about
its object whether it is acceptable or avoidable. Under some cir-
cumstances it acts as an instrument and becomes a pramāņa.
But if a piece of knowledge which is neither an illusion nor a
doubt does not produce another piece of true knowledge then it
should not be called a pramâņa, though some thinkers wrongly
call it a pramâņa. It is widely known all over the country that theThe Buddhist view of Pramāṇa—a critique
29
unconscious objects such as a lamp, a sense-organ, etc. are ins-
truments of knowledge. If we accept the view of some thinkers
that knowledge is only pramana then we shall have to discard
the popular view. Therefore, it should be noted that if a piece
of knowledge is included in the collocation of conditions which
determines a resulting consciousness then it is called a pramāņa.
A number of illustrations may be cited to substantiate our
point. If a perceptual judgment is taken into consideration then
the antecedent simple perception acts as an instrument which
produces the subsequent judgment of perception. In case of an
inference the knowledge of the mark is instrumental to the know-
ledge of the object marked. In case of analogy the knowledge
of similarity is an instrument of the analogical knowledge. The
auditory perception of a word leads to the knowledge of the
object denoted by it as an instrument. These pieces of knowledge
are pramāṇas. Therefore, it is rightly stated that the collocation
of conditions including both consciousness and unconscious
objects is a pramāṇa.
Some other logicians hold that a phenomenon of consciousness
which reveals an object is pramāṇa provided that the revealer and
the revealed owe their existence to the same set of conditions.
Every object in this universe is momentary. The Universe does
not become empty and worldly transactions go on undisturbed
since phenomena belonging to one series generate phenomena
of other series through the agency of a cause and its accom-
panying conditions. When a phenomenon of consciousness is
generated its antecedent phenomenon of consciousness is the
material cause and the object which determines it is the co-
operative efficient condition. But when an objective phenomenon
is generated the antecedent object-phenomenon is the material
cause and the antecedent phenomenon of consciousness belong-
ing to the parallel scries is the co-operative efficient condition.
A phenomenon of consciousness is produced by a phenomenon
of consciousness and an object, but an object, on the other hand,
is also produced by an object and a phenomenon of conscious-
ness. Thus, a phenomenon of consciousness never fails to reveal
an object which owes its existence to a set of conditions similar
to that of conditions determining the phenomenon of conscious-
ness, the revealer. Such a phenomenon of consciousness is a
pramina.Nyayamanjari
This view does not stand to reasons. If it is admitted then
an absurd conclusion is forced on us, viz., what does not pro-
duce a piece of consciousness as an effect would become a
pramāņa. [The causal relation does not hold between pramāṇa
and pramiti but the relation of the determinant and the deter-
mined holds between them from the Buddhist standpoint.]
Therefore, the so-called pramana is never the generator of
pramiti. Thus, the Buddhists fail to explain pramâņa. Again,
these logicians defend themselves that a phenomenon of cons-
ciousness which appears to be possessed of a process in the
shape of its object is held to be a pramāṇa. It has been stated
to this effect that the very object of consciousness puts on the
garb of a process and the pramāṇa appears to be possessed of a
process. (The Naiyāyikas subject this view to a severe criticism.
The points of their criticism are as follows). A phenomenon of
consciousness, the illuminator and the object, the illumined
simultaneously come into being. The object in question is an
effect of another antecedent momentary phenomenon of cons-
ciousness and another antecedent transient object but cannot
be an object of its simultaneous phenomenon of consciousness.
The object in question may be an object of its immediately
antecedent phenomenon of consciousness. (The driſt of this
argument is that a momentary phenomenon of consciousness
cannot appear as possessed of an effect, having produced no
effect during its existence. The pramāņa of the Nyaya school is
either actually present or remains so through its process when
its effect comes into being. But a momentary phenomenon of
consciousness can be in no way present when its effect comes
into being. Hence, a short-lived phenomenon of consciousness
cannot be a pramāṇa.)
30
These logicians defend their hypothesis in a different manner.
Their further contention is like this. A phenomenon of cons-
ciousness is invariably determined by an object if they are
effects of the similar sets of conditions and are compresent. A
phenomenon of consciousness is aware of an object by its very
nature of being conscious and the object, being unconscious by
its nature, becomes an object of awareness. If their invariable
relationship is explained in this way then wherein lies the
difference between the phenomenon of consciousness and its
object since they are the effects of the similar sets of conditions.32
Nyayamanjari
consciousness is representative. Is an external object an infer-
ence or an object of perception? It cannot be an inference since
no inferential knowledge is possible, the relation of invariable
concomitance being absent. What follows from the representa-
tive view of consciousness is that an idea remains devoid of
form when an object is not presented to it and assumes the form
of an object when an object is presented to it. But have those
who subscribe to the view that an external object is merely an
inference ever witnessed such formless consciousness (an empty
idea) ?
The other alternative suggestion that an external object is the
object of perception is not tenable since nobody is aware of the
two forms, viz., the form of an object and that of an idea.
Even if for the sake of an argument it is admitted that the two
forms are cognised, such a view will face the difficulty of being
involved in a regressus ad infinitum. As the form of an idea
is not cognised by a formless idea so the idea which cognises it
should have a form. The form of an idea will also be grasped
by another idea having a form and so on ad infinitum.
Again, an object is not grasped by a formless idea. In order
to transfer the form of an object to an idea the object should
surrender itself to the idea. Thus the object disappears and
the representative idea alone exists. The reality of a formless
object and the existence of an objectless idea being unthink-
able, another object, its substitute, should be postulated. This
object is also grasped. Therefore, there must be an idea to
grasp it. This object, too, will surely be merged in the idea in
order to transfer its form to it and so on ad infinitum. Thus, a
representative idea remains alone, having no corresponding ob-
ject. Hence, another object is to be postulated. Thus we see
that these assumptions will go on ad infinitum without a stop.
If the representative view of consciousness is accepted then the
subject-object-relation holding between an event of conscious-
ness and its object is determined by the relation of causality.
An object which generates an event of consciousness is re-
vealed by its effect consciousness. Such a solution being in
thorough agreement with the nature of things, stands above
criticism. The Naiyāyikas mean to say that among the condi-
tions of consciousness an object is only grasped by it owing to
the peculiar nature of the real objects. But this law holds good33
The view of the Mīmāṁsakas
only in cases of true perception but does not hold good in cases
of indirect knowledge such as inference, etc. The representative
view of consciousness is also open to these charges. These points
will be elaborately discussed later on. Even if we, for argu-
ment's sake, assume the representative view of consciousness
then pramâna cannot be distinct from pramiti (the result).
Therefore, the hypothesis in question is absolutely untenable.
The view of the Mimāṁsakas
Sabara holds that it is proper that those who hold that cons-
ciousness itself is pramāṇa but has no distinct result should be
surely refuted. But though he admits that consciousness itself is
pramāṇa yet he shows that the result, achieved by pramāṇa, is
distinct from pramāṇa, viz., cognizedness belonging to the ob-
ject of consciousness. This cognizedness is the mark by means
of which we infer consciousness. Consciousness is an act-a pro-
cess. All acts are inferred from their results. (Now, how do we
know that consciousness is an act?) The answer is that a know-
er cannot achieve a result if he does not perform an act. The
causes get themselves united in order to generate an impercep-
tible act. If it is not postulated then why do they unite without
a purpose? If they do not unite then a result cannot be produ-
ced. A cause bears a significant name only when it is related to
an act. A thing, supposed to be a cause, does not acquire the
title 'cause' but only passes by its old designation unless and un-
til it is related to an act. A man who runs after an effect
should not search for such a thing as is not a cause. Thus, if the
importance of an act be minimised then all the worldly trans-
actions would collapse. In fine, he adds that as the already
existent facts such as rice, water, fire, the cooking pot, etc., be-
come united with a view to performing the act of cooking which
was not yet existent so the soul, the sense-organ, the inner
organ and the independent object being united the act of perce-
ption (knowing directly an object) comes into being. The act of
consciousness is not directly known since an external object
outside the body of the knower is grasped by the sense-organ.
He implies that the act of awareness is not intuited since the
two forms (the form of an object and that of consciousness) are
not grasped. Though consciousness itself is not intuited yet itThe view of the Mimämsakas
only in cases of true perception but does not hold good in cases
of indirect knowledge such as inference, etc. The representative
view of consciousness is also open to these charges. These points
will be elaborately discussed later on. Even if we, for argu-
ment's sake, assume the representative view of consciousness
then pramăna cannot be distinct from pramiti (the result).
Therefore, the hypothesis in question is absolutely untenable.
33
The view of the Mimāṁsakas
Sabara holds that it is proper that those who hold that cons-
ciousness itself is pramāņa but has no distinct result should be
surely refuted. But though he admits that consciousness itself is
pramāṇa yet he shows that the result, achieved by pramana, is
distinct from pramâņa, viz., cognizedness belonging to the ob-
ject of consciousness. This cognizedness is the mark by means
of which we infer consciousness. Consciousness is an act-a pro-
cess. All acts are inferred from their results. (Now, how do we
know that consciousness is an act?) The answer is that a know-
er cannot achieve a result if he does not perform an act. The
causes get themselves united in order to generate an impercep-
tible act. If it is not postulated then why do they unite without
a purpose? If they do not unite then a result cannot be produ-
ced. A cause bears a significant name only when it is related to
an act. A thing, supposed to be a cause, does not acquire the
title 'cause' but only passes by its old designation unless and un-
til it is related to an act. A man who runs after an effect
should not search for such a thing as is not a cause, Thus, if the
importance of an act be minimised then all the worldly trans-
actions would collapse. In fine, he adds that as the already
existent facts such as rice, water, fire, the cooking pot, etc., be-
come united with a view to performing the act of cooking which
was not yet existent so the soul, the sense-organ, the inner
organ and the independent object being united the act of perce-
ption (knowing directly an object) comes into being. The act of
consciousness is not directly known since an external object
outside the body of the knower is grasped by the sense-organ.
He implies that the act of awareness is not intuited since the
two forms (the form of an object and that of consciousness) are
not grasped. Though consciousness itself is not intuited yet itNyāyamanjari
acts as a means to the awareness of an object like the invisible
sense-organ, viz., the eye, etc. Though consciousness itself is
not directly known yet it may be indirectly known by means of
its result, viz., cognizedness belonging to its object.
The actual words of the commentary of Sabara are as follows:
When an object remains unknown no body cares to know
whether a preceding act of consciousness exists. But when an
object is known the preceding act of consciousness is inferred.
Thus the view of Sabara has been faithfully represented.
It has also been stated by the author of Sloka-vārttika:- No
object is cognized if the act of consciousness does not precede
it. Cognizedness belonging to an object cannot be explained if
the preceding act of consciousness is not presumed. Afterwards,
to solve the apparent contradiction the proof is presumed.
(In other words Kumärila holds that presumption establishes the
existence of the act of consciousness. Both Sabara and Kumārila
hold that no body is directly aware of his consciuosness).
Jayanta puts the view of Sabara in a nut-shell. The act
of consciousness, denoted by the term 'consciousness,' is the
proof. It is an inference. The mark by means of which it is in-
ferred is cognizedness belonging to an object. The word 'con-
sciousness' may imply a sense-organ since a sense-organ produces
some forms of consciousness. The primary meaning of the word
'proof' is never a sense-organ. The purport of this view is that
consciousness alone is a proof which is always an inference, being
supersensuous. The proof in question brings about a result, viz.,
cognizedness belonging to an object. Though Sabara and the
Buddhists agree to the point that consciousness is the proof yet
they differ in certain respects. According to the Buddhists,
Pramāṇa and pramiti, are one and the same thing where as accord-
ing to Sabara pramiti, the result, is distinct from pramāņa.
34
The refutation of Mīmāṁsaka view
Jayanta joins issue with Sabara. He points out that it is
a matter of great regret that the learned Vedic scholars are
at their wit's end under the threat of hostile criticism from
some quarters. They arrive at a strange conclusion since all acts
of knowing are not mediate. The judgment ‘an object is known'
is an example cited by them. The perceptual judgment aThe Refutation of Mimāṁsaka view
cloth is white' presupposes the direct awareness of the colour
whiteness as its antecedent condition. Similarly, the perceptual
judgment an object is known' should also presuppose the direct
awareness of the awareness of the object as its antecedent condi-
tion. Why do you get nervous to speak out the verdict of your
experience? If you hold that the perception of an external ob-
ject reveals only the object and that perception is not self-
conscious, then the Buddhists who deny existence to the external
objects may only be defeated.
35
The view of the Mimämsakas that consciousness is not
directly introspected because it is an act is not tenable. They
assume a wrong hypothesis that knowing is an act whereas it is
an effect partaking of the nature of a result. Moreover, an
act belonging to a perceptible substance is directly perceived.
According to the Bhaṭṭas, the soul is directly intuited. But the
act, belonging to the soul, they say, is not directly introspected.
Has it committed an offence? What is the offence of an act of
knowledge that it transcends introspection? Now, they may
contend that a supersensuous act belongs to the perceptible
causes, over and above physical motion admitting of such
-divisions as upward motion etc. But this view is not tenable.
Is this act eternal like a universal or non-eternal property
of a substance like colour ? If it is eternal then its result
should be ever present since an act always inheres in the
substance. If the second alternative is accepted then an act is to
be accomplished by a cause. Another act should also inhere in
the cause when the cause brings about the act in question and
so on ad infinitum. If it is held that an act is produced by a
cause, devoid of an act then it is more logical to suppose that
the causes in which no act inheres, bring about the so-called
result of an act. An act has nothing to do.
Now it is contended that the word 'bâraka' directly points to
an act and that a substance does not acquire causal
efficiency if an act does not inhere in it. It is true that
etymological meaning of the word 'hāraka' is that what
does something. But it may be argued that it does not
bring about an act but only a result. This argument is met
thus. The verb 'to do' included in the body of the word
'Kāraka', directly points to an act. In the sentence 'Caitra36
Nyājamañjari
weaves (Karoti) a mat' every word denotes a distinct object.
The nouns 'Caitra' and 'mat' denote two distinct things. Simi-
larly, the distinct meaning of the verb 'weaves (Karoti) can-
not be ignored. It is nothing but an act. Caitra and a mat
become cases because of their direct relation with this act. A
reply to the counter-argument is as follows. A thing does be-
come a case because of its connection with a supersensuous act
since the act being transcendental no body can see a thing as
a case. The detection of the case-character of an object implies
the direct awareness of the connection of the act with itself. If
we cannot recognize a case to be such then all our transactions
with cases should be impossible. How can a man, desirous of a
result, make an attempt at procuring a suitable cause (a case
in grammar) to serve his purpose since the case-character of a
thing bound up with the connection with an act remaining
ever unknown ?
Jayanta holds that according to him the character of
a Kāraka (a case) is not supersensuous. The case-character
of a thing means the assemblage of all essential conditions.
(When a thing enters into a specific relation with an act it is
called a Kāraka (a case-the producer of an act). In order to
generate an act it requires the assistance of some other conditions.
When all the conditions assemble in order to make the thing
fit for generating the act in question it acquires the character
of a case. The persons, desirous of a result ascertaining all these
points get hold of the favourable conditions and derive the
intended result.
The Mimamsakas contend that if a thing does not possess an
act then no conditions can help it. (In other words, if consci-
ousness is not an act but a mere result then the co-operation of
conditions is useless). The Naiyāyikas meet this argument
thus:-If a thing possesses an act then the co-operation of con-
ditions is not needed to produce the act and thereby the result.
Now, the Mimärsakas further contend that the thing, com-
bined with the conditions, produces the act in question. The
Naiyāyikas give a reply to them. They hold 'Has the result
offended against you? Why do you not accept that the
result is directly produced by the joint effort of the thing in
question and its co-operating conditions ?"The Refutation of Mimamsaka View
37
The Mimamsakas have already raised the point that the
meaning of a verb cannot be ignored. A reply to this point is
as follows: The meaning of the verb 'to do' is the act of a
material object. It is virtually motion. We do not deny exis-
tence to motion which is visible to all. In every case we
perceive various acts like the burning of fire, etc. But we deny
existence to an imperceptible act. The Mimāmsakas further
contend that the verb 'to cook' has a meaning which should be
taken as something different from the act of burning, etc.,
since without its assumption the final result, viz., boiling can
never be obtained. If existence is denied to it then what for
will these cases combine? Such a contention does not carry
much weight. The purport of the contention is that the cases
produce the act in question. Now two questions arise viz. (1)
Do the cases jointly generate it? or (2) Does a case singly
produce it?
If the Mimamsakas answer the first question in the affirmative
then it should be admitted that each does not singly generate
it. Now, if each individual case by itself is not capable of pro-
ducing the act in question then how will the cases do it when
they combine? If they answer the second question in the affir-
mative then any one of the cases may generate it without re-
ceiving co-operation from other cases. In that case, the act,
the meaning of the verb 'to cook', does not constitute the end
for the realisation of which the cases combine.
When do the cases combine? Does the act come first and
does the combination of cases follow it? Or does such a combi-
nation come first and does the act follow it?; If the act precedes
the combination in question then what is the good of admitt-
ing it? If it is admitted that there is no need of combination
then the result would also be brought about by them even
when they stand disunited. If they hold that the cases jointly
produce the act in question then they will have to admit that
none of them singly possesses an act. If it is admitted then an
absurd conclusion will be forced on them that the fuel will not
burn unless and until it is combined with the cooking pot. (a
case stands for a condition).
Faggots burn but do not cook. (The Mimaṁsakas mean to
say that when the cases combine they produce an
act which isNyayamanjari
other than motion). This contention is not tenable. The said
faggots burn alike when they are either combined with the
cooking pot or remain alone. The cases assemble together not
with a view to bringing about a distinct act but a result. Now,
what is the nature of this result? Is it Independent of our will ?
Or, is it a creature of our will? (What we can either make or un-
make or transform according to our sweet will is called sådhya.
Any object the nature of which we can neither make nor unmake
nor transform according to our sweet will is called siddha.) If
the result is independent of our will then what will be the
nature of the combination of all independent objects? The free
combination of cases cannot take place if the result is deter-
mined. The Naiyãyikas should say that the result is not inde-
pendent of our will but a creature of our will (sādhya). Now,
if they accept this interpretation of the result then the result is
nothing but an act. In the above example, the act in question
is that of cooking which is other than motion.
(The Naiyāyikas join issue with them and point out then the
above conclusion is not tenable.) Do not say so. A result can-
not be an act. In the above case, the result is boiled rice. It is
certainly not an act. If you say that the word 'paka' is
synonymous with the word 'Odana' then we have no quarrel
with you. The Mimāṁsakas further put a question
to the
Naiyāyikas. What is the meaning of the verb 'to cook'? If an
act is not its meaning, then the verb will have nothing to
denote. (In an indirect manner they suggest that the act of
cooking is distinct from motion).
A reply to this contention is being given thus :-
The combined motions of all cases assembled together such
as the nominative case Devadatta and others directed towards a
common result constitute the act of cooking. This is the mean-
ing of the verb 'to cook'. In the above example each case has
its distinct act, c.g., the fuel burns, the pot sustains the content,
etc. We also experience each of these acts as distinct. But when
these acts combine to bring about the common result, we over-
look their individual character and consider the collection of
verbs as a single verb. This single verb is the verb 'to cook'.
Several sages also confirm our conclusion. The people say
'Devadatta cooks' 'fuels cook', 'the pot cooks' and so on. The
38The Refutation of Mimamsaka View
39
Mimāṁsakas point out a defect in the above conclusion. If this
is so then why do not the people say that the soul cooks? They
mean to say what actually happens when Devadatta cooks. He
moves the ladle.
The movement of his body and limbs is due
to the activity of the soul since the body is static by its very
nature. The final source of activity being the soul, the sentence
'the soul cooks' should have been noticed if movement is the
only act. (Jayanta meets this objection). The sentence 'he
cooks' cannot be framed since the soul is the unmoved mover,
The soul has no activity. It has the qualities of desire and
aversion. They are the springs of volition which is also a quality.
Volition causes motion in the material object.
III
In fine, we beg to state that the motion of the cases (i.e.
conditions) brings about the result. No activity other than
motion is witnessed. Mation is noticed in Devadatta, the
nominative case and also in other cases. After a series of motions
the result, viz., boiled rice, comes into being. This much is
noticed. No other act is experienced. The Mimāṁsakas hold
that the soul has a distinct activity which is called bhāvanā.
The verb 'to do' denotes it. (The literal meaning of bhāvanā is
making something). Every sentence reveals it as its primary
meaning. Such a view is also refuted by an argument mention-
ed in the above paragraph. No activity of the soul is noticed.
The soul is no doubt, an agent. Its agency does not depend
upon its activity. A soul becomes an agent when the quality of
Kṛti (volition) inheres in it. Consciousness and other similar
inner states of the soul are attributes but not acts since they
are not creatures of our will. The Mimimsakas put forward a
counter-thesis. They argue like this 'To know' is a verb. There-
fore, to know denotes an action. This action, as a matter of
fact, belongs to the soul. This counter-thesis does not stand to
reasons. There is no hard and fast rule that all verbs denote
actions. The verb 'gadi' which is included in the classical list
of verbs denotes a portion of a face. Let us analyse the sentence
'I know a jar' and see what is revealed by it. A jar denotes theNyayamanjari
object of knowledge. 'I' stands for the the soul, what does the
verb 'know' convey? Does it denote an act since it is super-
sensuous ex-hypothesis. If it is held that the result of the action
is presented to consciousness then the result itself should be
denoted by the verb 'to know.' Therefore, consciousness is not
an act. If consciousness were an act then the commen-
tator on the Mimāṁsā sūtras should not have separately men-
tioned consciousness and an act. He states that as consciousness
and an act are also recognized so they should be eternal.
The drift of the above statement is that consciousness does not
belong to the class of acts. The view that consciousness is
transcendental, being an action, is not sound. Moreover, if it
is held that consciousness is an act then it cannot be inferred
since the major premise is impossible to frame. A positive
example being absent, an induction is impossible. An act being
imperceptible, the example, viz., an object of knowledge in the
shape of an external object as qualified by an act, is an
absurdity. The Mīmāṁsakas put a question to the Naiyāyikas,
viz., 'How do you account for your inference of the soul?'
(The purport of this question is that if you infer the existence of
the soul without citing a positive example then why should not
we be allowed to infer consciousness in a similar manner?)
Such a plea is not tenable. When an induction is based
upon similarity a positive example is indispensable but if
it is based upon other grounds such as a universal then a
positive example is not necessary. The syllogistic argument of
the soul will be discussed in a subsequent section. The external
objects do not contain the character of cognisedness when they
are known. We have already stated that no body has witnessed
cognisedness belonging to an external object. Presumption also
cannot prove the existence of consciousness which partakes of
the nature of an act. An object is immediately known when-
ever it comes into contact with the sense-organ. The awareness
of an awareness follows the perception of an object in quick
succession. Hence, the means of the proof of self-consciousness
belonging to an object. Or, is it an objective illumination ?
The first suggestion is not tenable. The act of perception is
transcendental. When an object is perceived how can a person
grasp it as an object of the act of perception? We cannot frame
40The Refutation of Mimamsaka View
a judgment if we do not know the predicate before. Similarly,
we cannot frame the judgment that this is the object of percep-
tion if we are not beforehand aware of the perception in
question. The second suggestion of objective illumination is not
also tenable. If an object is known because of its own property
then all beings would be omniscient with the least effort on
their part since an object reveals itself without any reference to
the self. The Mimamsakas contend that an object does not
reveal itself because of its own property but its illumination is
conditioned by its relation to a subject. This suggestion of
condition is not tenable. A lamp by its own nature reveals an
object but does not depend upon the subject. Similarly, an
object by its own property becomes revealed and the subject has
nothing to do. Therefore the view that the illumination of an
object is conditioned by its relation to a subject does not hold
good. (The self contributes nothing towards the illumination of
an object.)
(Now, the Mimamsakas may further contend that as the
number two is the property of an object but is not perceived by
all so the objective illumination is not grasped by all.) The
so-called illumination belonging to an object as its property does
not bear a resemblance to the number 'two' etc. Since the
number 'two' is perceived only by him whose copulative judg-
ment referring to the two units of number produces it. But the
above law of perception does not apply to the case of the
illumination which belongs to an object as its property.
The number 'two' is only perceived by him whose copulative
judgment referring to the units of number produces it. Now,
which is held by the learned logicians to be the locus of illumi-
nation ?
If illumination is a process of the subject then it requires
another activity of the subject in order to be perceived since an
inactive cause can produce no result.
The Nyaya view on this point has been already stated that
illumination (samvedana) is a quality of the soul. You may
hold that it is mental activity in accordance with your system.
But we hold that Jñana and samvedanã are two synonyms.
We do not subscribe to the view that samvedana (illumi-
41Nyayamanjari
nation) is the result of the knowing process since if it belongs
to an object then every body should be omniscient.
(In order to explain a fact, viz., illumination of an object,
we presume the existence of knowing process.) If the object is
the seat of samvedana there would be no difference of opinion
between Sabara and Kumārila. A knowing process would be no
more an inference but a presumption. If both the subject and
the object are held to be the seats of samvedana then the two
defects vitiate the view, viz., the obliteration of the difference in
view between Sabara and Kumārila and the omniscience of all.
42
If samvedana is a mental process which belongs to the subject
then it will also be transcendental like consciousness. In that
case, samvedana itself should be an inference. It cannot be
the mark of inference of a knowing process. If another act of
samvedana is required to reveal it then a regressus ad infinitum
will be forced on them since each act of samvedana is transcen-
dental.
The alternative possible suggestion that samvedana is self-
luminous will be refuted later on. A judgment of perceptual
illusion that this is silver is due to the combination of appre-
hension and mutilated memory. This is apprehended and the
universal of silver is remembered. The possibility of the judg-
ment lies in this that apprehension and memory are not
distinguished from each other. If samvedana, the result of
knowing process, is self-luminous then the result of an appre-
hension will be grasped as it is in itself and that of memory
will also be grasped as it is in itself. In that case, the difference
between apprehension and memory will be clearly grasped.
Thus the ground which makes the appearance of an illusory
judgment possible will be cut off.
How can you explain that the result of the knowing process
is self-luminous since it does neither reveal itself as a form of
apprehension nor as a form of memory?
As there is no possibility of the third alternative so how can
the result of knowing process be revealed? No body has ever
experienced a case of illumination which lacks its distinctive
feature.
An awareness reveals itself as an act of awareness and an
object is grasped as an object. An awareness is never misidenti-The Refutation of Mimāṁsaka View
fied with its object. They are presented to our consciousness as
distinct from each other. Now, if you hold that consciousness is
self-luminous and when it reveals itself it assumes the form of its
object then you really conceal the nature of objects like the
Buddhists.
43
If you hold that consciousness is self-luminous then the view
that samvedana (the illumination of an object belonging to it)
is the result of knowing process is untenable.
In fine, we beg to state that the knowing process which is
inferred by means of its result as a mark is not a means of proof.
Some other logicians hold that a means of proof is such as is
a special cause of true knowledge and does not reveal an
apprehended object. This view is not tenable. There is no
difference in the nature of the means of proof either if it
produces such true knowledge as reveals a novel object or if it
produces such true knowledge as reveals an apprehended object.
When a means of proof is directed towards an object already
apprehended which effect is produced by it? The answer is that
it produces true knowledge. Does it repeat the same true know-
ledge as has been produced by it? In that case, the answer is
absurd since what has been produced cannot be reproduced.
No, it produces a fresh piece of true knowledge (though it reveals
one and the same object). Does it serve any purpose, produc-
ing a fresh piece of similar true knowledge? Yes, it discharges
its casual efficiency by producing another piece of true know-
ledge. The question of purpose does not affect a tangible result.
A means of proof does not take into consideration the question
of utility. Whom are you going to take to task? A means of
proof is an inanimate object. Can it be an object of lebuke?
When an object perceived before comes within the range of
vision of a man and becomes connected with his sense-organ
(eyes) the perception of it, the above object, takes place. Do
you make a formal complaint against him to this effect? Why
do you not shut up your eyes? Why do you look at things
already perceived by you? As the means of proof does not
produce in this case such true knowledge as is subsequently
contradicted so it cannot cease to be a means of proof. Do not
think that means of proof absolutely renders useless services
when it produces true knowledge of an apprehended object?46
Nyayamanjari
inference exists at the time of inference. Therefore, an inferen-
tial knowledge is conditioned by its real and existent object.
How do you account for the origin of the mental perception in
the form that one's brother will turn up to-morrow due to the
causality of its existent object? The answer is that the object
of the perception in question is his brother who lives in a dis-
tant country. He is qualified by the future act of coming which
will take place tomorrow. He also knows this predicate, pro-
duces the perception in question. Therefore the pure mental
perception (pratibhā) is not an exception to the above rule.
But, in case of memory, its object is not thought of as
its conditions. Take the example of the memory of a son of his
dead father. The father is dead and gone and his body has been
consumed by fire. There is no trace of his existence. Still, he is
easily recalled. Though the object is non-existent yet memory
takes place. Therefore, memory is not conditioned by its ob-
ject. Even when the object of memory exists in a distant
country the existence of the object is not considered as an in-
variable condition of memory. Hence, an object of memory
does not condition it.
one of
If memory is excluded from true knowledge because of its
being not conditioned by its object then the definition of a
means of proof should not be qualified by the phrase 'not pro-
ductive of such true knowledge as grasps a known object.'
Moreover, Jaimini himself has stated that verbal testimony is a
valid source of knowledge only when it produces such a know-
ledge which reveals new matter, not known before. But why
do you overdo by an extension of the application of this test to
all cases of means of proof?
An Examination of other definitions of Pramana
Some other Buddhists hold that Pramāņa is broadly defined
to be such as does not baffle movement. A means of proof is
that which does not frustrate the movement of a knower. The
negative predicate has a positive meaning. It signifies what
leads to the attainment of the object revealed by apprehension.
How does a pramana help us to get hold of an object? It re-
veals an object. This revelation sets up movement in the know-
er either to get hold of an object which is conducive to pleasure47
Appraisal of definitions of Pramāņa
or to refrain from an object which is a source of pain. A man
attains an object when he moves for it, being prompted by its
illumination. The connecting link between a means of proof
and the attainment of its object is a process of the former, viz.,
the revelation of the object.
The knower attains the object but the people think that the
means of proof causes him to attain it because it shows the
object to him. A parallel case may be cited. The people say
that the king robs a man of his property though his soldiers
actually do the act of his instance. Here the pronouncement of
an order amounts to the actual commitment of an act. The
character of a means of proof is its capacity for leading to the
attainment of an object, shown by itself, is called a means of
proof. Both perception and inference partake of the character
of leading to successful attainment. Hence the broad definition
of a means of proof is sound. The object of pure sense-percep-
tion is real and exclusively particular. It is very shortlived and
endures a moment only. Though it is impossible to attain it
yet a phenomenon of its series is attained. Hence the mean-
ing of 'leading to successful attainment' is the production of
determinate perception which refers to a number of a series of
objects similar to that of the basic pure sense perception.
Though the object of an inference is always a creature of
imagination yet the imagination being based upon the solid
rock of the unbroken succession of real objects, a man attains a
real object under the guidance of an inferential knowledge. A
familiar example will explain our contention. A man mistakes
the rays of a gem for a gem. If he proceeds to have it even
under the guidance of illusion, be attains a gem. Similarly, a
man proceeding to get hold of an imaginary object under the
direction of inference attains a real object. In fine, a means of
proof is what leads to the attainment of an object of determinate
knowledge. Though the object of determinate knowledge is un-
real yet the source of imagination being real, a real object is
attained. Hence, the hypothesis that a means of proof leads to
the attainment of the object of determinate knowledge is proved.
Therefore, a judgment such as the conch-shell is yellow, etc.
is not true though a man who proceeds to attain the object re-
ferred to by the above illusory judgment gets conch-shell since48
Nyayamanjari
he does not attain the object as revealed by the judgment. The
judgment reveals a yellow conch-shell but a white conch shell
is attained. Therefore the non-frustration of a means of proof
signifies that a means of proof successfully leads to the attain-
ment of an object as revealed by the judgment, the spring of
action.
This view is not sound. Jayanta asks the Buddhists to answer
a question, viz., "Does a means of proof lead to the attainment
of an object of pure sense-perception? Or, 'Does it lead to the
attainment of an object of a judgement ?' An inference is not
directly based upon sense-perception. Hence, it is an idle talk
to hold that inference leads to the attainment of an object of
sense-perception. In case of perception-an object is surely
revealed but is never attained since it endures only for a Kṣaṇa
(the minutest unit of time). Again, the object of a judgment
is hardly attained. The Buddhists themselves admit that the
object of a judgment is not a real one and that an unreal ob-
ject is hard to attain. They hold that when imagination im-
poses superstructure upon reality the object imagined is unreal
and that the object upon which imagination does not prevail is
real. A man may accidentally attain a real object. But it is
never an object of perception and inference. Hence, a knower
can never attain it, moving in accordance with the direction
of any means of proof.
Now, the Buddhists may contend that the attainment of a
member in the series of the real object is as good as the attainment
of a real object. Such a contention is not tenable. The hypo-
thesis of a series is not established since the dilemma whether
the series is identical with the individuals included in it or not
cannot be perfectly solved by them. This hypothesis will be cla-
borately refuted in the chapter on the refutation of the uni-
versal flux.
The followers of the Buddhist Idealism contend thus :-
Well, it is admitted that a series has only an imaginary exist-
ence. The above definition of a means of proof does not suffer
from a defect since it applies only to the world constructed by
Nescience. Nescience alone solves all the difficulties which be-
set the definition. It has been actually stated by them that it is
a definition of the means of proof which holds good only in theAppraisal of definition of Pramāṇa
- conventional world. From the metaphysical point of view the
external world has no real existence. Reality behind it is con-
sciousness. Everything in this universe is essentially conscious-
ness. The distinction between the knower and the known is a
creation of Nescience. If we look at the world from the point of
view of reality then there are no such things as the means to
attainment and the attained. This is the essence of the Budd-
hist doctrine. Such a view does not stand a severe scrutiny of
reason. It exhibits only an attitude of escapism. What is this
Nescience? Is it real or unreal? The causality of Nescience
should not be invoked to explain anything unless and until its
nature and character are not defined. The world of differences
does not owe its existence to the impressions due to Nescience.
But it will be established that the world of differences is abso-
lutely real. If you accept the imaginary existence of a series
then why do you not assume the imaginary objects such as uni-
versals, wholes, etc. If you urge that the latter objects should
be assumed because such suppositions involve a number of in-
soluble problems such as the problem of relation, etc. then a
reply to this argumentation is that the conjecture of a series is
open to the same charges. They are simply hoping against
hopes. Hence the definition of a means of proof in the form that
what leads to the attainment of an object revealed by percep-
tion is a means of proof is absurd. It is no definition at all.
Moreover, this definition is too narrow to cover all cases of
valid knowledge. It does not apply to such true knowledge the
object of which arouses in our mind a feeling of indifference.
What is this negligible object? It is such an object after
which nobody strives since it is simply neglected. In that case,
it should be included in the class of such objects as are to be
avoided. Such a view is not reasonable. An object of neglect is
experienced by us all with a peculiar trait of its own. It cannot
be discarded.
The objects which should be avoided are sources of pain.
The objects which are worth-having are conducive to pleasure.
A man carefully avoids the former and receives the latter. Our
attitudes towards avoidable and acceptable objects are well-
established. In case of indifferent objects which are neither
received nor avoided a distinct feeling is expecriened by us.
4950
Nyayamanjari
Our experience is the only source of its existence. When an ob-
ject worth having is perceived by us we feel an attraction for
it. On the other hand when we behold an avoidable object we
feel hatred for it. But when we see a negligible object we
neither like it nor hate it.
The Buddhists may urge that a negligible object is an avoid-
able object since it is not worth having. But there is no sanc-
tion of reason behind it. We cannot hold a thesis like this that
a sexually undeveloped person is a male because he is not a
female or that he is a female because he is not a male. A neuter
person is one who is neither a male nor a female since he is
known to us to be such. Similarly, a negligible object is neither
attainable nor avoidable since it is experienced by us to be
such.
When a man passes through a road a tuft of grass or a leaf
is presented to his consciousness. He neither feels inclined to
receive it like an umbrella nor wishes to avoid it like a snake.
But he feels an attitude of indifference towards it. Therefore,
the definition of a means of proof that what is conducive to the
attainment of an object is a means of proof is not sound since
the perception of a negligible object is also true though it is not
conducive to its attainment. The Buddhists may urge that the
perception of a negligible object is a means of proof though it is
not conducive to the attainment of the object and that it is so
since it has a function like a means of proof, being not itself
conducive to the attainment of an object. It is stated that a
king is known as a slayer though he simply issues an order of
capital punishment. Similarly, a piece of true knowledge may
be simply called as conducive to the attainment of an object
when it simply reveals an object.
Such a conclusion is not tenable.
If the definition of true knowledge is only confined within
the accincts of its power of revealing its object then it will be
too wide since this definition also makes room for the illusory
experience of water on the locus of the bright rays of the sun,
i.e., a mirage as it reveals its object.
Now, the Buddhists contend that in the case of illusion the
object of the buic sense perception is the real ray of the sun
but it produces a judgment which reveals an imaginary object,Appraisal of definition of Pramana
viz., water. Hence, it turns out to be false as it produces a con-
trary judgment. One and the same means of perception has three
different functions as it produces three distinct results, viz., it
reveals a true object and produces a judgment which stirs up
activity to get hold of the object and also reveals what is in-
variably connected with the object e.g. transitoriness but does not
become a means of proof of the perception of transitoriness as it
does not produce a subsequent judgment. A piece of knowledge
which does not reveal a particular aspect of an object is not a
means of proof of it. Let us take an example. When we perceive
a blue object the perception of a blue object is the means of
proof of it since the above perception produces a judgment re-
ferring to the blue object.
51
Every real object of the universe is momentary and hence
the blue object is momentary. The transitoriness of an object is
its essence. It is not distinct from the object itself. It is also
grasped when the object is perceived. But the perception of the
blue object in question is not a means of proof of its momenta-
riness, since the perception of it does not produce a judgment
which points to its transitoriness. But the judgment reveals the
blue object as an endurable one. But the continuity of the blue
-object is merely imaginary. Hence, the imaginary element
contributes to the untruth of the judgment. Thus, the sense-
perception of the blue object is not a means of proof of its
persistence. This is the sum and substance of the revised thesis
of a section of the Buddhists.
If you amend your definition in this manner then the de-
finition of the means of proof involves much more defects. You
have stated that a means of proof leads to the attainment of an
object by means of a process, viz., a judgment. Hence, as the
perception of an individual ray of the sun is not a means of
proof because of its production of a judgment referring to a
contrary object so the perception of an individual should not
be a means of proof because of its production of a judgment
pointing to a series which is contrarily opposed to that of the
true object. If the judgment points to an imaginary series why
does the knower move for the attainment of the object of
perception knowing full well that the object cannot be attained,
being momentary? If it is further contended that the knower52
Nyāyamanjari
moves to attain the object because he has wrongly identified the
individual object with the imaginary series when it should be
acknowledged that an illusion leads to the attainment of an
object. In that case, such a perception is not a means of proof.
Therefore, a means of proof is not conducive to the attain-
ment of an object. Moreover, the attainment or the non-
attainment of an object entirely depends upon the desire of a
person. The awareness of an object is the only product of a
means of proof. Therefore, in order to frame the definition of a
means of proof the character of knowledge, its product, should
be accurately specified. In fine, it is reasonable to hold that the
essence of a means of proof does not lie in its conduciveness to
the attainment of an object.
An examination of the definition of Perception of the Samkhya School
The Samkhyists also hold that the mode of intellect is a
means of proof. When an object comes within the range of our
sense-organ a change takes place in it (sense-organ). It catches
the form of the object in question. This image of the object,
seized by the sense-organ, exerts influence upon the Intellect.
The Intellect also transforms itself into a similar image of the
Intellect. This mode of Intellect attributing itself to transcen-
dental consciousness (Purușa) as its property is a means of
proof. Transcendental consciousness, possessing attribution of
Intellect, becomes the knower of a definite object fixed up by
Intellect. The mode of Intellect which is called cognition or
apprehension or determinate knowledge is unconscious since it
is a property of unconscious Intellect. Its result is the revela-
tion of an object. It does not belong to Intellect. Cognition or
apprehension or determinate knowledge is not a property of
him who reveals an object. Therefore there is no co-ordination
between a cause and its result. A means of proof-the mode of
Intellect does not belong to Transcendental consciousness since
the means of proof is such as possesses cognition or apprehen-
sion or determinate knowledge as its property. The result of a
means of proof is the revelation of an object. It does not be-
long to Intellect.
The Simkhyists may contend that when Intellect evolves
modes become very transparent. Puruşa, stainless by its veryDivision of Pramāṇa
53
nature is reflected into serene Intellect and as a result of
this reflection, the revelation of an object which is a property
of Intellect is ascribed to transcendental consciousness and
intellect appears to be conscious. If you stick to this position
then your very statement contradicts your own tenet. The pro-
perty of Purușa does not really belong to intellect and viceversa.
Your hypothesis is not different from that of representative
consciousness of the Buddhists. The refutation of the Buddhist
hypothesis amounts to that of your hypothesis.
All the details of the system of Kapila will be elaborately
refuted in the subsequent section. Here, we only point out that
if one follows his system he will fail to find a means of proof
in it.
We summarily remark that the other definitions of a means
of proof framed by the other system-makers suffer from defects.
For this very reason those who belong to our camp hold that
the assemblage of conditions such as defectless eyes, etc., is a
means of proof since it is the cause of true knowledge.
The definition and division of Pramāņa
The means of proof, stated above, admits of four kinds. The
author of Nyaya-sutra says to this effect 'Perception, Inference,
Comparison and Verbal testimony are the means of proof. In
this sūtra, the name and division of the subject-matter have
been given. In this context, the definition of the general
subject-matter, its division, the definitions of its specified forms
should be given. The next four sûtras which discuss the defini-
tions at the four sub-classes of pramâņa are as follows
*Indriyartha-sannikarşotpannam, etc. (arisen from the contact of
the sense-organs with their objects etc.) In this sutra the
general definition of Pramāṇa and its division have been given.
By the single sutra the great sage has realised two ends viz. he
has mentioned the four divisions of Pramana and the general
definition of Pramāņa.
The term 'Pramana' in close proximity of the terms
Pratyakṣa (Perception), Anumana (Inference), Upamâna
(Comparison) and Sabda (Verbal Testimony) points to the
fourfold division of Pramāņa (means of proof). But no term
denoting the number 'four' is given there. Moreover, there isNyayamanjari
no such term as 'only' is noticed to indicate the restriction
imposed upon the number of the division of the means of proof.
In that case, how do we know that the division is exhaustive
and complete ? Our answer to this question is that the number
is indicated by the very meaning of the terms themselves like
the sentence 'Feed three persons of the Garga family'; the
sentence 'Bring Yajñadatta and Devadatta' purports to convey
that only two persons are to be brought though there are no
terms to indicate the number and the exclusion of the other
number. Similarly, if it is stated that Perception, Inference,
Comparison and Verbal Testimony are the means of proof
then these very names by the force of their meaning suggest the
exact character of the intended division, i.e., they are only four
neither more nor less. Thus from the very name of the species
we understand the suggested division. The etymological mean-
ing of the term 'pramāṇa' supplies us with the definition of
Pramāṇa pointing to its general feature. The cause par
excellence of true knowledge is called Pramana. The suffix
attached to the root of 'Pramāṇa' denotes the sense of an instru-
ment. Thus the cause of Pramā (true knowledge) is Pramāņa.
It has been shown before. The sutra which embodies the
definition of Upamāna (comparison) containing the term 'sādhya-
sādhana' in the middle suggests by a linguistic device that
'sādhya-sadhana' (sadhyapramã-true knowledge) (sādhana-
karaṇa-a cause-the cause of true knowledge) is the common
character of all sorts of means of proof. The net result is that a
cause of true knowledge is a means of proof. If a cause of
knowledge produces such a judgment as is partly true and
partly false then it may be as well a means of proof. In order
to meet the anticipated difficulty three terms such as arthot-
pannam (caused by the real object of knowledge), avyabhicāri
(non-illusory) and vyavasãyätmakam (determinate) should be
borrowed from the sutra on perception and combined into the
other sūtras defining the other types of means of proof so that
the causes of memory, illusion and doubt are excluded from all
classes of means of proof. Thus, the above three terms become
the common factors of all the four sutras which define the four
different types of means of proof.
The term 'arthotpanna' (owing its origin to a real object)
54Division of Promāņa
prevents the cause of memory from being a means of proof. The
terms 'avyabhicari' excludes the source of illusion from being a
means of proof. The term 'Vyavasãyātmakam' shuts out the
cause of a doubt from the list of means of proof. This, the
boiled down meaning of the whole thing amounts to this that a
means of proof is the cause of such knowledge as is generated
by a real object, is not doubtful and is not illusory. Thus we
get the definition of a means of proof in its generic character
and the division of it from a single sútra.
If a single sutra serves two independent purposes, viz., the
division of pramāṇa and definition of pramana in its generic
character then a defect in the use of a sentence is noticed. A
sentence should convey a single meaning. But if it communi-
cates two meanings then it really splits itself up into two
sentences. A sentence represents a unit of thought. It should
not represent two. If it does so it violates the fundamental rule
of the use of a sentence. The sutra of Gautama suffers from this
defect.
55
A reply to this is as follows: A sutra is immune from this
defect since it is an agreed assumption that a sūtra may point
to more than one meaning either by its consistent terms them-
selves or by their meanings.
When a matter is known only by the means of verbal
testimony to the exclusion of other means of proof the sentence
which expresses it should have only one meaning. If it signifies
two meanings then and then only the charge of the bifurcation
of the single unit of thought into the two units of thought etc.
invalidates the truth of the sentence. In such cases only a
sentence should never convey two meanings.
Let us take an example. The Vedic injunction is: 'A person,
desirous of kingdom in the Heaven, should perform the Vája-
peya sacrifice'. This injunction is an illusion of Utpatti Vidhi
which simply narrates the name of a sacrifice. If we try to ex-
tract two meanings from it then it will shape itself as a case of
guna-vidhi as well. A guṇavidhi significs merely a guņa (a
subsidiary element) of the main action already enjoined by a
precious injunction. The second meaning of the injunction in
question amounts to this that a sacrifice should be performed
in order to attain Heaven and that wine should be the most im-Nyayamanjari
portant article to be used in this sacrifice. Thus the one sen-
tence has two incongruous meanings. According to the first one
the action enjoined by this sacrifice is completely a new one.
But, on the other hand, according to the second one the action
enjoined is merely a repetition and so on. It is impossible on
the part of a sentence to yield such two incongruous meanings.
But the precious sūtras ingeniously indicate a lot of meanings
which have been already determined by the different sources
of knowledge. But it is a glorious feat on the part of the sutras
that they yield manifold meanings. Such a feat should not be
condemned as defective. It is called a sutra because it indicates
many a meaning. This is really an excellent device adopted
by the authors of the sutras that they give the readers to under-
stand a good deal of things by means of a single sentence con-
taining a minimum number of syllables. The device, adopted
by them to indicate so many meanings, is as follows:--the
filling up of the understood, the use of one to serve multiple
purposes and repetition of a word. The sutras follow a set of
rules to convey so many meanings. There is nothing faulty
about them.
56
There is no such rule as determines the priority of treatment
with regard to the division of genus and its definition. But there
is a rule that the definition of the species must follow the divi-
sion of its genus and its definition. A single sūtra may simul-
taneously discharge both functions, viz., division and definition
by means of tantra (serving many a purpose).
The definition of a species is not possible if the corresponding
genus remains undefined. But we may divide a genus into
species and define it as we like. We may at first divide it into
species and then define it. Or, we may at the outset, define it
and then divide it into species as in the case of Siddhanta
(tenet) and chala (wrangling). Or, we may simultaneously
define it and divide it into species. In order to do it if the
device of tantra (serving many purposes be one and the same
thing) or the device of avṛtti (the repetition of something) is
adopted then it suffers from no defect.
in objection to the division of Pramāras
Let us now postpone the consideration of devices, viz., tan-57
Division of Pramanas: Buddhist hypothesis
tratā (the use of the same sutra to serve multiple purposes) and
âvṛtti (the repetition of the same word) adopted in the sutra
in question to indicate the number of the means of proof since
the logicians of the rival schools do not agree to the point
that the number of the means of proof is four. It will be esta-
blished that the number of the means of proof is exactly four
when it will be proved to the hilt that their number is neither
more nor less. But it is difficult to prove the above thesis.
There are many hypotheses on the point at issue. The Cārvākas
(materialists) hold that perception is the only source of know-
ledge. The Buddhists assert that there are only two sources of
knowledge, viz., perception and inference. The Samkhyists
subscribe to the view that the three means of proof viz. percep-
tion, inference and verbal testimony should only be admitted.
The Mimamsakas and others arrive at a conclusion that the
number of the means of proof is more than four. How do you
come to the conclusion that the means of proof only admits of
fourfold division? A reply to this question is as follows. We shall
refute later on the view of the Carvãkas when the validity of an
inference will be discussed. We shall point out the difference of
the verbal testimony from inference when we shall subsequently
define verbal testimony. Hence the Buddhists do not follow the
right path.
The Buddhist hypothesis of two-fold Division of Pramāṇas
The Buddhists refuse to accept the Nyâya thesis. They hold
that the means of proof admits only of two kinds since the
knowable objects are only of two types and the difference in the
type of knowable objects alone accounts for the variety of the
means of proof.
The objects are two-fold, viz., perceptible and imperceptible
or exclusively particular and universal. As those two objects
mutually exclude each other so the existence of the third type
of objects is impossible. (Each being the negation of the other
they exhaust the whole universe and exclude the middle). How
do you come to know the non-existence of the third type?58
Nyayamanjarī
The reply to this question is that perception, the great, throws
light on it. Perception which is directed towards a blue object
grasps it as a blue object. This part of our hypothesis is agreed
to by all. The perception of a blue object differentiates it from
a non-blue object since it is not revealed by the awareness of a
blue-object. What is revealed by the awareness of a blue-
object is a blue-object and what is not revealed is a non-
blue-object. Hence the possibility of the existence of a third
type is ruled out. Is the third type an object of the awareness
of a blue object or not? If you say 'Yes' then it is nothing but
a blue object. If you say 'No' then it is nothing but a non-
blue object. There is no such object as is neither blue or non-
blue.
How do we define a blue object ? An object which is revealed
by the awareness of a blue object is blue. An object which is
not revealed by such an awareness is non-blue. The same rule
holds good in the case of perceptible and imperceptible object.
An object of perception is perceptible. An object which is not
an object of perception is imperceptible. The pssibility of the
third type of objects is also excluded. We should also follow the
same logical path in order to disprove the possibility of the exis-
tence of a third type of objects other than a particular and
universal. Thus we see that perception fixes up its own object.
It has been stated that perception determines its own object,
excludes its negation and suggests the absence of a third kind.
All these three functions are discharged by a single means.
If this view is not accepted, an object cannot be completely
known in all its aspects with the result that the practical utility
of his knowledge will be nil. No body will proceed either to
attain an object or to avoid it. (He means to say that an object
is not known as attainable unless we know as well that it is
other than avoidable and vice-versa).
It has been stated that a person who seeks fire does neither
sit idle nor leaves the place when he beholds fire. It is a truism
that sense-perception simply apprehends an exclusively parti-
cular point of reality which lies within its range but does not
judge it. But it should be admitted that perceptual judgements
which follow in its wake determine the object, exclude it from
its negation and preclude the possibility of the third alternative;Division of Pramāṇas: Buddhist hypothesis
59
otherwise, all practical transactions would collapse. If it be so,
the relation of contradictory opposition existing between an
object of perception and its non-object is known to us since per-
ception reveals its object as absolutely excluded from its non-
object. Inference contributes its quota to the understanding of
the proposition that there is no middle term between an object
of perception and its opposite (non-object).
Of the two opposites if one is known then its other is exclu-
ded from that piece of knowledge because of their nature in-
volving mutual contradiction. The suggested third if any is also
included in the contradictory opposite since it is not revealed
by the awareness of an object.
its awareness.
Now a question arises in our mind. If you had ever grasped
the third one like the second one then the third one would
surely have an independent existence like the two objects (an
How do you come to know that the
object and its opposite).
relation of contradiction or non-contradiction exists between the
known and the unknown? The reply to this is as follows:--
Oh sound logician, in order to know the relation of contradic-
tion the knowledge of the opposite is not necessary since the
object is known as opposed to those which are not revealed by
An object is said to be opposed to that which is
not grasped when the object is presented to our consciousness.
Hence, as non-awareness indicates the relation of contradiction
so the distinct awareness of the opposite should not be sought
after. There is no middle term between the two contradictory
terms. Thus the two-fold division of all objects is absolutely
established. Thus there is no middle term between the follow-
ing pairs of terms opposed to each other, e.g., existent and non-
existent, eternal and non-eternal, successive and simultaneous.
Perception reveals only a perceptible object, viz., an exclusively
An inference reveals a universal
particular point of reality.
which lies beyond the ken of perception.
There are two kinds of knowable objects which are well esta-
blished by two kinds of the means of proof. Then say, why we
should postulate another distinct type of the means of proof and
what for?
It is not reasonable to hold that the verbal testimony also
like an inference reveals a universal which is imperceptible.I
60
Nyayamanjari
One and we same object should not be revealed by more than
one means of proof since they would oppose each other to secure
the priority of appearance and either of them would be redun-
dant. If the second means of proof knows an object in the
same way as the first one has done, then the services of the
second one are futile. The learned ones hold that if a means of
proof reveals only what has been already known by its predece-
ssor then it simply kills a dead man. The second cannot grasp
the object in question in a different manner since it is to con-
tradict the evidence of the first one. The persons conversant
with the laws of thought hold that the co-operation of various
means of proof is impossible. When many a means of proof
reveals one and the same object it is technically called samplava
(mutual co-operation). But it is hard to establish that there are
common objects of many a means of proof. The idea of mutual
co-operation on the part of the means of proof is discarded.
Perception and inference cannot co-operate since inference can-
not reveal an exclusively particular point of reality and percep-
tion fails to reveal a universal.
How can an inference which depends upon the relation of con-
comitance for its existence prove the existence of an exclusively
particular point of reality which is neither similar nor dissimilar
to any object of the universe.
Sense-perception is causally connected only with a real point of
reality. How can it grasp a universal which is created by
imagination ?
The so-called other means of proof such as inference, verbal
testimony, etc. will have no distinct objects to reveal.
Then an exclusively particular point of reality is grasped by
sense-perception and the objects other than the reals are within
the range of inference based upon the relation of invariable con-
comitance.
There is really speaking, no object which is to be grasped by
many means of proof. It is a good news for us that like the
plurality of means of proof applicable to a case neither a whole
nor a universal does exist.
If you admit that an inference and verbal testimony apply to
the field of perception then you should also admit that they
would also produce such knowledge as is produced by percep
pered 208ben
The Refutation of the Buddhist hypothesis
tion. But the resultant knowledge of these means of knowledge
or cognition is not similar. The Buddhists say to this object :
When the object of the different means of knowldge is one the
knowledge arrived at by them should be the same.
But perce-
ptual knowledge is never similar either to the inferential know-
ledge or to the verbal knowledge. The light of the stars or
the light of the moon is entirely different from that of the
sun who illumines the whole universe.
61
They also hold that what is sensed is absolutely different
from the object of verbal knowledge. A blind man does not see
an object but gets an idea of it when he hears a word denoting
it.
They also add that the experience of burn when a man is
burnt by fire is totally different from the knowledge of burn
produced by the word 'burn'. In fine, they submit that as only
two types of objects have been established by them by means of
the logical procedure stated above so the third means of proof
does not exist over and above perception and inference. It
should also be admitted that the plurality of the means of proof
does not apply to the same case.
The Refutation of the Buddhist hypothesis
A rejoinder to the Buddhist view is as follows: It has been
stated that perception is competent enough to exclude the possi-
bility of a third type of objects and thereby to deny existence to
the means of proof other than perception and inference. But
such a stand is not logical.
An indeterminate perception which cannot connect the ante-
cedent event with the consequent one cannot bear so heavy a
burden on its shoulders. The determinate forms of knowledge
are nourished and strengthened only by imagination. How can
you hold that such knowledge establishes and arranges the real
objects of the universe ?
Or, let us assume for the sake of argument that the blue and
the non-blue exclude the middle. But the same method fails
when we try to know an object as being perceived or as being
inferred. When a perception of an object takes place it reveals
the object as it is in itself but does not reveal it as a perceptum.
An object is cognized in the form that this is blue but never in62
Nyāyamanjari
the form that I perceive a blue object. What is meant by its
perceptibility? Does it exist in a sense-organ? Or, is it the
fact of being an object of self-conscious sensuous cognition? Of
these two alternatives the first one is known only through the
joint method of agreement and difference but not directly per-
ceived. Kumārila Bhaṭṭa says to the effect-
That a sound is an object of auditory perception is never
directly grasped. When I hear a sound, if my cognition assumes
the form that it is a sound but not that it is an object of hearing.
But that it is heard is indirectly known through the joint method
of agreement and difference. A deaf man cannot hear a sound.
A man having normal power of hearing hears a sound. Hence,
a sound is heard by the ears of a man. It is a case of inference.
Now, you may suggest the second alternative that when an
object is sensed by a person he knows that he perceives it. But
it is not a fact that the knower is aware of his perception of an
object. When an object is perceived by a person, he is not
aware of his perception since no perception is introspected at
that time. If the perception of the object is not introspected
then it is impossible to know that the said object is an object of
perception. How do you know that when an object is perceived
an introspection of perception does not take place? Are not
two forms simultaneously present in our consciousness? No, we
never experience in cases of perception a difference like this,
that this is perception and this is an object of perception. Only
one form is cognized. In the fitness of things there should be
only the form of the object perceived but not that of perception.
This point will be discussed later on.
The Buddhists contend that if a direct awareness is not self-
conscious it cannot reveal an object. Jayanta quotes the line of
the Buddhist text to prove his honesty of representation 'Na
pratyakṣo . prasidhyati' (But this view is not tenable). If
we are at first aware of our awareness then object-consciousness
cannot follow it. Hence how can the perception of an object
take place? Now, the Buddhists may contend that an awareness
being self-conscious, reveals its content.
In that case they are
to face the two horns of a dilemma. Is an awareness an object
of another piece of awareness or self-luminous? If they hold thatThe Refutation of the Buddhist hypothesis
it is an object of another piece of awareness then a regressus ad
infinitum becomes inevitable. But such a regressus ad infinitum
in this case defeats the very purpose of the hypothesis in question
(the initial awareness will never be revealed since an unending
series of awarenesses will go on in vain). Therefore, if they
stick to the decision that perception, being introspected, reveals
its object then the whole universe would be blind and dumb.
The Buddhists cannot, also, hold that an awareness is self-lumí-
nous since if an awareness be an object of its own self then it
will be no better than ordinary objects, e.g., blue, yellow, etc,
We shall subject the hypothesis of the self-luminous character of
an awareness to an elaborate and severe criticism when the thesis
of subjective Idealism will be refuted.
63
The Buddhists may argue that an absurd conclusion will be
reached if their hypothesis is not accepted. If nobody is aware
of his awareness then it makes no difference whether an aware-
ness appears or not. In that case everybody would be either
absolutely ignorant or omniscient. Such an indirect proof is
not tenable. As soon as an awareness comes into being the
person having awareness becomes a knower.
The essence
of an
awareness is to illumine an object. Whenever it
arises it reveals an object. How is it that there is no difference
between an absent and present awareness? When the aware-
ness of a blue object, etc. arises in the mind of a man he be-
comes a knower. But when an introspection of happiness, etc.
takes place in his mind he becomes an enjoyer. This definition
of a knower or that of an enjoyer is not too wide to be appli-
-cable to a non-knower or to a non-enjoyer. When a perception
takes place we are not aware of it. Hence, the perception in
question does not assume the form that I perceive an object,
As a perception is not introspected so it can neither be differ-
entiated from mediate knowledge nor can suggest that there
is no third form of knowledge other than immediate and medi-
ate awareness. How can perception prove the existence of only
two types of objects?
We have shown before that the inference which has been
adduced by the Buddhists to prove the existence of only two
kinds of objects is based upon the evidence of perception that
a perceptible object is incompatible with an inferred object.Nyāyamañjarī
We have already pointed out that perception is not capable
of enlightening such an incompatibility of its object with that
of an inference. If such an incompatibility is not perceived, an
inference based upon it is an impossibility. If it is not proved
that the objects admit only of two types then the desire for
establishing only two kinds of the means of proof should be
given up.
Or even if we admit for the sake of an argument that there
are only two kinds of objects then how can the further distinc-
tion of the means of proof due to their difference in the assem-
blage of conditions and results be gained? The sets of condi-
tions which determine perception and inference are distinctly
different from those of conditions which determine verbal know-
lege and comparison. Moreover, the results which the former
pair yields are also different from those of the latter pair. These
differences account for the corresponding change in the nature
of the means of proof. Hence, the hypothesis that the means
of proof admits of only two kinds is not tenable. This
argument also refutes the hypothesis of the Samkhya school
that there are only three kinds of the means of proof. We shall
establish that the fourth means of proof is determined by a dif-
ferent set of conditions and the resultant knowledge is a class
by itself.
64
Re-affirmation of the co-operation of the different Sources of knowledge
(Samplava)
Moreover, the Buddhists under the sway of delusion have
argued against the application of the plurality of the means of
proof to a single object. Nobody can establish the existence of
an inference if such an application does not take place.
If one does not grasp that the relation of invariable concomi-
tance holds between the probans and the probandum then the
probans in question does not point to the probandum. The
knowledge of the relation of invariable concomitance in ques-
tion implies that of the two concomitants. The probandum,
one of them is a concept, the knowledge which is ex-hypothesis
inferential. If the Buddhists stick to this hypothesis then an
inference is an instance of circular reasoning. (If we do
not know the probandum then we cannot grasp the relation ofCo-operation of the different Sources of knowledge
invariable concomitance. Again, if we do not know the relation
of invariable concomitance then we cannot grasp the probandum
in question).
65
Now the Buddhists may suggest that the probandum is known
by a fresh inference. In that case a vicious regressus ad infi-
nitum is inevitable since the fresh inference requires another
inference to reveal it and so on.
In order to avoid a vicious regressus ad infinitum the percep-
tion of the probans and the probandum should be admitted.
In that case an application of the plurality of the means of
proof to a single object takes place.
The Buddhists contend that this criticism is based upon a misun-
derstanding of the conclusion of the Buddhist Logic. They add
that inference and verbal knowledge reveal imaginary objects.
Imagination supplies a person with the knowledge of invariable
concomítance. Hence, neither a regressus ad infinitum vítíates,
invalidates the hypothesis in question nor an application of
the plurality of the means of proof is required for the justifica-
tion of the hypothesis.
The sum and substance of the Buddhist point of view is that
conceptual knowledge which follows a true sense-perception in
close succession is stamped by the perceptual image and conse-
quently assumes the form of perception. The content of conce-
ptual knowledge, the conceptual image is purely imaginary
but still it excludes itself from such other conceptual images
by its very nature. All syllogisms refer only to conceptual
images. As any one who mistakes the rays of a gem for a gem
and proceeds to attain the object obtains it, so in the case of
an inference though a conceptual image is mistaken for an image
of real object yet a real object is attained when a man works
under the illusion since reality is at the root of the conceptual
image in question. Hence, inference and perception can never
have a common object. How can the hypothesis of the appli-
cation of many means of proof to a common object be possible?
How can the Buddhist theory of inference be open to the charge
of a regressus ad infinitum ?
This statement is merely a hoax. The relation of invariable
concomitance has been specified by the Buddhists as the relation
of identity or that of causality. Does it belong to reality? Or66
Nyayamanjari
does it belong to an imaginary image? It cannot belong to an
imaginary object. A real object is always produced by a real
object. A real object is only identical with a real object. Hence,
the relation of invariable concomitance belongs only to a real
object. The conceptual image does not represent a real object
but the relation belonging to a real object is determined in and
through the medium of an imaginary image. Really, a strange
solution is this: The relation of invariable concomitance
belongs to real objects. But two general images which are ima-
ginary beings play the part of a probans and a probandum.
Thus the relation in question exists on one locus but something
else is the source of its knowledge. The object inferred is one
thing but a man who infers moves for another and attains an
object other than the inferred one. All this is mere deception
and nothing else.
Moreover, a concept is in no way related to a real object.
Hence, it cannot bear a close resemblance to a perceptual image.
Hence, thinness and vividness which are asserted of concepts
do not impart validity to them since they are far away from
the domain of reality.
The induction from the Buddhist point of view is not based
upon sound proof. It is a mere conjecture. Hence, the con-
clusion which is deduced from such induction carries no material
validity. If the Buddhists believe that the universality of the
relation of invariable concomitance is really conceptual then
why do they run the risk of proving its material validity?
If the perception of a universal is not assumed then the
relation of invariable concomitance cannot be discovered. Hence,
the cause of inference is very much weakened. Moreover, one
who discovers the relation of invariable concomitance cannot
perceive the probans (a mark) for the second time. Hence,
those who are against the admission of application of the
plurality of proofs to a single fact really fail to establish the
validity of an inference.
con-
An exclusively particular cannot serve as a mark. If a
cept is a mark its knowledge cannot but be indirect, i.c., inferen-
tial. If an inference is based upon another inference then either
a regressus ad infinitum or a vicious circle will invalidate
all cases of inference. Such defects take away much from judg-Co-operation of the different Sources of knowledge
ments. Hence the possibility of the plurality of proofs cannot
be rejected. How can you reject the plurality of proofs without
rejecting an inference which is generated by the knowledge of
invariable concomitance with that of the mark.
67
Moreover, even if the existence of only two kinds of objects is
admitted then there is no bar to hold that both perception and
inference apply to one and the same object. An object which is
to be perceived at one time at a place goes beyond the range of
perception if it changes its place and time. But it is inferred. An
object which is now inferred from this place is perceived from
that place or will be perceived at a subsequent period of time.
The doctrine of the universal flux will be refuted later on. The
Buddhists have postulated the hypothesis of a series in order
to justify the hypothesis that what is perceived is attained.
They may subscribe to our hypothesis that various proofs apply
to one and the same object without any prejudice to their own
hypothesis since a series is not in the least affected by it.
The Buddhists have a motive behind the rejection of the
application of the plurality of proofs to a single object. They
intend to deny existence to a universal, etc. A fit reply will
be given to them by re-establishing the hypothesis of a uni-
versal, etc.
The fire of your criticism consumes the impurities which
cling to our hypothesis. It is a good news to the logicians that
like the application of the plurality of proofs the distinct exis-
tence of a whole and that of a universal will be re-established.
The Buddhists argue against the application of the plurality
of proofs on the ground that an assumption like this contradicts
other assumptions and is redundant. The charge that it is
superfluous has been met by us when we have proved that a
proof should not be unnecessarily qualified by an adjective of
revealing a novel object. We do not even find contradictory
nature in it. When a proof comes into being it does not cancel
any antecedent judgment like the negative judgement that this
is not silver. A concrete object is possessed of many properties.
A particular means of proof discovers sometimes one particular
property in it. In this situation let us see what is meant by its
contradictory nature. The Buddhists may explain the contra-
dictory nature in this way that if perception, inference and
ŞNyayamanjari
verbal knowledge have a common object then the knowledge of
it should have been similar (i e. when a man perceived fire his
mediate knowledge of fire should have been similar). Some
logicians meet this objection thus-In the case of an object
common to various forms of consciousness the conditions which
determine each form of consciousness being different, the re-
sulting consciousness in each case is different like the percep-
tion of an object, lying at a close quarter, differing from that
of it lying at a distance. Other logicians point out that the
diversity in the character of consciousness is explained not by
the difference in the conditions but by the difference in the
nature of the objects. In the above example the near object is
not the same as the distant one. When an object is looked at
from a distance it is seen as qualified by its general feature.
But when it comes nearer, it is seen along with its special fea-
tures. Perception, inference and verbal knowledge differ from
one another because of the difference in their objects.
Our visual perception grasps an object as qualified by its
specific property. The inferential knowledge grasps the subject
of inference (the minor term) as qualified only by the object
inferred (the major term) on the strength of an induction. A
piece of knowledge which arises from a word reveals an object,
its meaning, as associated with the word itself. The knowledge
of a word meaning is always verbalised. How do the Naiyayi-
kas now hold that the different proofs apply to the same object
since they have admitted that no piece of knowledge has the
same object? Oh yes, the Naiyāyikas admit that no two such
pieces of knowledge have the same object. Still, they stick to
their decision that many proofs apply to one and the same ob-
ject. They mean to say that the substratum underlying the di-
verse properties is one and the same. When the application of
many proofs to a single object is spoken of, a reference to the
identical substratum is made. These two rival hypotheses, viz.,
application and non-application of many proofs to a single ob-
ject will be more elaborately discussed later on. However, it
has been already established that many proofs apply to one and
the same object. The great commentator on the Nyâya-sūtra
has given an appropriate example. From the words of a trust-
worthy person we learn that fire exists at a distant place. A
68Enumeration of other extra Sources of knowledge
person proceeds in that direction relying upon his words. When
he comes near he sees smoke and infers its existence. When he
advances further and approaches fire he sees it with his own
eyes, etc., etc. In some cases restriction is imposed upon the
function of proofs. As for an example the Vedic Injunction alone
that one who intends to attain heaven should perform Agni-
hotra-sacrifice throws light upon the attainment of heaven by
means of a Vedic sacrifice but perception and inference do not
enlighten us. When one hears the roaring of thunder he infers
its cause which he neither perceives nor learns from the scrip-
ture. One directly knows that his hands are two but he does
neither infer the number nor does learn it from the lips of an-
other person. In the majority of cases all proofs apply to all ob-
jects but there are few cases in which a particular proof has an
exclusive object of its own.
69
Thus all the charges levelled against the Nyaya hypothesis of
the application of all the different proofs to a case have been
adequately met. The fear of negative criticism has been re-
moved. The above hypothesis is now proved. All the long
cherished intentions of the Buddhists to establish the two hypo-
theses that there are only two means of proof and that there are
only two kinds of objects have been nipped in the bud. Thus,
all the hypotheses that the number of the proofs is less than
four have been examined.
Enumeration of other extra sources of knowledge
Now the hypotheses that the number of the proofs is more
than four is being examined. Prabhākara holds that the num-
ber of the means of knowledge is five. They are perception,
inference, verbal testimony, comparison and presumption. The
Bhaṭṭas include non-apprehension in the list of the means of
knowledge and hold that their number is six. Some add tradi-
tion or rumour and probability to the above list and hold that
they are eight in number. The Carvãkas who are well-trained
in the logical discipline hold that the fixation of the number of
the means of knowledge is an impossible task.
Presumption of the Bhatta school
The Bhäffas explain presumption in the following manner.Nyayamanjari
Whenever a fact known to us or learnt from a verbal source
seems to be apparently absurd and requires the assumption of
some other facts to explain it, it is called presumption. The
phrase 'known to us' requires further explanation. It means the
fact which is known by means of any of the five means of proof.
The phrase 'learnt from a verbal source' signifies that it has
been learnt from the nonscriptural source or from the scrip-
tural source. The meaning of the sentence thus learnt seems to
us to be apparently inconsistent. We postulate some other facts
in order to explain it. It is called presumption. The source of
our knowledge of the primary fact being six, presumption corres-
pondingly admits of six-fold division. The word 'dṛṣṭa' signifies
'awareness' in the widest sense. Thus 'Śruta' presumption gets
itself merged in the Dṛṣṭa presumption. Why has the first one
been treated separately? Its separate treatment suggests that
presumption in this case solves apparent contradictions which is
noticed in the matter brought in only by the verbal testimony.
Hence its object is different from those of other five forms of
power presumption.
Let us cite an example of presumption based upon percep-
tion. We perceive fire and see its effect, i.e., the burning of an
object which comes in contact with it. But we fail to explain
why it does burn. This apparent riddle leads us to postulate its
power of burning which is not visible.
70
An example of presumption based upon inference is as follows:
We infer the motion of the sun from the mark, i.e., the occu-
pation of different spaces. The motion of the sun appears to us
to be a riddle. It is solved only if it has the power of moving. An
example of presumption based upon comparison is cited as
follows. We see a gavaya (a blue deer). We remember a cow.
The individual cow which is remembered is cognised as qualified
by its close resemblance to a blue deer. It is not within the
range of our vision. The awareness of the resemblance of a
gavaya belonging to a cow is the resulting consciousness of com-
parison. How is an individual cow thus qualified presented to
our consciousness? It cannot be perceived since there is no
sense-object-contact. It cannot be inferred since no invariable
mark is present. We do not understand through the medium
of a word since there is no such word as denotes it. But itPresumption of the Bhaṭṭa School
appears to be mysterious that it is presented to our conscious-
ness. Hence, we assume that the object in question has the
power to be cognised in this way. Presumption itself is a dis-
tinct means of proof since all these cases of presumption have
for their objects 'transcendental power'. Power inherent in an
object can never be perceived and cannot also be inferred since
an inference is invariably based upon the knowledge of the re-
lation of invariable concomitance which is dependent upon per-
ception for the discovery.
71
The relation of concomitance admits of two kinds, based
uponeither the method of agreement or that of difference.
These two kinds of invariable concomitance help us only
to understand the essence of a substance and its essential
properties. But its power being still subtler, is beyond
the reach of them. It is not enlightened by them. There
is little chance for verbal testimony and comparison to throw
light upon it. Hence it is only presumption which has such
power as its exclusive object. Let us give an example of
presumption based upon presumption. The knowledge of an
object through the instrumentality of a word seems to us to be
apparently inconsistent. To remove this inconsistency we
assume that a word has the power of expression. In spite of its
power of expression a word fails to convey its meaning if it is
not assumed to be eternal. This topic will be discussed in the
chapter on verbal testimony. Presumption, based upon non-
apprehension, has been illustrated by Sabara himself, the com-
mentator on the Mimâmsi-sutra It is as follows. One cognizing
the absence of the living Caitra at home finds that this experi-
ence is inconsistent. In order to solve this consistency he
assumes his presence somewhere outside his house.
Why is it not a case of inference since the known probandum
is established on the strength of the perception of its mark? No,
it is not a case of inference since the assemblage of conditions
which determine inferential knowledge is absent. According to
the rules laid down in the logic of the Naiyayikas the conditions
such as the presence of the invariable mark in the subject of in-
ference, etc., only determine a specific form of knowledge which
is called an inference. The assemblage of the above conditions
is conspicuous by its absence when one is aware of Caitra'sNyayamanjari
presence outside his home. Shall we infer the presence of Caitra
outside who is absent from home? Or shall we infer the pre-
sence of Caitra on the outside which is other than a house? But
a mark which is suitable for the purpose is not available.
None of the following marks such as Caitra absent from a
house, containing the negation of Caitra; the negation of Caitra
in his house; or non-perception of Caitra in his house belongs
to the subject of inference. Neither Caitra's house nor Caitra nor
the negation of Caitra nor non-perception of Caitra belongs to
either Caitra or to his existence outside his house, Hence, none of
them is a genuine mark. Moreover, in the case of an inference,
the means of proof should be logically prior to the conclusion
but on the contrary in the case of a presumption the matter to
be proved comes first and the means of proof is found out later
on. In this case we get the result of our enquiry first. Hence,
it is not a case of inference. The argument, put forward by the
Mimamsakas, is as follows. From the astrological calculation
we learn that Caitra is still alive. The absence of such a person
from his house appears to us to be a riddle. It leads us to assume
that he is somewhere outside his house so that the problem is
fairly solved. His mere absence from his house is not an invari-
able mark of his existence outside his house since it is connected
with his conditional existence as well as his non-existence due
to death. The awareness of the negation of Caitra in his house
is necessary for the inference of his existence outside his house,
since no probans, if it is not cognized, leads to the knowledge of
the connected probandum, the awareness of the negation of an
object arises when all the means of proof fail to cognize the
object negated. But in the case of the point at issue there is the
means of proof which cognizes his life. His life means his exis-
tence somewhere. The negation of Caitra cannot be known
since the means of proof of his existence is available. The
means of proof of his existence being at work, solves the
contradiction between his simultaneous existence and non-
existence. It restricts his non-existence to his house and his
existence to the space outside his house.
When we know for certain that Caitra who is alive exists
somewhere outside his house we come to know his absence from
his house. Thus we at first know what we should have known
7273
Presumption of the Bhatta School
later on. On the contrary, in the case of an inference when we
know probans, viz., smoke, we have not the slightest knowledge
of the probandum, i.e., fire. In other words, the order of know-
lege is strictly followed. Does not this reversal of the order of
knowledge in the case of a presumption amount to a defect in
the procedure? 'Certainly not is the reply given by the
Mīmāmsakas.
The Mimāṁsakas further add in support of their view that
presumption corroborates the findings of the two independent
means of proof, viz., verbal knowledge and non-perception
which grasp the existence and the non-existence of the
same object, viz., Caitra. It simultaneously reveals the exis-
tence and the non-existence of the above object, i.e., Caitra.
The verbal testimony indefinitely speaks of his existence. We
know that he exists somewhere. But when we know for certain
that he is absent from his house, we also definitely know
that he lives somewhere outside his house. A presumption is
not an inference because of this distinctive feature. More-
over, a presumption not being conditioned by the knowledge of
invariable concomitance is different from an inference.
In the case of inference the relation of invariable concomi-
tance holding between fire and smole is grasped by a single
means of proof. But in the case of presumption the relation of
invariable concomitance holding between presence outside a
house and absence from a house cannot be grasped by a single
means of proof. If it is admitted by the Naiyāyikas that the
relation of invariable concomitance is indirectly grasped by
means of a hypothetical judgment that this is not possible if
such and such condition is not available then we (the Mimāmsa-
kas) take no exception to it. The major premise is obtained by
means of presumption. The conclusion may be deduced from it
by means of syllogistic process. If the subsequent part of the cog-
nitive process is called an inference then the Naiyãyikas may do
so as they like.
The relation of invariable concomitance holding between two
objects just outside his house may be dicovered. But in this wayNyayamanjari
the relation of invariable concomitance holding between an
object negated and its negation can never be discovered.
When we see that Caitra is present in his house we conjec-
ture that we cannot account for his stay at home if he is not
absent from other places. Thus, we presume his absence from
all the places other than his house. We cannot see all the
places other than his house and come to know that he is absent
from each of them. In this case, generalization, based upon
observation, is impossible since the places are innumerable.
How do the Mimāṁsakas arrive at the general (universal) pro-
position "Where there is no fire there is no smoke?" The reply
of the Mimamsakas to this question is that the method of agree-
ment contributes much to arrive at the required induction that
smoke is the invariable concomitant of fire but exclusive use
of the method of difference to arrive at the said induction is
not worth trying. If we arrive at the correct generalization repe-
atedly observing the positive instances then why should we
run after negative instances to arrive at the same truth in a
roundabout manner? In the present case, whenever we try to
establish the relation of concomitance holding between Caitra
and his absence in a general way we realise the real difficulty
which besets it. The absence of Caitra cannot be abstricted
from its locus. The locii of such absence are innumerable.
Hence an induction is impossible but a summation of a few
cases is merely possible. Hence Caitra's absence cannot be
inferred.
74
Now, a question may arise that Caitra's absence may be
definitely known by means of non-perception. 'No' is our reply.
The reason is as follows: When we know negation by means
of non-perception we know it as located upon a particular well-
defined locus. But the negation of Caitra belongs to all places
excepting his house. Hence it cannot be known by non-percep-
tion. The objector may urge that he will roam about from one
place to another in order to know the negation of Caitra by
means of non-perception. Such a contention is not tenable.
Though he may pay a visit to all the different places yet he
cannot definitely know the exact locus of the negation of Caitra.
He leaves Kaufämbi for some other places. But a doubt may
chase him that as soon as Caitra departs from Kausambi hePresumption of the Bhatta School
75
may return to it. To an ordinary man with a limited power of
knowing things the negation of Caitra in all places outside his
house cannot be known by means of non-perception but by
means of presumption. He may still contend that the object in
question may be easily inferred. The argument is as follows:
All the other places contain the negation of Caitra because they
are other than the place occupied by Caitra like the place in
the vicinity of his house. Such an argument is set at naught by
a counter-argument. The other places are not distinct from
such places as contain his negation because they are distinct
from the place which is very close to his house like his own
house. The small body of a man is seen only at a particular
place. If its negation had not existed in all other places then
its small size would have been a puzzle which could not be solv-
ed. That is why it should be presumed that his negation exists
in all places not occupied by him. Hence, the negation of Caitra
under discussion is only ascertained by means of presumption.
Śrutărthāpatti
Fat Devadatta does not take his meal during the day' is an
incomplete sentence but has a reference to some understood
part of it. The knowledge of such understood portion is called
presumption based upon verbal knowledge. Whenever we hear
an incomplete sentence but gather its sense with the aid of some
portion not given, the knowledge of such portion is a distinct
type of knowledge since it is due to none of the accepted means
of knowledge such as perception, etc. The above knowledge is
not direct since the taking of meal at night (supper) is beyond
the range of our vision. It is not an inference since the above
knowledge comes into the mind of one who is innocent of the
relation of invariable concomitance. We cannot even entertain a
supposition that it is due to comparison and so on. The knowl-
edge of the taking of supper is surely verbal. The words which
are heard are not competent enough to convey the above sense
since the sentence which is heard conveys negative but cannot ex-
press a positive meaning as well. Moreover, in the above case, as
long as the words such as 'At night he takes, etc.' are not heard
the meaning, conveyed by the understood words, cannot consti-
tute the meaning of the given sentence. Moreover, the meaning.76
Nyāyamanjari
of the understood words, viz., 'the taking of supper' is neither a
necessary element of the meaning of the given sentence nor in-
separably related to it so that it invariably flashes in our mind
even if it is not conveyed by the given words.
Therefore the knowledge that he takes his supper at night is
based upon an authoritative sentence which is assumed by us. Let
us now make an inquiry into the nature of the means of proof
which leads us to do so. Our ears fail to hear such words as are
not manifest since they have not been uttered. We cannot even
infer the existence of the understood words since the words are
also known even when the knowledge of invariable concomi-
tance, one of the essential conditions of inference, is absent.
Moreover, it is almost impossible to find out a mark which will be
an invariable concomitant of those words which are eternal but
transcendental. Therefore, we should presume a sentence which
will solve all inconsistencies, involved in the given sentence,
considering the context and other relevant matters.
The assumption of such a supplementary sentence with refe-
rence to the context, etc., has been admitted by the Mimāṁsakas
who are supposed to be experts in syntax. It has been stated in
the Tantra-värttika that the assumption of a supplementary
sentence has been accepted by all. It is hard to find out a mark
which is an invariable concomitant of the understood clause since
it is transcendental ex-hypothesi. We cannot infer the words
such as night etc. If the sentence 'he eats at night' be the pro-
bandum and Devadatta who is flabby but does not take his
meal during the day be the probans then the probans in ques-
tion does not belong to the subject of inference (the speaker of
the sentence) but belongs to such a locus as contains the negation
of the probandum and hence is not an invariable mark. More-
over, we find here no such property as can be proved by means
of the probans in question just as we prove that a hill is fiery be-
cause it is smoky. Neither the sentence 'he does not take his meal
during the day' nor its meaning can constitute the mark which
will help us to infer the sentence 'he takes his meal at night.'
If the sentence containing the phrase 'at night' (i. c., the
sentence that he takes his meal at night) is not heard then how
can it be grasped as belonging to the subject of inference? But
if it is heard then there is no need of inferring it.Presumption of the Bhaṭṭa School
It is highly impossible to hold that the meaning of the sen-
tence that Devadatta who is bulky does not take his meal during
the day serves the purpose of a probans in connection with the
inference in question. Nay, we cannot even assert that the in-
consistency inherent in the sentence stirs our imagination to
supplement it by the assumption of the sentence that he takes
his meal at night in order to make it a consistent one.
Words denote universals. It will be an absurdity if they be-
long to no particulars. But there will be no inconsistency. We
admit it. But in no case one can hold that a supplementary sen-
tence is necessary to complete the sense of the above sentence.
(Therefore the meaning of the sentence has no part to play in
this matter). For this reason the sentence which is being heard
implies a syntactical relation to some part of it not given here
but as it stands in itself it falls to convey a consistent meaning.
Hence, the given sentence implies it as a grammatical necessity.
It illustrates presumption based upon testimony. It is to be
noted here that if the portion of sentence is not presumed, the
above incomplete sentence will not be able to communicate its
meaning. Thus, the Mimamsakas make out a case for Śru-
târthāpatti.
77
Now, an objector raíses a question as to the soundness of the
above hypothesis. Why should not the meaning of the above
complementary sentence be enough to communicate the mean-
ing of the incomplete sentence? The bulky size is the effect of
the taking of nocturnal food. The effect in question being
experienced should lead to the inference of its cause, viz., the
taking of food just as smoke, being perceived, is a means to the
inferential knowledge of fire. The taking of meal has been for-
bidden at a particular period of time but it must take place in
some other part of the day. Why should a sentence be presum-
ed? Moreover, the sentence which is presumed is only for the
understanding of the proper meaning of the sentence in ques-
tion but not for acquiring merit. No body should find fault with
the hypothesis that the meaning is directly presumed but not
through the medium of the sentence which conveys it. Why
should a partition in the shape of a sentence be allowed to
intervene between the two meanings directly and indirectly
acquired?78
Nyayamanjari
The Mimamsakas give a reply to the above objection. Oh,
child, you are still inexperienced in the Philosophy of Grammar.
A sentence which conveys a complete meaning is only a source
of valid knowledge since an incomplete sentence conveys no
meaning, being not self-sufficient.
A sentence is a complete whole in which each of its consti-
tuents (i.e., parts of speech) fulfills its duty and tends to convey
the meaning of the sentence. These parts do never stop half-
way but invariably complete its task, viz., the expression of the
complete meaning of a sentence.
A sentence which expresses a complete meaning is a source
of valid knowledge. Such a sentence bears a significant name.
Therefore whenever we hear a portion of a sentence we should
fill up the gap supplying the understood portion by our imagi-
nation. How can we get at the complete and consistent mean-
ing if the understood portion is not supplied ?
In many cases, the Vedic injunctions are incomplete. By
means of presumption, based upon testimony, they are made
complete. But, in these cases if we do not complete the Vedic
injunctions which enjoin rites then the sense of the clause to be
inserted, being merely implied, will not be strictly Vedic.
The Vedic mantra (a prayer) which speaks of a kind of
ceremony in honour of the departed ancestors (aṣṭakā by name)
leads us to assume an injunction which enjoins aṣṭakā. Simi-
Jarly, we assume Vedic injuctions on the basis of the direct
wording of the Vedic mantras, e.g. the marks of gods given in
the mantras etc.
Sometimes, we also assume a complete Vedic injunction on
the basis of an incomplete injunction. The Vedic injunction one
should perform 'Viśvajit sacrifice' is an instance of an incomp-
lete Vedic injunction. The injunction does not contain a word
which denotes the enjoyer of the fruit of the action. In this case,
it does not carry the sense which it intends to convey. The
object of an injunction is to induce a man to perform the rite
prescribed by it. But a man who is aware of the fruit of the rite
and intends to have it is persuaded to do it.
Hence, the above injunction should be supplemented by the
word ‘svargakāmaḥ' (desirous of heaven). The complete
injunction amounts to this that one who is desirous of heavenPresumption identical with Inference
79
should perform Viśvajit sacrifice. The injunction 'one who is
desirous of the lustre arising from the holy study should offer
Caru (rice boiled in milk) in honour of the sungod' is also
incomplete since the meaning of the word 'caru' is ambiguous.
It may mean either the pot containing rice to be boiled in milk
or simply rice boiled in milk. Hence, another injunction which
throws light on the deity to be worshipped and the article to be
offered should be assumed to supplement it.
In cases of subsidiary rites such as Aindragnya etc., a general
hint has only been given by the basic injunction as to their
observance. In order to know the details of the rites which
make them up w are to assume some injunctions which assert
that the subsidiary rites bear a close resemblance to the principal
rites which they belong to.
The Mimamsakas conclude thus -As in these cases, the
knowledge of invariable concomitance is impossible so
presumption based upon testimony cannot be replaced by
inference. By means of this proof, the words which are not
heard but form part and parcel of the incomplete sentence
heard by us, are supplied. But if it is held that the objects,
denoted by these words, are to be assumed but not the words
then these objects cannot enjoy the sanctíty which is shared by
the meanings of the actual Vedic words. The net result of this
discussion is that presumption, based upon six sources of
valid knowledge, should be accepted as a source of valid know-
ledge. But on the contrary, presumption, if carefully examin-
ed, is not distinct from inference.
Presumption identical with Inference
If two things are not inseparably connected by a tie of
relation then one of them cannot illumine the other. No person
can know another object on the basis of the knowledge of an
object. Moreover, the relation of invariable concomitance
may exist between the two objects but if one does not know it
to be such then he cannot infer the other, simply knowing
one of the two. It should also be noted that a new born baby
does not possess such a complicated process of knowledge. (It
is not an elementary form of knowledge). In all cases of
presumption it is not possible to know the specific relationNyayamanjari
existing between the two objects. But it is also a fact that
they are known to be related in a general manner.
80
Moreover, the Mīmāṁsakas hold that in a case of presump-
tion the proof that it (the given) cannot be established with-
out this (the assumed solvent) is an instance of negative
concomitance. The negative concomitance, being known, does
also lead to the positive one that if it is assumed then it will be
explained. These two kinds of concomitance (positive and
negative) are the property of the probans. Hence, presump-
tion is not other than inference. We shall prove that what is
based upon the observation of negative instances becomes the
probans when it is also grounded upon the observation of
positive instances. Moreover, the so-called instances of
presumption which are based upon perception and other forms
of valid knowledge and are put forward to prove the existence
of the supersensuous power of an object are really pointless
since the supersensuous object in question does not exist.
Refutation of the Power of Cause
An effect which is produced only by its cause assisted by its
conditions does not presuppose the supersensuous power of the
cause for its coming into being.
cause.
The Mimamsakas contend that the so-called cause is not a
real cause if it is devoid of power to produce an activity. (In
other words, what is capable of producing an activity is a
But what lacks it is not a cause). When a person
intends to cut down a tree he lifts up an axe. But likewise he
might have raised a shoe to do it. If its capacity for doing an
action is not admitted then any cause would have produced
any effect without any restriction since the essence of all sub-
stances is one and the same. The Mimamsakas cite two
examples to bring home the point at issue. If a man takes
poison he meets his death. If a house is set on fire then it is
burnt. If we enquire into the cases of these two effects then we
find that the power, belonging to the so-called causes, consti-
tutes the real cause. But in these two cases if their
power is
obstructed by the recital of incantations, though the causes are
recognised to remain numerically identical yet their effect
does not take place. How does one account for it without81
Refutation of the hypothesis of Sakti
subscribing to the hypothesis of power? Because the essence of
the cause and the assemblage of conditions are not obstructed
by the recitation of incantations. The essence of the cause
remains unaffected and the assemblage of all conditions is now
as it was before. The power of a cause to produce an effect is
only obstructed. That is why the effect does not come into
being in spite of the fact that the cause remains unchanged
and all the conditions assemble. Moreover, it is also observed
by us that even when two persons have service of the same
status and draw the same pay they have differences in their
enjoyments of life. This fact has led the Naiyāyikas to assume
as conditions of all
transcendental objects like virtue etc.
will
effects. If you follow the same line of thinking then you
have to subscribe to hypothesis of transcendental power. This
is the sum and substance of the Mimāṁsā-contention.
The refutation of the hypothesis of Sakti
The view of the Mimāṁsakas is not sound. The Mimāṁsakas
have contended that the selection of a particular cause for a
particular effect points to the hypothesis of the supersensuous
power of a cause. Let us now subject this hypothesis to a
thorough scrutiny. We are not competent enough to frame a
novel hypothesis of causality concerning the positive objects
but follow the traditional view in our theory and practice. By
our mere wish neither water does warm us during chill nor fire
does quench our thirst. How do we come to know that these two
are causally connected e.g. an axe and the act of hewing? Either
we discover the relation in question or we learn it from the ex-
perienced persons. When we discover it we have recourse to the
joint method of agreement and difference. That is why when we
intend to cut down a tree we take up an axe but not a shoe etc.
It should also be noted that whenever a cause-in-itself is
present the effect does not come into being because like the
cause itself the presence of conditions is also required for the
appearance of an effect. As the conditions do not always
accompany a cause so the effect does not come into being even
in the presence of a cause. Virtue and such other subjects are
also included in the list of essential conditions. If the assemb-
absolutely necessary for the
lage of such conditions isNyāyamanjari
appearance of an effect then how we can contend that an
effect must always appear because the mere cause is present.
The hypothesis of merit and demerit should be admitted, other-
wise, we fail to explain the variety of effects. It is not a fact
that they are transcendental because they represent cosmic
force. But they are so because of their innate nature just like
an internal organ and an atom.
The Mimāṁsakas have held that when some particular
incantations are uttered the effects do not appear in spite of the
assemblage of all conditions and the cause, e.g., poison and fire
do not produce their effect. According to them the only
possible explanation is that the power of the cause is obstructed
under such circumstances. The Naiyāyikas point out that an
effect does not appear not because the power of the cause is
counteracted but because the assemblage of condition is disturb-
ed by the introduction of a new factor. (They mean to say
that the presence of a negative condition is also essential for
the appearance of an effect but with the utterance of the incan-
tation, mentioned above, the negative condition disappears
from the scene). What does the person do, uttering the
incantation if he does not counteract the power in question?
No, he has not obstructed the power but has simply introduced
a change into the very collocation of conditions, nay, he has
replaced the old collocation by a new one. We should also
bear in mind that a particular collocation of conditions is
responsible for a particular effect and hence the effect in
question does not appear. The Mimāṁsakas take an exception
to this explanation and point out that as no perceptible change
is noticed in the nature of a cause so how is it that an effect
does not come into being? If this is their contention then how
will they explain why poison does not kill a person when it is
not devoured?
82
Now the Mimamsakas may give an answer that contact of
poison with blood is also one of the conditions of death. If this
is their answer then the Naiyayikas will also argue that the
absence of an incantation is also a negative condition of an
ellect such as burning, death etc. When a just person swears
virtue prevents the appearance of an effect Similarly, an
incantation finds a place in the assemblage of conditions andRefutation of the hypothesis of Śakti
83
obstructs the appearance of an effect. Let us, for the sake of
an argument, assume the existence of power. How does an
incantation act upon power? Does it destroy power or does it
counteract its influence ? Certainly, it does not destroy power
since with the disappearance of the influence of the incanta-
the cause is seen. If it
tion in question the effect of
is held that power is counteracted then the Naiyãyikas will
also argue that the cause itself is likewise prevented from
producing its effect.
The cause remains unaffected. "How is it that it does not
produce its effect?" says the objector. "The very question is
also applicable to power" is the reply of the Naiyāyikas. The
objector may urge that the unchanged nature of the cause is
directly grasped. The rejoinder is that power also remains
unaffected and its unchanged nature is inferred from its effect.
The Naiyāyikas put a question to the Mimamsakas whether
power
which is postulated by them is coexistent with the cause
itself or it is an effect. If they hold that it is coexistent with
the cause then its effect should always follow from it. Now,
they may hold that power alone does not produce an effect but
it requires the aid of concomitant conditions. If they subscribe
to this view then the assumption of power becomes superfluous
since the hypothesis that the cause itself accompanied by the
conditions produces an effect better obeys the law of parsimony.
What purpose will serve the hypothesis of Power? If they hold
that the power of a cause is an effect of the cause itself then is
it an effect of the cause alone or of the cause combined with
the conditions? If they answer the first question in the affirmative
then an effect should always come into being since power
continuously follows from its cause. Again, if they hold that
power is an effect of the assemblage of conditions then the
very collocation of conditions will only be sufficient enough to
explain an effect. In that case what is the good of postulating
'power' which intervenes between the cause and its effect (i.c.,
a redundant tertium quid) ? Again they may urge that a cause
which is devoid of power cannot produce an effect. If this is
their contention then they surely invite a regressus ad infinitum
since power, the effect, is produced by a cause which possesses
1Nyayamanjari
another power
which in its turn requires another power for its
very existence and so on ad infinitum.
The Mīmāṁsakas go on defending their case thus An
invisible object is postulated only to explain a perceptible
object in a perfect manner but not to spoil one's own case. If
a series of powers is assumed then the potentiality of a cause
will be simply exhausted by the production of such a series and
no effect will be produced. Hence, they postulate the hypothesis
of only one power and hold that the logical problem of a
regressus ad infinitum does not arise.
84
--
A critical review of this hypothesis is as follows :-If a
perceptible object is not explained without the postulation of an
invisible object then and then only they are at liberty to assume
an invisible object. If a visible object is otherwise explained
then there is no necessity of assuming an invisible object. And
the Naiyāyikas have also proved to the hilt that a visible fact is
explained without assuming an invisible object. They also hold
that if the opponents are bent upon assuming an invisible object
in order to explain a fact then they may do so provided that it
does not involve a regressus ad infinitum like merit and
demerit. Moreover, the latter should bear in mind that they
also assume an imperceptible process of the causal factor like
power in order to explain an effect. Now, the Naiyāyikas point
out that if one of these two hypotheses of invisible objects
explains facts i.e., an effect to the satisfaction of all, then why
should the Mimāriisakas assume two invisible objects, violating
the law of parsimony? The Mimamsakas contend that if a so-
called cause which is possessed of power does not produce its effect
in and through its intermediate process then it is not a real
cause. The Naiyāyikas put a question to them. "How do they
know that the cause possesses power?" They may say in reply
that they infer it from its effect. The Naiyāyikas take an
exception to it that an effect owes its existence only to an
intermediate process but not to power. The Mimamsakas
contend that a tree is not cut down even when a shoe is busy
with its intermediate process. If this is the contention of the
Mimimisakas then they should admit that the intermediate
process is perceptible but not transcendental since they do not
infer the intermediate process of a cause from its effect butPresumption as an instance of Inference
directly know the operation of the cause in and through the
intermediate process before the appearance of its effect.
An intermediate process is always an inference. It is inferred
only from its effect. An effect is a mark only of one of the two
viz., power or an intermediate process. Hence, we cannot infer
both of them on the strength of one and the same mark. Let us
now pay our heed to the point at issue, Herice, the above
illustrations of presumption which are put forward to establish
the existence of transcendental power are really pointless. Even
if we assume the existence of transcendental power for the sake
of an argument then it is only an inference since the invariable
relation which holds between two concomitants is an instance
of causal relation. If the cause-in-itself is not sufficient enough
to bring about its effect then and then only we should infer
something else in addition to the presupposed cause in order to
explain an effect and this may be called 'power'.
85*
The instances of presumption which have been advanced to
prove the eternality of sound will be refuted later on in the
chapter on verbal authority.
Presumption based upon non-apprehension included in Inference
The examples of presumption, based upon non-perception,
do really illustrate inference. The absence of a living person
from his house constitutes a mark which indicates his existence
outside his house. The absence of living Caitra from his house
is the subject of inference. His existence outside his house is
the probandum. The state of his being absent from the house
is the probans. On previous occasions we have found that
whenever a living person has been absent from his house he
has been present outside the place of his residence. A similar
instance may be cited. Smoke coexists with fire because it
possesses smoke. Therefore, it has been a vain feat of wordy
warfare to find fault with the reason and to refute the view
that the proposition that living Caitra is present. outside his
house follows as a conclusion.
a
The Mimamsakas have contended that if presumption is an
instance of inference then presumption should not be distinct
source of the knowledge of a novel object. But such a conten-
tion is not tenable. Which object is grasped by presumptionNjāyamanjari
another power which in its turn requires another power for its
very existence and so on ad infinitum.
84
The Mimamsakas go on defending their case thus:-An
invisible object is postulated only to explain a perceptible
object in a perfect manner but not to spoil one's own case. If
a series of powers is assumed then the potentiality of a cause
will be simply exhausted by the production of such a series and
no effect will be produced. Hence, they postulate the hypothesis
of only one power and hold that the logical problem of a
regressus ad infinitum does not arise.
A critical review of this hypothesis is as follows:-If a
perceptible object is not explained without the postulation of an
invisible object then and then only they are at liberty to assume
an invisible object. If a visible object is otherwise explained
then there is no necessity of assuming an invisible object. And
the Naiyāyikas have also proved to the hilt that a visible fact is
explained without assuming an invisible object. They also hold
that if the opponents are bent upon assuming an invisible object
in order to explain a fact then they may do so provided that it
does not involve a regressus ad infinitum like merit and
demerit. Moreover, the latter should bear in mind that they
also assume an imperceptible process of the causal factor like
power in order to explain an effect. Now, the Naiyāyikas point
out that if one of these two hypotheses of invisible objects
explains facts i.e., an effect to the satisfaction of all, then why
should the Mimäāmsakas assume two invisible objects, violating
the law of parsimony? The Mimāṁsakas contend that if a so-
called cause which is possessed of power does not produce its effect
in and through its intermediate process then it is not a real
cause. The Naiyāyikas put a question to them. "How do they
know that the cause possesses power ?" They may say in reply
that they infer it from its effect. The Naiyāyikas take an
exception to it that an effect owes its existence only to an
intermediate
process but
not to power. The Mimūmsakas
contered that a tree is not cut down even when a shoe is busy
with iu intermediate process. If this is the contention of the
Mimimakas then they should admit that the intermediate
process is percepuble but not transcendental since they do not
infer the intermediate process of a cause from its effect butPresumption as an instance of Inference
directly know the operation of the cause in and through the
intermediate process before the appearance of its effect.
An intermediate process is always an inference. It is inferred
only from its effect. An effect is a mark only of one of the two
viz., power or an intermediate process. Hence, we cannot infer
both of them on the strength of one and the same mark. Let us
now pay our heed to the point at issue. Hence, the above
illustrations of presumption which are put forward to establish
the existence of transcendental power are really pointless. Even
if we assume the existence of transcendental power for the sake
of an argument then it is only an inference since the invariable
relation which holds between two concomitants is an instance
of causal relation. If cause-in-itself is not sufficient enough
to bring about its effect then and then only we should infer
something else in addition to the presupposed cause in order to
explain an effect and this may be called 'power'.
The instances of presumption which have been advanced to
prove the eternality of sound will be refuted later on in the
chapter on verbal authority.
85
Presumption based upon non-apprehension included in Inference
The examples of presumption, based upon non-perception,
do really illustrate inference. The absence of a living person
from his house constitutes a mark which indicates his existence
outside his house. The absence of living Caítra from his house
is the subject of inference. His existence outside his house is
the probandum. The state of his being absent from the house
is the probans. On previous occasions we have found that
whenever a living person has been absent from his house he
has been present outside the place of his residence. A similar
instance may be cited. Smoke coexists' with fire because it
possesses smoke, Therefore, it has been a vain feat of wordy
warfare to find fault with the reason and to refute the view
that the proposition that living Caitra is present. outside his
house follows as a conclusion.
The Mimamsakas have contended that if presumption is an
instance of inference then presumption should not be a distinct
source of the knowledge of a novel object. But such a conten-
tion not tenable. Which object is grasped by presumption86
Nyāyamanjari
according to you? Is it unqualified existence of Caitra ? Or is
it his staying outside his house? His existence pure and simple
has been known from the astrological science. Hence, it is not
a new object. The object to be known is his presence some-
where outside the house. How is this object included in the
already cognised object? The proof which generates knowledge
of his absence from his house opposes the appearance of such
knowledge as reveals his presence at home. But it throws light
neither on his presence nor on his absence outside.
When the absence of a man from his house is perceived by
us we cannot definitely know whether he is far away from his
house or he is staying in the courtyard of his house. But if we
know that a living person is absent from his house then we
unerringly infer that he is, staying outside his house. Moreover,
the knowledge of the absence of a living person from his house
cannot be equated with the knowledge of his presence outside
his house. The fact that a man is living is one thing but, on
the other hand, the fact that he is staying outside his house is
another thing. Moreover, it cannot be also held that the know-
ledge of the absence of a living person from his house is the
same as the knowledge of that person staying outside his house.
From the knowledge of the first object we pass on to the know-
ledge of the second object but these two pieces of knowledge
are not identical. Our knowledge of smoke on the locus of fire
is not the same as is the knowledge of fire. Smoke is different
from fire. In this case, too, the absence of a living person from
his house is distinct from his presence outside his house. The
hill and fire are two known objects. We infer only their
relation which is a novel object. Similarly, here too, the
connection of the living person with the place outside his
house is only inferred since it is such an object as
known before.
was not
If the Mimämisakas do not approve of this decision that a
novel object, i.c., the connection of the living person with the
place outside his house, is known by us, then presumption,
having no other new object to reveal, becomes simply super-
fluous. His absence from his house and his life during his absence
from home are known by means of two distinct sources of
knowledge. But if we infer his contact with some place outsidePrabhakaras' defence of Presumption
his house then we see that inference has some scope for reveal-
ing an unknown object. But presumption has no such scope.
It simply grasps an object which is already known. In case of
presumption an object is postulated in order to solve an
apparent contradiction involved in a given fact. An unknown
object is not revealed by presumption which reveals only the
postulated object. Hence, presumption reveals no new object.
It has been stated in their authoritative work that as an object,
which is known either through any source of knowledge other
than the verbal testimony or through the verbal testimony,
seems to involve contradictions so someother object is assumed
to solve it. The object which is postulated is never denoted by
a word. But whenever an object is supposed to solve a contra-
diction it is known. Presumption reveals only the postulated
object known already. Hence, the object to be postulated is
no new one. As in the case of an inference based upon the
relation of self-identity the known object is an inference so
in presumption the known object is only revealed. Hence,
presumption is not a distinct source of knowledge. This is the
sum and substance of our argument,
1
The contention of the Prābhākaras in the defence of Presumption
The followers of the Prabhakara school of Mimarisã follow a
different line of argument to distinguish between Inference and
Presumption. In case of inference the so-called probans is not
dependable if the probandum does not exist on the locus of the
probans in question. The adjective phrase 'otherwise, not logi-
cally valid' qualifies a probans in case of inference. For example,
smoke cannot logically exist on the subject of inference if fire
does not exist there. But in case of presumption reverse is the
order subsisting between the implier and the implied. Let us
take a familiar example. It cannot be proved that a living per-
son is staying outside if he is not absent from his house. When
a living person goes out of his house he stays outside. They also
explain the extract of Sabara's commentary to fit it in with
this new hypothesis. The object which is known to us either
through the verbal testimony or through the other means of
knowledge causes us to postulate other objects. As such an
object is the only source of postulation, so in the absence of it
8788
Nyāyamañjari
such a postulation becomes impossible. Again, if we have no
opportunity of postulating an object then the object which is
postulated cannot appear on the scene. Presumption reveals
only an object which is assumed. Hence, presumption is not
Inference. This is the sum and substance of Prabhakaras'
defence.
The refutation of Prābhākaras' defence
This difference is merely verbal but is not based upon the
observation of new facts. If the object to be known is not
known before then how can one know that it will appear to us
to be a puzzle without having such and such condition? If one
possesses the previous knowledge of the object then what is the
good of exposing the puzzling character ? Because we have de-
finitely known the object which we are now trying to know in
this context. The Prābhākaras may contend that we have already
known not merely the object but also the puzzling character
without assuming such and such indicator. Oh so great is its
difference from inference. Does not this statement amount to
this that the knowledge of invariable concomitance precedes
presumption? If they say that the presence of a living person
outside is impossible without his absence from house then they
should also admit that if he is absent from his house then he is
surely present outside his house. What is the nature of this
impossibility? If it is logical impossibility then the so-called
presumption is no better than inference since the latter thought-
process moves in a similar manner. If the probans is known
before then and then only the probandum is known afterwards
and if the probans is not previously known then the probandum
cannot be known.
It is a wrong statement that the absence of living person from
his house objectively determines his presence outside. If the
absence from house is an established fact then its effect is sub-
sequently produced by it since a cause is invariably antecedent
to its effect. Such a cause alone is productive of its effect. Now
it is to be noted here that if one tries to establish causal connec-
tion between the absence of a person from his house and his
staying outside at the next moment then an absurd situation
arises viz. at the very moment of his absence he neither stays inRefutation of Prabhākaras' defence
89
nor outside his house? Hence, the causal relation does not
outside.
presence
hold between one's absence from house and his
But this discussion is fruitless since it has no bearing upon the
point in question. In other words, such a discussion does not
improve upon the Prābhākara thesis that presumption is a dis-
tinct source of knowledge.
Some logicians of the Prabhākara school hold that presumption
is distinct from inference since in presumption the implier
points to the implied and conditions the implied. In case of
inference smoke is only the mark of fire but in case of presump-
tion the absence from house indicates and produces presence
outside. Such a thesis is likewise refuted. Moreover, the Mimām-
sakas have already pointed out that the relation of invariable
concomitance holding between the implier and the implied can
in no way be discovered since a relation is discovered when the
objects thus related are within the range of vision. Such an argu-
ment does not make an appeal to us.
The Mimamsakas themselves are not sure of the truth of their
argument. A doubt whether or not the invariable relation holds
between the implier and the implied has arisen in their mind
but they have not been able to arrive at the difinite conclusion
that the above relation does not subsist between them. Hence,
they have put forward another example to prove their thesis.
The example in question is an follows:--When a living person is
at home he is not out. But if they think that it is a better one
then they should have given it at the outset. But it does not
illustrate presumption based upon non-perception. The initial
proposition of the Mimamsakas is that there are six kinds of
presumption. But they, cowed down with fear at the angry
look of the Naiyāyikas, have taken to heels, deserting presump-
tion based upon non-perception like a doe in a forest. Such an
act, on their part, is extremely mean and unworthy of a noble
man,
If you desert this young lady (in the shape of the former
illustration of presumption) who absolutely depends upon
you for her protection then how will the other ladies (the
other illustrations of presumption) count upon your protec-
tion with confidence ?
If a negative fact is presumed on the basis of positive fact90
Nyayamanjari
then it is an illustration of presumption based upon percep-
tion. But in that case it is not difficult to discover the relation
of invariable concomitance holding between the above two
facts. The simple reason is that an object of limited extension
occupies only a portion of space and hence in the other spaces
its negation can be easily known. If it is determined that
smoke does not exist in a place where fire does not exist then
does such smoke, according to you, play the part of a probans
which establishes the existence of fire on its locus? As you
decide with regard to this example so we decide with regard
to your example of presumption. (If you agree to the point
that the above example illustrates inference based upon nega-
tive concomitance then the instance of presumption is in no
way different from that of inference).
Now, the Mīmāṁsakas may contend that inference is based
only upon the positive concomitance discovered in and through
repeated observations. Such a contention is not tenable. If the
Mimāṁsakas hold that a negative fact is implied by presump-
tion then they surely arrive at a wrong conclusion. But the
Naiyāyikas hold that a mark which is either positively or
negatively related to the probandum is conducive to latter's
inference provided that the probandum in question is not
already known. We shall prove later on that there are cases
of inference in which the knowledge of the negative concomi-
tance is essential. If we do not ascertain the positive and
negative relations of the probans belonging to the subject of
inference before the actual act of infering then we are not sure
of the truth of an induction which leads to a deduction. The very
propositions which the Mimärsakas have put forward to prove
the absence of living person from all places outside his house
are the same as are required for the inferential knowledge of
his absence. All the counter-arguments, advanced by the
Mimâmsakas, are really semblances of reasoning since they are
contradicted by the sources of valid knowledge such as
perception etc.
Presumption based upon the verbal testimony is not distinct from an
inference
The example of the so-called presumption, based upon the91
Presumption not distinct from Inference
verbal testimony, is a weak one, and is not different from that
of an inference. It is really absurd to presume the part of
sentence since the meaning of the absent part can be inferred
from its effect which serves the purpose of a true mark. As you
infer fire, the cause of smoke, on a hill seeing smoke, the effect
of fire, in its cave, so you may infer the taking of meal, the essen-
tial condition of corpulence, noticing the great bulk of a person.
We notice no difference in these two instances. From our
repeated observations we have learnt that corpulence is the
effect of the taking of meal. In some cases the mark is perceiv-
ed but in other case it may be known by means of the verbal
knowledge. There is no great gulf of difference fixed between
these two marks, acquired by the two different sources of
knowledge.
The Mimamsakas contend that an incomplete sentence can-
not convey its meaning. They do not mean to say that the
sentence that corpulent Devadatta does not take his meal dur-
ing the day fails to convey that he is corpulent but simply
intends to suggest that the knowledge of his corpulence is condi-
tional and that it involves a reference to its condition which is
not given there. This hypothetical knowledge, being incomp-
lete, is not a true one. Hence the source of this knowledge, i. e.,
the sentence, is not a means of true knowledge. Hence, the
sentence in question should be made complete. This is the sum
and substance of the Mimämsă contention. Such a contention
is not tenable. Now let us see which one of the following invol-
ves reference to something else. Is it a word or its meaning or
its knowledge? If it is held that a word involves a reference
then it may be answered that as no inarticulate sound involves
a reference so a word which does not refer to a meaning in-
volves no reference to some other word. If it is further held
that a word which refers to its meaning also involves a refe-
rence to some other word then the hypothesis requires further
clarification. The upholders of the hypothesis should agree to
the point that the meaning of a word also involves a reference
to some other object. If it is admitted that the meaning of a
word involves a reference to some other object then the hypo-
thesis that the presumption of a clause is necessary becomes
superfluous. Now, the Mīmāṁsakas may uphold the third alter-92
Nyayamanjari
native and assert that consciousness involves a reference. If this
is their stand then the critics (the Naiyāyikas) point out that
all forms of consciousness do not involve a reference to other
objects. The critics admit that the knowledge of the meaning
of a word involves a reference to other objects over and above
its own object because its object involves a reference to them.
But they also subscribe to the view that the auditory percep-
tion of a sound does not involve such a reference since sound
itself, its object, does not involve a reference to other objects.
Hence, in order to establish the referential character of mean-
ing one should admit the referential character of an object.
Moreover, the Mimâmsakas presume a clause in order to
establish the knowledge of some additional objects. Hence, it
will be a simpler course to be adopted by us if we directly
assume the additional objects themselves. What benefit do we
derive, having recourse to the additional step?
Now, the Mimāṁsakas raise an objection that what is assumed
does not follow from the Vedas. But the objection may be met
thus :-
Even if we assume for the sake of an argument that a clause or
a sentence is presumed then the meaning of the clause or of
the sentence is not conveyed by the same since either of them
is non-Vedic. The Mimāṁsakas may contend that the Vedic
text is of two-fold character. viz., the first type is heard, i. e.,
given and the second one is inferred and that what is presumed
also pertains to the Vedic text. The counter argument of the
Naiyāyikas is as follows:-
The subject-matter of the Vedic text admits of two kinds, viz.,
the first one is directly given by the Vedic texts and the second
one is suggested by the first one. Thus, the suggested matter is
also Vedic. In that case,,why should we subscribe to a gratui-
tous assumption in the shape of a clause or of a sentence?
Hence, the new matter, i. c., the subject matter, which is deriv-
ed from the direct Vedic text will be treated also as Vedic.
Therefore, we can confidently assert that the hypothesis of pre-
sumption based upon the verbal testimony is in no way more
satisfactory than that of the Naiyāyikas.Prābhākaras' Refutation of Srutărthāpatti
The refutation of Srutarthapatti by the Prābhākaras
Now, the followers of the Prabhakara school of Pūrvamimāṁsā,
a third party, appear
the scene. They refute the above two
hypotheses and put forward a new hypothesis. The above subject
matter, i. e., supper at night, is supersensuous and the relation
of concomitance holding between supper and fatness cannot be
discovered. Again, the hypothesis that a clause or a sentence
which completes a Vedic sentence otherwise incomplete is to
be presumed, has already been refuted. But if the subject-matter
which is imagined is very general then it will be easy, on our
part to discover the relation of concomitance. Let us see a few
concrete cases. There are few examples of Vedic injunctions
in which the verb 'to sacrifice' has been used but the agent i.e.,
the nominative has not been mentioned. But in these cases the
nature of the agent can be easily guessed. The verb 'to sacri-
fice' is transitive. Being such it produces some result. One who
enjoys the fruit of the action is the agent since the relation of
invariable concomitance holds between the enjoyer of the fruit
of an action and the transitive verb like the verb 'to sacrifice'.
93
The drift of this line of thinking is that it is easy to arrive at
a more general induction. The Prābhākaras quote a line from
the commentary of Sabara in order to solve the apparent con-
flict between their view and that of Sabara. Sabara clearly
writes that Presumption is dṛṣṭa (based upon sources of valid
knowledge other than the verbal one) and Sruta (based upon
verbal knowledge). Prabhākara interprets it in a different
manner. He holds that the apparent meaning is not real one. It
is only a popular saying. But the real meaning of it is that the
complete Vedic sentence gives rise to such knowledge of objects
as removes the apparent inconsistency involved in it (the Vedic
sentence). Thus Prabhākara and his followers refuse to accept
Śruta-arthāpatti (presumption based upon the verbal testimon
as one of the distinct varieties of Presumption and propound
the thesis that the additional meaning which the words of the
Vedic sentence do not cover is also conveyed by this sentence and
the above knowledge is thus derived from the source of verbal
testimony. As an arrow has a short or long process, i.e., it hits
a near or a remote object orit pierces and passes through a thin
or thick object quickly or slowly, so a sentence quickly or slowly94
Nyayamanjari
conveys its meaning since the knowledge of the complete mean-
ing depends upon a group of factors viz. the knowledge of the
meanings of words denoting qualities, substances, action, etc. As
long as the function of words conveying their meanings continues
so long the knowledge of the meaning arises in our mind. But
when its function ceases to work it produces no knowledge since
the factors which determine knowledge do not exist.
A student, who is worthy of being initiated into the art of the
proper use of words employed by the experienced persons,
attentively notes the usage of the old teachers and comes to
learn that such and such sentences are capable of conveying such
and such meanings. The words which constitute these sentences
determine the meanings of them which obey a number of speci-
fic conditions. If we reflect on the nature of conditions which
regulate the conditioned meanings of sentences then we come
to know that there are some cases which show that even silent
words determine such meanings. There are a few Vedic injunc-
tions which are elliptical in their character. An illustration of
this type is 'Viśvajita yajeta' a person who intends to enjoy
heavenly bliss should perform the sacrifice called Viśvajit which
is a means to this end. In this injunction the compound word
'svargakāma' (one who intends to enjoy heavenly bliss) is not
given. Still, the silent compound word contributes its quota
of meaning towards the conveying of the complete meaning of
the above injunction. There are also some other injunctions in
which the given words which are heard are given up since
they do not help to convey the complete meanings of them
(injunctions). An illustration of this type is as follows:---
Yasya ubhayam havir ārttim arcchet (the word 'ubhayam'
(both) has been abandoned since it is not capable of expressing
the complete meaning of a great Vedic injunction). (In connec-
tion with the directions of the new moon and the full moon
sacrifices it has been stated that if both the articles which are to
be offered are spoiled then Indra should be offered five plates
of rice. Now, the prima facic view is that an emphasis should
be laid upon the adjective 'both'. The conclusive view is that
even if one of these two articles to be offered is spoiled then the
compensatory rite should be observed. Hence, the word 'both'
loses its significance since its absence opens up a wider scope. ThePrabhakaras' Refutation of Srutarthāpatti
actual traditional practice is that the word 'ubhaya' (both)
should be given up. Thus, it has got no part to play when the
meaning of the above two conjoined injunctions is conveyed).
In some cases no importance is attached to a subordinate clause
which does not shape the meaning of the main injunction, e.g.,
one sprinkles the articles with such clarified butter as remains
after the conclusion of the Prayāja sacrifice. (There is direction
for sprinkling the articles to be offered with clarified butter which
remains after the conclusion of Prayāja sacrifice in the above
Vedic sentence. Such a provision invites other considerations.
There should be also some ruling with regard to the preserv-
ations of such clarified butter and the provision of a pot which
will contain it. In the absence of such a ruling will the sprink-
ling of the articles with clarified butter be abandoned? A doubt
arises in our mind. The Mimāṁsakas hold that no qualitative
change from the religious point of view is introduced into the
nature of these articles by such sprinkling. In connection with
that sacrifice it has also been stated that omentum should be
given to Prajapati. But it should not be sprinkled with clarified
butter. The object of the sprinkling of the articles with clarified
butter is not spiritual but merely secular. To smoothen the sur-
face of the rough and coarse articles is the tangible aim.
Omentum requires no such sprinkling. Therefore, in that case
if any quantity of clarified butter exceeds the need of Prayāja
sacrifice then it should be left aside. Hence, the sprinkling of
articles with clarified butter is not an essential condition of the
sacrifice in question. Thus, the Vedic sentence which describes
such sprinkling is not an integral part of the Vedic injunction
which throws light upon the performance of some Vedic rites.
In other words, this Vedic sentence is not taken into considera-
tion when the meaning of the main injunction is discussed).
Now, the boiled-down sense of the early discussion is this that
when the meaning of a proposition corresponding to a relational
judgment is ascertained it must be admitted that the words
which are actually given do not determine the above meaning.
If the truth of the above judgment is accepted then it also stands
to reason that a sentence, a portion of which is not given may
also directly convey a meaning. In that case what is the good
of assuming the type of presumption based upon the verbal
.
9596
Nyayamanjari
testimony? As in the so-called instances of presumption based
upon the verbal testimony the meaning is directly conveyed by
the incomplete Vedic sentences so the intermediate process of
supplying the silent portion in order to render the sentence
complete is superfluous. Now, a problem arises in our mind. It
runs thus:-Should all the constituents of a sentence be ascer-
tained? Moreover, if the meaning of a sentence is not comple-
tely grasped then how can the factors that determine the mean-
ing be ascertained?
The solution of the above problem is as follows. Even when
we hear a sentence in toto the words which compose it do not
determine its meaning by their mere presence in the body of
the sentence. But, on the contrary, if the meaning of a sentence
is ascertained then we are in a position to understand which
words really determine the meaning of the sentence. This is our
view which has been already stated. Thus, if the meaning of a
sentence of which some words are not heard is ascertained then
in the light of that meaning we know that even the unheard
words, too, determine the above meaning. Let us cite a few
examples to vindicate the truth of our view that the unheard
words determine the meaning of a sentence. The Vedic sentence
'svargakāmo yajeta' amounts to the complete sentence
'svargakāmo yāgena svargaṁ bhävayet'. It means that one
who aspires after heavenly bliss should make provision for
heavenly bliss by means of a sacrifice. In the original form of
the sentence the words 'yāgena' and 'svargam' are not given.
But its meaning being transparent it is easy to follow that the
unheard words determine the above meaning. We follow the
meaning of the word 'agnicit'. The word stands for a sentence
'Yah agnim cinoti'. The formation of the word is this (agni+
ci the suffix 'kvip' denoting the agent). When we get the word
thus formed, there is no trace of the kvip suffix which is dropp-
ed in the resultant form. But the meaning of the unheard suffix
is definitely grasped. The word 'adhuna' also contains an
element which is not heard. The combination of the pronoun
'idam' with the nominal suffix adhuna results in the word
'adhuna' (at present). The base of it is dropped though it
conveys the meaning. Similarly, in the compound words and
the words formed by the nominal suffixes the proper case-Refutation of Srutārthāpatti
97
endings which are significant remain unheard. But we grasp
their meanings. (The compound word 'raja-puruṣaḥ' amounts
to the sentence räjñaḥ puruṣaḥ (the servant of the king). The
sixth case-ending corresponds to 'of'. It denotes the relation of
the master to his servant. We follow its meaning though we do
not hear it. The word 'Daśarathiḥ' amounts to the sentence
*Dasarathasya apatyam pumân (the male child of Dasaratha).
(The sixth case-ending is dropped in the resultant form though
its meaning is clearly grasped). Similarly, we follow the
meaning of the incomplete sentence 'Viśvajitā yajeta'. In the
light of its meaning we come to learn that it contains the word
'svarga-kamaḥ' which remains unheard. A viniyoga injunction
is such as points to the relation between the end and the means
of a sacrificial rite. (Some Mimāmsakas hold that the above
injunction discharges its function with the help of six special
proofs which are called Śruti, Linga. Väkya, Prakaraṇa, Sthana
and Samakhya. They have been explained also in the manuals
of the Mimāṁsā works of the Bhāṭṭa School). The Mīmāṁsakas
of the Prabhakara school contend that a viniyoga injunction
discharges its function of pointing to the relation between the
end and the means with the help of five proofs with Linga at
the top and Samakhya at the bottom. They also contend that
Sruti, the first of the so-called viniyoga proofs, has got no part
to play. Thus, no Sruti should be presumed in the absence of a
direct Śruti. In fine, there is no scope for Śruta-arthāpatti in
connection with the function of viniyoga injunction.
The Mimamsakas of the Bhatta school contend that if the
Prābhākaras mean to say that the meaning of a sentence is
conditioned alike by the given and the silent then they should
admit that all words which determine the meaning of a
sentence, uniformly discharge their function of expressing their
meanings. In that case there should exist no distinction between
a word used in a primary sense and that used in a secondary
sense from the Prabhākara standpoint. Moreover, the Bhattas
have cited a fair number of examples, the proper interpretation
of which depends upon the solution of the conflict among the
six proofs of ascertaining the relation between the principal and
the secondary elements of a Vedic rite. The solution presupposes
Śruti, the first of the above six proofs, as the only solvent of allNyāyamañjari
conflicts since the earlier one is held to be stronger than the
latter. The Prabhākaras refuse to accept Śruti as a proof. Now
how can they do justice to such example if they do not subscribe
to the view of the Bhāṭṭas ?
The Prābhākaras face this objection thus:-The words which
constitute a sentence and determine its meaning have got a
part to play. But each of them does neither play the same part
nor in the same manner. Words have different ways of express-
ing their meanings. Some directly express their primary mean-
ing but others convey only secondary meanings. But the mean-
ing of a sentence cannot suddenly appear if its essential
elements denote no meaning. Again, if it is admitted that the
constituent words have their contribution towards the mean-
ing of a sentence then it goes without saying that the words
will be admitted to denote the different types of meaning
(primary, secondary, etc.).
The word 'lion' has a primary meaning in some sentences.
But the very word, used in the sentences like the present one
'Devadatta is a lion' denotes a secondary meaning.
98
The word 'Ganges' has a primary meaning in the sentence
'He takes his ablution in the Ganges' (Gañgâyāṁ Majjati). But
in the sentence 'A cowherd lives in the Ganges' (on the
banks of the Ganges) (Gangāyām ghoṣaḥ prativasati) the
word 'Ganges' denotes a secondary meaning. Thus, the
Prābhākaras meet the first part of the objection raised by the
Bhāṭṭas.
The Prabhakaras also meet the second part of the objection
raised by the Bhāṭṭas. They point out that the Bhāṭṭas have
lost sight of the real point. The real strength of a proof lies in
its power of conveying the relation between the means and the
end. If one proof conveys it much more quickly than another
then the first one is stronger than the second one. The proofs
have been arranged in order of their power of conveying the
relation in order of time. The first proof gets the first preference
since it conveys the above relation without the least delay. If
we follow the sense of a Vedic text then we can understand
which of these proofs renders us speedy service to grasp the
relation between the end and the means. Thus, there is no
necessity of presuming Śruti.Refutation of Srutarthāpalli
The Prābhākaras now argue against the hypothesis of the
Bhaṭṭas. The Bhaṭṭas assume that such of the six proofs, viz.
śruti, lińga, etc. impart the power of conveying the relation
holding between the end and the means to the viniyoga injunc-
tion. The very power of conveying such relation, being the
same, how can one proof prevail upon another, preventing the
due function of the so-called dependant proof in question? To
meet this objection, they will have to revise their assumption
and hold that the proofs do not uniformly impart the above
power to the injunction in question. They should hold that
the one is quick at imparting the power but another is slow to
do so. If they admit it then they will find no difficulty in follow-
ing the position of the Prabhākaras. They hold that all words
do not uniformly convey their meaning. Similarly, all the proofs
have not the same speed to convey the above relation promptly.
What the Prabhakaras mean to say is that to have a proper
solution an approach should be made from the side of the
meaning of a sentence but not from the side of the words them-
selves. Therefore, the assumption of the power of words or that
of a sentence is of no use.
99
The rites such as are observed in honour of Indra accompa-
nied by Agni and others are called Vikṛta since the details of
their performance are not directly mentioned. In case of Vikṛta
rites no injunction which throws light on the observance of
their subsidiary rites is found. But still none should infer an in-
junction which provides us with the required details. The very
injunction which enjoins a Vikṛta rite furnishes us with all the
details to be observed in connection with it. In some cases, the
very injunction is correlative of the subsidiary actions. If the
view is taken to be absolute then a question arises that there
would be no distinction between a direct mandate and an in-
direct one the application of which is extended since both of
them inform us alike of the details of subsidiary actions to be
observed. An answer to this objection is as follows-There is
no difference in the nature of the understanding of these two
mandates. But there is a difference in the matter of the perfor-
mance of the two sets of rites according to the direct and the
indirect mandates. In case of a direct mandate one should
observe rites as he is ordered by an injunction to do. But in100
Nyāyamanjari
case of an indirect mandate one should follow it so far as it has
bearing upon the rite undertaken by him. (In other words, in
the first instance all the details of a principal rite are furnished
directly by the injunction. Thus, the performer has no choice
to make. He is required only to obey the command. But in case
of the performance of a subsidiary rite the details are not
directly supplied by an injunction. They follow from the injunc-
tion which governs the basic principal rite. All the details of
the main rite are not to be necessarily performed in connection
with the observance of a secondary rite. Only the suitable ones
are to be selected. Moreover, in connection with the perform-
ance of a principal rite some such details are observed as are
not directly mentioned by injunctions. They are not to be
counted upon as essential for Vikṛta karman. Thus Vikṛta
karman is the pivot round which the selection of details revolves.
Still a Vikṛta karman bears a close resemblance to the main
karman since one is to observe a majority of the details of a
main rite in connection with the performance of its correspon-
ding Vikṛta karman.
.
Very well, if this is the solution offered by the Prabhākaras
then they should admit that the husking of the cooked article
should not be observed in case of milk-boiled rice which is
prepared in a gold vessel, since such husking is incompatible
with the vikṛta karman in which such milk-boiled rice is re-
quired. But why is husking mentioned here and abandoned
after mature consideration? The answer to this objection is
very simple. Among the details of the main rite husking is includ-
ed. It is a truism that the husking of milk-boiled rice is absurd
on the face of it. Still, one should not argue like this that its
incompatibility should not be exposed since it is absurd to think
of it as an element of vikṛta karman. One should bear in mind
that it has been stated that a vikṛta karman is similar to its
corresponding main rite so far as the details of the latter are
concerned. It is naturally expected that all the details will be
observed in connection with the performance of a vikṛta
karman. Husking is included in the list of the details of a main
rite. Thus, husking has a possibility of being performed. To
rule out this possibility the prohibition of husking has been
mentioned. The main reason for this prohibition is this thatRefutation of Dhvani
101
the direct details are observed but the parts of the details are
neglected in case of the extension of the application of an in-
junction.
Jayanta says in fine that the detailed discussion of the subject
matter, of the other systems, which has been incidentally intro-
duced into the work on Nyaya philosophy should no more be
encouraged.
Some aspects of the thesis of the Mimamsakas of the Bhaṭṭa
school have been incidentally discussed. On a critical examina-
tion of their thesis we find that the hypothesis of presumption
based upon the verbal testimony is only open to serious objec-
tions. Any one of the two hypotheses, viz. (i) both given and
silent words determine the meaning of a sentence and (ii) the
words of a sentence by means of their different intrinsic power
of quickly or slowly conveying their objects express the meaning
of a sentence without assuming other sentences or clauses, is a
better substitute.
The refutation of the hypothesis of Dhvani
The second hypothesis that the words of a sentence by means
of their intrinsic power completely express the meaning of a
sentence is refuted by the hypothesis of the proud rhetoricians
that a word, apart from its primary or secondary meaning, con-
veys a distinct meaning by means of the power of suggestion
and that the meaning of a word in some cases suggests another
distinct meaning. They say that a positive sentence suggests a
negative meaning and that a negative sentence suggests a
positive meaning.
The examples are as follows. The positive sentence "Oh pious
one! move here freely etc." suggest a negative meaning. The
negative sentence "Oh traveller ! do not enter this house etc."
suggests a positive meaning. (The words convey, at the outset,
a primary meaning and afterwards with reference to the context
and other factors the suggested meaning is presented to our
mind.) Jayanta joins issue with the rhetoricians and holds that
the words only by means of their power of expressing either
primary or secondary meaning convey the final meaning of a
sentence. In the examples cited above the objects meant are toNyayamanjari
be grasped by other sources of knowledge or are knowable by
such proofs.
Or, one should not engage one self in dissertation with the
students of pure literature since the learned scholars in the
different branches of study become perplexed to ascertain the
much complicated meaning of a sentence.
We shall not spend much time in discussions about the import
of a sentence which befits the circle of the learned critics of
literature since the ascertainment of such a meaning is not
within the province of the logicians. Hence, we shall now return
to our old topic. Our confirmed opinion on this topic is this
that presumption does not differ in the slightest degree from
inference.
102
Abhāva (Non-perception) is distinct source of knowledge
The Bhāṭṭas hold that the proof which reveals negation is a
distinct one.
The proof which does not reveal a positive object reveals a neg-
ative object and is called the privation of proof (pramāṇābhāva).
If we analyse the judgment that there is no jar here then we find
that a proof which grasps only a positive object reveals a jar
and that a negative judgement that there is no jar owes its exis-
tence to the privation of all proofs. If we dive deep into the
matter then we see that the non-appearance of the knowing
process of the knower directed to a jar is the proof which is
called the non-perception of a perceptible object and the result-
ing consciousness assumes the form that a jar does not exist.
(This hypothesis is not sound since the proof in question is not
a form of consciousness). The alternative hypothesis is this.
The knowing process of a knower which reveals a negative fact
such as the negation of a jar is due to the absence of a proof
positive. The judgment that there is no jar is the proof. The
result of such a proof is that the negation of a jar is to be avoid-
ed or obtained etc. Kumārila has explicitly stated in his
Śloka-värttika to this effect:-
The first hypothesis of Kumarila is that the proof which is
called the privation of a proof is really the negative mode of a
soul-the negative mode which is the absence of all positive
states such as perceptual consciousness etc. These positiveRefutation of Dhvani
states of the soul reveal only positive objects. The negative
state, on the other hand, the source of a negative judge-
ment such as there is no jar. The second hypothesis is that the
judgement which refers to an object other than a positive one
(i.e., the negative judgement that there is no jar) is the proof
in question and that the result of the judgement is that the
negation of a jar is to be avoided.
An object other than a positive one signifies here the nega-
tion of a jar. The judgement that there is no jar here is not
perceptual since it does not owe its existence to the sense-object
contact. Sense-object-contact admits of two kinds, viz. conjun-
ction and inherence. These two are fundamental types. There
are other varieties of sense-object-contact. They arise from the
combination of these two contacts such as conjunction-cum-in-
herence etc. Such a contact is not possible here. The state of
being an adjective to an object, conjoined to a sense-organ,
does not constitute the sense-object-contact in this particular
case. The negation of a jar does not qualify the spot. What
qualifies another object must be either in conjunction with it or
inhere in it. A stick which is conjoined to a person qualifies
him (a person possessed of a stick). The colour 'white' which
inheres in an object qualifies it. This is the nature of an adjec-
tive which we learn from experience. The negation of an object
is not conjoined to an object, its container, since it is neither a
quality nor an action nor a universal.
103
Even it is taken for granted that the negation of a jar is vis-
ualised because of the sense-object-contact in the shape of
conjunction cum the relation of the qualifying to the qualified
then it would also be admitted that one visualises taste etc.,
belonging to an object to which his eyes are conjoined. The
Naiyāyikas may meet this objection with the remark that taste
is not visualised since it is not capable of being visualised. But
this very answer goes against the perception of negation since it
is imperceptible. Moreover, if the perceptibility of an object
or its imperceptibility determines its perception or non-percep-
tion then why should the sense-object-contact with its six-fold
division be assumed as one of the conditions of perception? The
capability of being perceived should alone determine percep-
tion. Therefore, the awareness of the negation of a jar is not104
Nyayamanjari
visual. The Naiyāyikas put forward a cogent argument in
support of their thesis. The say "When we attentively direct
our eyes to a spot we perceive both the spot and the negation
of a jar. But when we shut up our eyes we behold none of them.
If both these pieces of awareness are alike dependent upon our
eyes then how can we say that we perceive the spot but not
the negation of a jar? How can the proposed difference in the
knowledge of negation be accounted for? The Mimamsakas
boldly meet this objection and emphatically say, "Oh, yes there
exists a difference between the perception of a spot and the
awareness of negation. The negation of an object is not perceiv-
ed because no sense-organ has contact with it."
If the eyes do not come in contact with the perceptible object
then the perception of the object does not arise. Though the
eyes make contribution towards the growth of the awareness
of negation yet this contribution being indirect the awareness
of negation is due to some other factors. As we have knowledge
of heat at the sight of the brilliant colour of blazing fire encircl-
ed by the voluminous flames at a distance so we are aware of
negation seeing the spot. In the above instance we infer heat
on the strength of the perception of colour. Our eyes are not
the unconditional antecedent to the knowledge of heat. Simi-
larly, eyes are not the indispensable condition of the awareness
of the negation of a jar which is not invariably connected with
the visual perception of the spot. Hence, the awareness of the
negation of a jar is not perceptual.
It has been stated thus : (in Kumårila's Šlokavārttika) The
knower at the outset perceives the locus of negation. Then he
recollects the object negated. Afterwards his inner, organ in
co-operation with the non-perception of the perceptible object
produces the knowledge of negation without receiving direct
help from the outer sense-organs. (Thus, the awareness of
negation is never perceptual since it does not directly owe its
existence to the sense-stimulus),
For the reason stated above, we have, sometimes, the know-
ledge of the negation of an object-the negation which lies out-
side the range of our sense-organs. Let us cite an example. A
man who has thoroughly seen all the objects of Gauramūlaka,
a village, has gone out of the village to a distant place. ThereRefutation of Dhvani
he has been asked by a person whether Garga lives at Gauramū-
laka or not. Now he who thoroughly knows Gauramülaka re-
collects for sometime and knowledge dawns in his mind that
Garga is not present at Gauramülaka which lies outside the
range of his sense-organs. Sense-organs play no part to produce
this negative judgment. Hence, the awareness of negation is
not perceptual. The negation of Garga, just cited above, is not
an inference. Neither the locus of negation, i.e., the particular
space in Gauramülaka nor the non-perception of the object
negated is the required mark necessary for an inference. The
spot in question cannot be the mark since a man who is inno-
cent of the invariable relation obtaining between the spot and
the negation of an object is aware of such negation on the spot.
Moreover, the spot in question contains both an object and its
negation and it cannot be an invariable concomitant of the
negation of an object alone. Moreover, a reliable mark rests
upon the subject of inference without an exception. The subject
of inference is, here, the spot. The spot is also the mark.
The spot cannot rest upon itself. Hence, if the spot is the mark,
then it does not belong to the subject of inference. Negations
of objects belonging to the spot in question are innumerable.
Moreover, the negation of an object does not belong to a parti-
cular spot. The number of its locii is countless. Hence it is
absurd to discover that the relation of invariable concomitance
holds between the spot in question and the negation of a parti-
cular object.
The non-perception of an object negated cannot play the
part of a mark which leads to the inferential knowledge of the
negation of the object since it does not belong to the object of
inference. (The text-book does not refer to the old example.
But it cites another commonplace example. We shall follow
the text). The non-perception of a jar may somehow belong
to a jar but does not belong to the spot which contains the
negation of a jar. It may be urged that as non-perception of a
jar contributes its quota towards the appearance of the aware-
ness of the negation of a jar so it belongs to the spot. Such an
argument involves the fallacy of mutual dependence. The fallacy
may be thus illustrated. If the non-perception of a jar belongs
to the spot, the subject of inference, the mark, i,c., the non-
105Nyayamanjari
perception in question, becomes strong enough to produce the
required inferential knowledge of the probandum in question.
Again, if the inferential knowledge of the probandum correctly
arises from the premises then the mark is known to belong
truly to the subject of inference. Thus, these two propositions-
pre-suppose each other. Hence, it is impossible to establish that
non-perception belongs to the locus of negation. The upholder
of the view that the non-perception of an object is the mark
may argue that if the probandum is inferred even by means of
the defective mark then it is of no use to know it as belonging
to the subject of inference. Moreover, if the mark in the shape
of the non-perception is not discovered as an invariable con-
comitant of the probandum in question then how can it help to
infer the negation of the object in question? The discovery of
invariable concomitance depends upon the previous knowledge
of both the mark and the probandum as it has been found in
the case of smoke and fire. Now, if you stick to the above argu-
ment then it will be open to a serious charge since you do not
show what sort of knowledge you have of the probandum in
the shape of the negation of an object when the relation of con-
comitance obtaining between the probandum and the probans.
is discovered. If you hold that the probandum is inferred even
at that time then it is a clear instance of mutual dependence.
On the other hand, if it is held that the knowledge of the nega-
tion of an object is due to another distinct act of inference then
this line of argument will be vitiated by the fallacy of a regres-
sus ad infinitum. The mark, viz., non-perception is itself a
negative fact. We must have recourse to the same process of
thought in order to know it. (To infer a negative fact we
require a mark which is also a negative fact. The mark, being a
negative fact, is to be inferred. Another negative mark is thus.
necessary. It also cannot but be inferred by means of some other
negative fact which is a mark, and so on ad infinitum. Thus,
the fallacy of a regressus ad infinitum cannot be avoided.)
Hence, we cannot count upon an inference as revealing negation.
After taking a few baffled steps we will admit that a competent
distinct proof produces the knowledge of negation and that
negation is not an inference. It is not proper for us even to
entertain a hypothesis that the negative judgment that there is
106107
Refutation of Non-perception
no jar on this spot is due to either verbal testimony or com-
parison or presumption. Therefore, it stands to reason that the
knowledge of a negative fact is due to a proof which is itself
negative in its character since all the positive proofs exclusively
throw light on the positive objects.
A proof and an object which is known by it should be alike
in their character (similiasimilibus etc.). A proof which is
negative in its character cannot reveal a positive object. Simi-
larly, a negative fact cannot be established by a proof which is
positive in its character. A proof which throws light only on a
negative fact cannot be gainsaid. Therefore, a proof which is
negative in its character should be admitted in order to enlighten
a negative fact.
The refutation of Non-perception as a distinct source of knowledge
A refutation of the Bhaṭṭa Mīmāṁsā view stated above is as
follows. It is a truism that a negative fact is admitted by the
Mimāṁsakas of the Bhaṭṭa school to be objectively real and
distinct. One should not search for a distinct proof for its illu-
mination since it is revealed by perception and similar other
proofs already admitted by us. When a negative fact rests upon
a spot which is within the field of our vision it is seen with our
own eyes. But when it lies beyond the range of our sense-organ
it is grasped by any other competent proof. The judgment that
there is curd in the pot is a simple one. Similarly, the judg-
ment that there is no jar here is a simple one. In the first case,
both the objects, viz., curd and the pot stimulate eyes which
produce the first judgment. Similarly, in the second case, the
negation of a jar and the spot stimulate eyes which without be-
ing passive and functionless produce the second judgment. Now,
how can the Mimamsakas hold that the negative judgement
is a complicated one? They hold that the one element of it
the spot is visualised whereas the other element of it is
grasped by some-other proof. How can a distinction in the
nature of the so-called awareness of the two objects be logically
drawn? The judgment that the hill is fiery is a simple one but
still it is a judgment by complication. It is a truism that the
predicate of this judgment, viz., fire is not perceived and that
i. e.,३
Nyāyamanjari
its knowledge is mediate. If we take the growth of knowledge
of fire into consideration then we find that the remembrance
of the invariable concomitance obtaining between smoke and
fire and such other thought processes intervene between the
perception of smoke and the appearance of the knowledge of
fire. But in case of the above negative judgment there is no
such delay. No thought process goes between the perception of
the spot and the awareness of the negation of a jar. Like the
perception of the spot the awareness of the negation of a jar
immediately and invariably follows the sense-object-contact,
i.e., the functioning of the sense-organ, viz., the eyes.
108
The fire on the hill, as stated above, is beyond the range of
our vision. But the negation of a perceptible object located
upon a near locus is not so. The awareness of negation is causally
connected with the senses. Its causal connection is based upon
the joint method of agreement and difference. No man can see
the above-mentioned fire in a hill in spite of the best activities of
his eyes. The negative awareness is visual since it is produced
when the eyes do not cease to function. Such an awareness
closely follows the sense stimulus. The Mimãmsakas have pointed
out that the colour of a distant fire is seen but its heat is in-
ferred and that the knowledge of heat is not causally con-
nected with the sense-stimulus. They urge that the awareness
of negation is not likewise causally connected with the sense-
organ. But this analogical argument does not hold good. The
conclusion that no eyes are capable of feeling heat has been
repeatedly arrived at. Every body knows that the sense of touch
grasps only tactile objects. The eyes are capable of revealing
colour and the sense of touch can only feel the touch of an
object. Thus, in the above case, heat is only inferred since
eyes are absolutely incapable of feeling heat.
The conclusion, reached by the Mimāṁsakas, is one-sided. It
is not applicable to the perception of negation.
If the awareness of an object which follows the visual percep-
tion of its container is not of sensuous origin then it does not
follow that every such awareness as follows perception is non-Refutation of Non-perception
109
perceptual. If this law had been universal then colour would
not have been visualized. A fresh objection arises in our mind,
viz, "How can negation which is colourless and has no connec-
tion with the eyes be perceived with eyes ?" An object is known
as visualized when it is an actual object of perception produced
by eyes. It is not so because it has colour. No coloured atoms
are visualized. Whatever is connected with eyes is not visualized.
The sky though connected with eyes is not visualized. Now, if
the Naiyáyikas go to the other extreme and hold that an object
which is not connected with eyes is also visualized then the
very distant and the past objects such as Vibhiṣaṇa and others
should have been visualized. The Naiyãyikas now make their
position clear. They hold that the law that an object which is
not connected with eyes is not visualized is applicable only to
the positive objects. A negative fact though unconnected with
eyes may be visualized. The narration of the six-fold division
of sense-object-contacts touches only upon the positive objects.
Whenever a positive object which is connected with the sense-
organ is perceived, the sense-object contact is one of the six
types mentioned in the Nyaya text book. The hypothesis that a
sense-organ reveals only an object with which it comes in con-
tact relates only to the positive objects. But a negative fact,
being other than a positive one, is visualized though it does not
come in contact with eyes. Such an admission does not inter-
fere with the law of perception mentioned above. Now, if we
stick to this conclusion then we smell a scent of possible ano-
maly that if a negative fact which does not come in contact
with the sense-organ is perceived then all negative facts belong-
ing to distant lands should also be perceived since they are also
in no way connected with the sense-organ. Such an anomaly
does not arise since the awareness of a negative fact is deter-
mined by the perception of its locus. The locus of a negative
fact which is within the range of a sense-organ is only perceived.
(Jayanta, himself, finds fault with this suggestion. He subs-
cribes to another suggestion which is widely known among the
circle of the logicians of the Nyāya and Vaiśeşika schools. Or,
a negative fact which comes in contact with eyes by means of
conjunction-cum-the relation of the qualifying to the qualified
is visualized. He cites an example to strengthen his case. ThoseNyayamanjari
who hold that the relation of inherence is perceived admit that
the sense-object-contact is conjunction-cum-the relation of the
qualifying to the qualified. Oh! This unproved hypothesis is
based upon an example which is not admitted by both the con-
tending parties! What a wonder! The Naiyāyikas give the
following answer. "No, do not say like this. Even from your
stand-point the relation obtaining between a substance and its
attribute cannot but be admitted. The awareness of a substance
is not the same as that of an attribute. Therefore, a substance
is not identical with its attribute. But neither a substance nor
an attribute is perceived if any one of them does not come in
contact with the sense-organ. Therefore, some sort of sense-ob-
ject-contact must be admitted in order to explain the perception
of an attribute. There is no time at our disposal to indulge in
trifle matters.
110
The counter-thesis of the opponents that negation cannot
qualify the so-called locus, i.e., the ground, in case of the nega-
tion of a jar since it has neither contact with the locus nor in-
heres in it, is not tenable. We shall prove on the score of expe-
rience that there exists a third type of relation which is other
than the relation of conjunction and that of inherence and is
called the relation of the qualifying to the qualified. The oppo-
nents have raised another objection that if the relation of the
qualifying to the qualified added to the relation of conjunction
were admitted then the perception of taste would have also
taken place at the time of the perception of negation by means
of this relation. Our answer to this objection is this that our
opponents will also have to face the same difficulty since they
admit the existence of the complex relation in the shape of
conjunction cum inherence in order to perceive the colour of
certain-objects. The purport of this reply is this that taste and
colour co-inhere in an object. If colour comes in contact with
our eyes by means of the relation of conjunction cum inherence
then taste will also come in contact with the same organ by
means of the same relation. Now, the opponents may contend
that if such a relation suffers from defects then it should not be
admitted and that its non-admission does not affect our posi-
tion. Now, the Naiyãyikas subject the contention of their oppo-
nents to a severe scrutiny. They urge that if this is the position111
Refutation of Non-perception
of the opponents then how do they explain that the eyes perceive
colour with which they, the eyes, do not come in contact since
colour comes in contact with the eyes only by means of the rela-
tion of conjunction cum inherence? The very function of eyes
by means of which an object is perceived is called a contact.
Or, it may be asserted that the sense-organs are fit to perceive
an object and an object is fit to be perceived. Either the func-
tion of a sense-organ or the reciprocal fitness explains the per-
ception of an object such as colour, etc. The relation of con-
junction cum inherence has no part to play. Now, if this is all
what the opponents have got to say then negation should also
be perceived since the sense-organ functions or there exists
mutual fitness, the prerequisite conditions of perception. If a
sense-organ
is admitted as an instrument of the perception of an
object then it must have contact with the object. But if they
refuse to accept the hypothesis that the sense-object-contact is a
necessary condition of perception then they blow hot and cold
with the same breath.
For the reason stated above, it should be admitted that there
are six kinds of fitness and that they correspond to the six-fold
sense-object-contact. The mere statement of non specified fitness
will not do. A fit object which is invariably perceived comes in
contact with the sense-organ but, on the contrary, an object
which comes in contact with the sense-organ is not necessarily
fit for being perceived. If the above hypothesis is accepted then
the possibility of visualizing taste or such other qualities is ruled
out. Thus taste is never introspected though it comes in con-
tact with the inner organ (manas) since the inner-organ is
neither capable of introspecting it nor taste is capable of being
introspected.
Even if it is admitted that fitness is the sole condition of per-
ception then it cannot be proved that negation lacks fitness.
Now, if the Mimamsakas argue that negation should not have a
positive property then the Naiyâyikas meet this argument with
the following counter-argument, viz., the opponents also admit
that many a positive property belongs to negation. There are
only two alternatives open to the Mimamsakas. Either they
should hold that negation is absolutely unreal because it defiesNyayamanjari
all characterization or they should accept the Nyäya hypothesis.
that negation is perceived.
. The following verse has been stated by Kumărila in support
of his thesis. The content of it is this :-
112
. A question whether or not such-and-such object existed in
the village is put to a person who visited every part of that
village. He falls to remember the object which he did not
witness. On the strength of this non-remembrance he comes to
know that such-and-such object did not exist there at the time
of his visit. (The inner meaning of this verse is that negation
is not a present object and its locus is a remote object. Both of
them are beyond the range of perception. Negation is still
cognized. Therefore, the awareness of negation is non-
perceptual).
But this thesis does not stand the test of reason. When a
person visits the village of Gauramülaka which does not
contain some objects he thoroughly perceives it and has also
direct knowledge of the negation of those objects not to be
found there in a general manner just as a person perceives the
absence of light. (When a person perceives the absence of light
his perception is expressed in a universal negative judgment
that there is no light. There is no specification of the absence
of all particular lights. When he is asked whether he has seen
the absence of such-and-such light he remembers the absence
of the particular light. Similarly, the visitor has perceived
the negation of Garga.) Now, the person remembers the
absence of Garga. The negation of Garga cannot be perceived
since it is a past object. When he is asked whether Garga was.
there (during his visit) he, being truthful, says that Garga was
not there after having remembered what he saw before. Now, a
doubt whether Garga is now there or not lingers in his mind
since Garga may go back to that village from some other
place and stay there. Now, an objection is raised that the
person did not know that he perceived the negation of all
objects. (The purport of this objection is that the memory of
the object of an act of perception which is not introspected
is impossible.) The answer to the objection is that the
remembrance of the object of perception which is not intros-
pected is to be admitted here as the relaxation of this law isRefutation of Non-perception
113
accepted by all in case of the remembrance of induction in
connection with the inference of a familiar object. Thus when
he is asked he remembers and gives the reply to all.
Now, an objection is raised that if one perceives all individual
negative facts without knowing that he does so then he should
simultaneously remember all of them but not a particular one.
This objection is not sound. He remembers only that particular
negation about which a question is asked. In other words, if
there is an exciting factor to revive the memory of a particular
negation such as a question, etc., then that particular negation
is only remembered to the exclusion of the rest since the
factors which are required to excite the memory of all parti-
cular negations are absent. We shall prove our point by an
word
be
may
appeal to facts. All the letters that constitute a
simultaneously apprehended. But when the last latter is
apprehended all the letters are simultaneously remembered.
Therefore, in some cases, all the objects that we simultaneously
apprehended are simultaneously remembered. But there are
also some other cases which illustrate that the objects which
are simultaneously apprehended are successively remembered.
Thus, if the objects are perceived without being known that
they are so perceived, they are not necessarily recollected
simultaneously. Thus, if a person simultaneously perceives a
number of objects having not known that he does so then there
is no hard and fast rule that they should be simultaneously
remembered.
Moreover, the statement of Kumärila himself that the locus
to this that
-the village-has been only perceived amounts
the negations of all other objects are also perceived along with
the locus but this perception is not introspected since the term
'only' signifies the negations of objects other than the locus.
Kumārila himself subscribes to this view in the following verse.
When we determine a positive object and express our
determination in the form that this is so and nothing else such
determination necessarily involves a reference to the negation
of other objects.
Thus when the village of Gauramūlaka with all its positive
contents is perceived the negation of absent Garga is also
directly cognized. Hence, the hypothesis that the awareness of114
Nyayamanjari
negation is indirect should be given up. It should also be
admitted that the negation of an object is perceived. The
Mīmāṁsakas have rightly said that the negation of a jar
belonging to the field of vision is not inferred. The Naiyāyikas
approve of this point. The negation of an object which lies
outside the field of vision is also inferred. An instance of the
inference of negation is as follows. When in pitch dark night
there is continuous and heavy shower of rain and the roots of
corns are wet, the absence of the contact of the storm with the
raining cloud is inferred. Another example is being cited to
bring home on the above point. This example is the familiar
example cited by the Mimamsakas to illustrate presumption.
It is as follows. We infer that Caitra is not out because he is in.
The negation of an object is also known on the strength of
verbal testimony. The travellers, having heard the words of
trustworthy persons, ascertained that there was no thief, etc.
on the way.
The Mimamsakas have also stated that there should be
thorough similarity between the means of proof and the know-
able object. They cite an analogous case in support of their
hypothesis. They show that a positive object is grasped only by
means of a positive means of proof. Such an argument is not
convincing.
The absence of eye-disease is one of the conditions of
perception. The absence of the probans on the locus of the
negation of the probandum is one of the concomitant condi-
tions which accompanies the probans to generate inferential
knowledge. The absence of defects of a speaker such as
absence of negligence, untruthfulness, etc. is the concomitant
condition of verbal knowledge to be produced by the testimony
of a trustworthy person. Thus, the negative conditions are also
included in the totality of conditions that produces positive
knowledge. Sometimes, a negative fact constitutes a probans
which leads to the inferential knowledge of a positive probandum.
The absence of rainfall leads to the inference of the blowing
away of the cloud by the storm (the contact of the cloud with
the storm). Thus, it is unreasonable to hold that a negative
fact is known only by means of a negative means of proof.
When a semi-divine being, viz., a Yaksa is worshipped theRefutation of the Reality of a Negative fact
115
articles of worship do not change in conformity to the object
of worship.
The Refutation of the hypothesis that a negative fact is real
Now, the Buddhists, clad in red clothes, appear on the
scene and make a remark that that discussion regarding the
nature of a means of proof of a negative fact is tenable if a
negative fact is real but the very foundation of this discussion
is unsubstantial since a negative fact itself is conspicuous by
its absence in the universe.
Negation is cognized but is never known as an independent
object. (It involves a reference to some other objects). It is
grasped as the negation of a jar (i.e., as qualified by space,
time and jar, the object negated.) A negative judgment is ex-
pressed in the form that this is not here now. Though negation
is cognized as indicated above yet it should be actually related
to the three relata, viz., time, space and the object negated. If
it actually comes in contact with them then nobody should
find fault with the hypothesis that negation is objectively real.
But, as a matter of fact, it remains always unrelated to its un-
avoidable relata. No relation exists beween it and time, space
and the object negated since no relation such as the relation of
conjunction, inherence, etc. unites them. No term which does
not relate itself to another term qualifies it (an unrelated term).
Now, it may be contended that the relation of the qualifying to
the qualified connects them with one another. There is no need
of assuming other relations. But such a contention is not tena-
ble since the relation of the qualifying to the qualified pre-
supposes some other basic relation obtaining between them
(the qualifier and the qualified). A term which qualifies an-
other term as an adjective is either conjoined to or inheres in
that term. Two examples will illustrate this point. They are
as follows: Devadatta is possessed of a stick. This lotus is bluc.
(In the first instance a stick which becomes a predicate of
Devadatta is at first conjoined to him. In the second instance
the colour 'blue' at the outset inheres in the lotus and then be-
comes a predicate.) Hence, the relation of the qualifying to
the qualified is really not an independent relation. By the
sweet will of a person the conversion of the terms of the rela-116
Nyāyamanjari
tion of the qualifying to the qualified is noticed. Sometimes,
an adjective becomes a noun and a noun becomes an adjective.
Therefore, this relation is not objectively real but imaginary.
No relation can specially exist between negation and the object
negated since there is neither co-existence nor coordination
between negation and the object negated. Let us take an
example to illustrate this point. Suppose, a jar is present in a
particular spot at a particular point of time. It cannot be
absent from that spot at that point of time. Again, if the
negation of a jar exists in a particular spot at a particular point
of time then a jar cannot exist then and there.
The Naiyāyikas may contend that the relation of opposition
holds between negation and the object negated. Now, let us see
what is meant by opposition. If the negation of a jar is a pre-
established real fact, comes to the locus of a jar and opposes it
then it will be opposed to it like a mace opposing a jar. Such
a relation of opposition does not exist between them. If it is
assumed that a similar relation obtains between a jar and its
negation then their co-ordination should be grasped as it is
noticed in case of the destroyer and the object destroyed. The
negation of a jar should produce some effect in order to negate
a jar. But what is that effect? If it does nothing in order to
negate a jar then any object would have been opposed to any
other object. If it is assumed that it produces another negative
fact to oppose a jar then this hypothesis cannot escape the
charge of regressus ad infinitum. The so-called sources of the des-
truction of a jar do not bring about its destruction since a posi-
tive object, being destructible by its own nature, does not require
a destroyer for its destruction.
If a positive object is destructible by its own nature then
there is no need of postulating a condition of its destruction. If
it is indestructible by its own nature then the so-called condi-
tions of its destruction have got no part to play.
For this reason, due to the operation of conditions like a
mace, etc., a series of heterogeneous effects such as pot-sherds,
etc., comes into being out of a jar, etc. Again if these pheno-
mena are brought under some other series then a new series of
effects will appear. But under no circumstances the negation ofRefutation of the Reality of a Negative fact
a jar (the destruction of a jar--a negative fact) will be caused by
a jar. But it may be contended that the above negative fact
(the post-negation of a jar) is something real and happens to be
other than a jar. Such a contention will yield no result. Now,
it may be further contended that the negation of a jar in
general is a real fact since it is not cognized on its locus when a
jar is brought there but it has been cognized on it when the
jar has not been brought there because of the relation of oppo-
sition obtaining between a jar and its negation. This conten-
tion is not also tenable because the relation of opposition has
been refuted. Again, if the negation of a jar is not different from
a jar then a jar should have been an effect of a mace. Now, the
Buddhists may argue that the pot-sherds which are produced by
a mace constitute the very negation of a jar. Such a hypothesis,
it is a pity, will lead to an absurd conclusion. If these potsherds
are crushed then the negation of a jar is virtually destroyed. In
that case, the destroyed jar will re-appear. Now, the Buddhists
may revise their hypothesis and hold that the potsherds which
produce no effects are called the negation of a jar. In that case,
the potsherds may be the negation of a cloth as well because an
unreal object cannot be distinguished from another such unreal
object. This argument based upon the assumption of the Bud-
dhists that the negation of an object is unreal. It may be further
shown, following the above line of argument, that a mace, etc.,
cannot effectuate potsherds, etc. (If a potsherd owes its exist-
ence to itself then it does not require conditions like a mace etc.
for its appearance. But if it does not appear at all then the so-
called conditions have no bearing upon it). Now, a question is
put to the Buddhists regarding the nature of negation as suppos-
ed by them. Does it come into being or not? If it does then it
should be called a positive object like a jar. If it does not come
into being but enjoys existence then it should be eternal. If it
is eternal then is it related only to a particular object or to all ?
Of these two alternatives we find no reason in favour of the
first one. If the second alternative is accepted then the parti-
cular negation, being eternal and all-pervasive, should oppose
each and every positive object by its very nature. The net result
of this opposition is that all positive objects, eternal or non-
eternal, would have surely ceased to exist.
117118
Nyayamanjari
Now, if the Hypothesis of negation is discarded then the line
of distinction which absolutely separates one positive object from
another will break down and the one monotonous identity will
engulf all the distinct types of objects. Thus, the human con-
vention, of distinction based upon the classification of objects of
the universe, will disappear from the surface of earth.
If negation does not enjoy objective reality, milk will be
identical with sour milk and sour milk will be so with milk.
Similarly, a jar will be a piece of cloth. A hare will have horns.
The unconscious objects such as earth etc. will be possessed of
consciousness, the very essence of the soul.
If we assume the hypothesis that negation is objectively real
then the positive objects maintain their mutual distinction by
means of their objective difference, which is a type of negation.
But if we do not subscribe to this view and do not try to avoid
the danger of the merging of objects into one another then a
greater peril will surely await us.
The Buddhist criticism
As a positive object is admitted to be different from another
positive one so it should be taken to be other than a negative
fact with whic it is associated. Now, let us see how its distinc-
tion can be maintained. If the mutual difference of the so-called
negative facts is intrinsic, i.e., self-evident, then why will not
the positive objects be so ? Have the positive objects committed
any difference? If difference, in all cases, is uniformly extrinsic
then how is such an assumption tenable ?
If it is held that negation is different from a positive object
because of its association with a positive object and a positive
object is different from negation because of its association with
negation then such an assumption involves the fallacy of mutual
dependence. If it is assumed that every object, both positive
and negative, is different from another object because of its
association with another external negation then the fallacy ofre-
gressus ad infinitum will surely vitiate such an assumption since an
unending series of differences is to be assumed in order to establish
a single case of difference. Negation has its own innate character,
viz., negativity. But it is common to all negative facts. Hence, it
cannot constitute the differentia which distinguishes an indi-Division of Non-perception
vidual negation from another. The distinction of one individual
negation from another is due to the positive object negated by
each individual negation. The objects which are negated by
negation are positive. As they differ from one another so their
corresponding negations mutually differ. From the above finding
of facts it is reasonable to hold that the positive objects consti-
tute the mark of distinction of the negative individuals but not
the reverse.
Hence, it will be unwise to assume the hypothesis of a nega-
tive real since the apprehension of colossal chaos arising from
it haunts us.
If negation has no objective existence then what is the mean-
ing of the negative particle 'mà'? There is no truth behind the
hypothesis that every word has a real meaning.
We are the Buddhists who have earned name and fame in
every circle of thinkers. We are expert in establishing the thesis
that words have also imaginary meaning.
In some cases, a negative term, framed by attaching a nega-
tive particle to a term, presents to our consciousness an idea of
a contrary object. When a negative particle is connected with
a verb these two being together suggest to our mind an idea of
the mere cessation of the action denoted by the verb.
119
Very well, let us accept the above Buddhist hypothesis. Now,
a question is put to the Buddhists that if the Buddhists discard
the hypothesis of negation then what purpose will be served by
the elevenfold division of non-perception the only source
of the awareness of negation ?
Eleven-fold division of Non-perception
1. Non-perception of the thing-in-itself-There is no
jar on this spot because no jar is perceived.
2. Non-perception of the cause of the object negated :-
Here is no smoke because no fire is perceived here.
3. Non-perception of the pervader of the object negated :-
Here is no touch of the cold because no water is perceived
here.
4. Non-perception of the effect of the object negated :--
Here is no fire the causal efficiency of which is not counteracted
because smoke, the effect of fire, is not perceived.120
Nyāyamanjari
5. Perception of the contrary of the object negated :-Here
is no cold touch because fire which excludes cold touch is
perceived here.
6. Perception of the effect of the contrary of the object
negated Here is no cold touch because smoke which is the
effect of fire that excludes cold touch is perceived here.
7. Perception of the pervaded of the contradictory of the
object negated :-The destruction of a positive effect is not
uncertain because it does not depend upon a factor other
than the condition of its being for its destruction. Such non-
dependence on the invariable mark of certainty is contradic-
torily opposed to uncertainty. Seeing the mark of certainty we
frame the negative judgment of a positive object-an event that
it is not uncertain.
8. Perception of the contradictory of the effect of the
object negated :-Here is no source of cold touch because fire
is perceived here.
9. Perception of the contradictory of the pervader of the
object negated :-Here is no touch of snow because fire is
perceived here.
10. Perception of the contradictory of the cause of the
object negated :-Here is no horripilation, no grinding of
teeth, because fire is perceived here.
11. Perception of the effect of the contradictory of the
cause of the object negated :-There is no such person, on
this place, as has the grinding of teeth, etc., because smoke is
perceived here.
It is a truism that there are eleven types of non-perception.
Non-perception is the source of a negative proposition but not
that of objectively real negation. Now, the following question
arises in our mind. Non-perception is that type of probans
which is not different from the probandum. Such a non-
difference of the probans from the probandum is admitted by
the Buddhists themselves. The negative judgment or the
negative proposition that there is no such-and-such object,
being the probandum, non-perception, the probans, should be
different from it. How can non-perception be the probans in
this case? The Buddhists say in reply that there is much truth
in this question, but the contender misses the inner significanceDivision of Non-perception
121
of the Buddhist theory. Non-perception does not actually lead
on to the actual negative proposition but to the potentiality of
doing so. This potentiality is not different from non-percep-
tion. Hence non-perception is such a probans as non-
different from the probandum to be established.
Now, a fresh question arises in our mind. Potentiality,
mentioned above, is a positive state but non-perception is a
negative fact. How is it that they are identical? The Buddhists
give a reply to this question in the following manner. Those
who know the real character of non-perception explain it thus.
Non-perception is not a negative fact. It is not contradictorily
-opposed to perception. It is contrary to perception. It signifies
the awareness of an object which is other than what is expected
to be perceived. Such an awareness is denoted by non-percep-
tion. Thus the hypothesis that non-perception is the source of a
negative judgment is also not open to the possible charge that
if a negative fact presupposes non-perception as its source of
knowledge then non-perception, being itself negative, should
also presuppose another non-perception and so on ad infinitum.
But non-perception of the Buddhist school, being an awareness
of a positive object, presupposes no other awareness as it is self-
luminous. Now, another question arises in our mind. If non-
perception is the source of a negative proposition then can we
frame, on the strength of non-perception, a negative proposi-
tion like this that a supersensuous object does not exist? The
Buddhists meet this objection in the following manner. They
hold that the subject of a negative proposition is always a
perceptible object. If a perceptible object which is expected to
be perceived somewhere is not perceived but some other
object is perceived then non-perception leads on to a negative
proposition. We should also bear in mind that the subject of
this negative proposition cannot but be a perceptible object.
Hence we cannot, at our sweet will, frame a negative proposi-
tion which refers to any and every object without restriction.
In the Buddhist system the objects such as a jar, etc., that
have been seen before are definitely known to be visible. If
they are not perceived somewhere then they are referred to
be negative judgments. The objects which lie always beyond
the ken of our knowledge such as the sky-flower are never
}120
Nyayamanjari
5. Perception of the contrary of the object negated :-Here
is no cold touch because fire which excludes cold touch is
perceived here.
6. Perception of the effect of the contrary of the object
negated Here is no cold touch because smoke which is the
effect of fire that excludes cold touch is perceived here.
7. Perception of the pervaded of the contradictory of the
object negated :-The destruction of a positive effect is not
uncertain because it does not depend upon a factor other
than the condition of its being for its destruction. Such non-
dependence on the invariable mark of certainty is contradic-
torily opposed to uncertainty. Seeing the mark of certainty we
frame the negative judgment of a positive object-an event that
it is not uncertain.
8. Perception of the contradictory of the effect of the
object negated :-Here is no source of cold touch because fire
is perceived here.
9. Perception of the contradictory of the pervader of the
object negated :-Here is no touch of snow because fire is
perceived here.
10. Perception of the contradictory of the cause of the
object negated :-Here is no horripilation, no grinding of
teeth, because fire is perceived here.
11. Perception of the effect of the contradictory of the
cause of the object negated :-There is no such person, on
this place, as has the grinding of teeth, etc., because smoke is
perceived here.
It is a truism that there are eleven types of non-perception.
Non-perception is the source of a negative proposition but not
that of objectively real negation. Now, the following question
arises in our mind. Non-perception is that type of probans
which is not different from the probandum. Such a non-
difference of the probans from the probandum is admitted by
the Buddhists themselves. The negative judgment or the
negative proposition that there is no such-and-such object,
being the probandum, non-perception, the probans, should be
different from it. How can non-perception be the probans in
this case? The Buddhists say in reply that there is much truth
in this question, but the contender misses the inner significance121
Division of Non-perception
of the Buddhist theory. Non-perception does not actually lead
on to the actual negative proposition but to the potentiality of
doing so. This potentiality is not different from non-percep-
tion. Hence non-perception is such a probans as is non-
different from the probandum to be established.
Now, a fresh question arises in our mind. Potentiality,
mentioned above, is a positive state but non-perception is a
negative fact. How is it that they are identical? The Buddhists
give a reply to this question in the following manner. Those
who know the real character of non-perception explain it thus.
Non-perception is not a negative fact. It is not contradictorily
opposed to perception. It is contrary to perception. It significs
the awareness of an object which is other than what is expected
to be perceived. Such an awareness is denoted by non-percep-
tion. Thus the hypothesis that non-perception is the source of a
negative judgment is also not open to the possible charge that
if a negative fact presupposes non-perception as its source of
knowledge then non-perception, being itself negative, should
also presuppose another non-perception and so on ad infinitum.
But non-perception of the Buddhist school, being an awareness
of a positive object, presupposes no other awareness as it is self-
luminous. Now, another question arises in our mind. If non-
perception is the source of a negative proposition then can we
frame, on the strength of non-perception, a negative proposi-
tion like this that a supersensuous object does not exist? The
Buddhists meet this objection in the following manner. They
hold that the subject of a negative proposition is always a
perceptible object. If a perceptible object which is expected to
be perceived somewhere is not perceived
object is perceived then non-perception leads on to a negative
proposition. We should also bear in mind that the subject of
this negative proposition cannot but be a perceptible object.
Hence we cannot, at our sweet will, frame a negative proposi-
tion which refers to any and every object without restriction.
but some other
In the Buddhist system the objects such as a jar, etc., that
have been seen before are definitely known to be visible. If
they are not perceived somewhere then they are referred to
be negative judgments. The objects which lie always beyond
the ken of our knowledge such as the sky-flower are neverNyayamanjari
referred to by a negative judgment since they being not
ascertained as visible objects non-perception does not precede
it (the negative judgment in question) as its condition. But
there is an exception to this rule. The negative judgment that.
Caitra is not a demon does not presuppose non-perception of
a visible object as its condition. The reason behind the above
statement is that Caitra is immediately known to be other than
a demon. It is a fact that Caitra is perceived. Hence, he is
not a supersensuous object by the logical necessity of the law
of contradiction. Thus, the above negative judgment does not
presuppose non-perception of the visible object as its
antecedent condition. In other words, it is immaterial to
enquire whether the demon in question is visible. In fine, the
Buddhists arrive at this conclusion that the hypothesis that
negation is objectively real is not tenable since a negative
judgment or proposition is explained by non-perception as its
condition.
122
The Establishment of the hypothesis that Negation is real
A refutation of the Buddhist thesis is as follows. There are
two types of judgment, viz., positive and negative. Every
body's experience bears evidence to their existence. They are
illustrated by two examples, viz. there is a jar on this spot
and there is no jar on this spot. The Buddhists are divided
in their opinion as to the content of a negative judgment.
Some of them hold that a negative judgment does not point
to a peculiar object but is a mere construction of imagination.
Others hold that it refers to an individual phenomenon of
consciousness. (In other words, it is an empty form which is
not determined by a real object but is constructed only by
imagination. Or, it is a projection of consciousness which
appears as an external negative fact.) These two statements
about a negative judgment make no difference between a
negative judgment and a positive one. Thus both of them
should be either equally valid or invalid. By an arbitrary
exercise of will they hold that a positive judgment is true but
a negative one is false. Now, if both of them stand on the same
platform then the peculiar object of a negative judgment
should be thought out. The Buddhists hold that the non-123
Establishment of Negation
perception of a jar is nothing but the awareness of a spot
devoid of a jar. Such a statement is absolutely unreason-
able. Let us examine the nature of the state of being devoid of
a jar. Is it identical with the surface of the spot or not? If it
is identical then the spot, containing a jar, should also be
referred to by the negative judgment that there is no jar on this
spot since the surface of the spot remains the same whether it
contains a jar or not. If the above state is different from the spot
then it is really a negative fact but expressed only in a different
language. Thus the contest is merely nominal but not real.
The Buddhists will not surely make a profit if they try to
understand the state of being devoid in terms of a jar. Is it
identical with a jar or different from it? If the first one is accept-
ed then it is a jar. If the second one is accepted then it is the
negation of a jar.
The Naiyāyikas now quote the very example for the negative
judgment which has been cited by the Buddhists. The judg-
ment in question is that a jar does not exist here. The Budd-
hists hold that it refers to a spot devoid of a jar. The Naiyāyikas
point out that the term 'heie' which is one of constituents of
the above judgment refers to a spot. They agree with the
Buddhists in the point. The term 'here' of the positive judg-
ment that a jar exists here similarly refers to a spot. Such a
reference is admitted by all. The remaining portion of the here
spot is not a vacuum since a necessary reference to some
additional object makes it significant. The additional object
may be called the state of being devoid of a jar or the negation
of a jar. But the difference in name does not make distinction
in the nature of the object referred to. But the Buddhists may
contend that the portion of a negative judgment that a jar does
not exist is only a construction of imagination. Such a conten-
tion is not tenable. The Buddhists hold that a negative judg-
ment follows an indeterminate perception in quick succession
like a determinate perception and they should admit that the
negative judgment must share the same fate with the positive
one.
All positive judgments which are constructed by imagination
are based upon sense-perception. But a negative judgment
should not be based upon sense-perception. The Naiyāyikas124
Nyayamanjari
——
contend that no judgments which are constructed by imagina-
tion are true. Thus, the positive judgments do also turn out to
be untrue. Now, the Buddhist may solve this difficulty thus :-
the determinate perception of positive object is true since it
closely follows a sense-perception (i.e. the indeterminate per-
ception of the Nyaya school). But such a solution is not con-
vincing since negative judgments, being also based upon the
true positive judgments, cannot be true.
Now, the Buddhists may contend that the positive judgments
are called as true because they are conducive to the attainment
of a real object. If this is the purport of their contention then it
may be pointed out that the negative ones are also true since
they likewise lead to a real object. A question may be asked by
them. What is the real object to be attained by means of a
negative judgment? A counter-question is put to them. What
is the real object to be acquired by a positive judgment ? They
may answer that it is 'blue'. We also give them the same reply
that a similar object is also got at by means of a negative judg-
ment. Whenever we come to by the object 'blue' it is obtained
other than yellow, etc., which is subsumed under non-blue.
As 'blue' with this characterization is obtained so it is not un-
reasonable to hold that the negation of yellow, etc., is also
obtained. If it is not admitted then the attainment of blue can-
not also be explained since it is impossible to think of 'blue'
without the above characterization. You have already assumed
in the chapter on definition that an object contains an exclusion
from its other. You cannot retract now.
Happiness or sorrow arises in the absence of a foc or of a
friend. A man places his feet on the way seeing the absence of
thorn on it. A man is earnest to search for the material of a jar
if he finds that no jar has come into being. A man refrains
from taking medicine when he realises that he is free from
disease. No thoughtful man can deny objective existence to nega-
tion having noticed that it actually exists and many worldly
transactions are based upon it.
The Buddhists raise the following objection to the solution
already enumerated. The object of an awareness is one of itsEstablishment of Negation
conditions. Negation is absolutely devoid of all characterístic
features. Hence it is not competent to produce awareness. How
can it be an object of awareness? This objection is not tenable.
From the Buddhist position no real object which produces
awareness is revealed by it since if it endures two or three
points of time the doctrine of the universal flux falls down. The
reason of the negative criticism is as follows. The so-called
condition of awareness at first comes into being, then produces
awareness and afterwards is revealed by its effect-awareness.
These three events cannot simultaneously take place. Hence, the
Buddhists should arrive at the conclusion that even a positive
real which is revealed by apprehension does not produce it, not
to speak of a negative fact. Later on, the Buddhist thesis that
a real object imparts its form to consciousness will be refuted.
In order to be consistent, the Buddhists should hold that positive
and negative facts do not alike produce their awareness. But
the Naiyâyikas point out that the Buddhist should admit that both
the positive and negative facts should be defined as devoid of all
characteristic features but it is pity that the Buddhists hold that
the object of negative awareness is devoid of characteristic
feature. A positive object is that which is the object of positive
awareness but a negative one is that which is the object of
negative awareness. Hence it has been stated in the Nyaya-
bhāṣya that there are two kinds of Reality, viz., positive and
negative. The Buddhists raise an objection to the above thesis
of the Naiyāyikas that if a negative real produces awareness
like a positive one then the line of distinction which separates a
positive real from a negative one is sure to break down. What
a deep insight of the fools! Every body will admit that the
positive awareness is different from the negative one. But how
is it that objects, viz., positive and negative reals, revealed by
these two types of awareness, do not differ in their mutual
character?
Moreover, oh fool! you are to explain why does 'colour'
differ from 'taste' though they alike produce the same effect viz.,
consciousness ? If you hold that difference in the character of
awareness accounts for diversity in the nature of their objects
then the character of the positive and negative reals should also
be essentially different though they are endowed with the same
125126
Nyayamanjari
causal efficiency since they generate dissimilar awareness. The
Buddhists also admit that no difference in the nature of expe-
rience without assuming diversity in the character of its objects is
explained.
·
According to the Buddhists true knowledge reveals a real
object. It admits of two types. They point to the two distinct
kinds of objects since they are mutually different and one and
the same object cannot be revealed by each of them.
From the above conclusion it follows that the difference in the
character of knowledge accounts for the distinction in the
character of its object. A positive real is the object of a positive
awareness and a negative one is that of a negative judgment.
The existence of positive and negative awareness can in no way
be gainsaid. Hence, they point to the existence of positive and
negative reals. This is the corollary of the above finding. It
should also be admitted by the Buddhists. But the Buddhists
hold that negation is a mental construction. In that case, they
should be thorough and consistent subjective Idealists. It is not
proper for them to embrace half-hearted Idealism. It has been
already proved that a negative real has practical efficiency, i.e.,
it is productive of some effect. A negative real produces at
least its awareness. Hence, its power of production cannot be
denied. But it is also a truism that a negative real cannot yield
such result as a positive real does. In this connection, it should
be noted that a positive real fails to do what another such real
does. Hence the distinction in the nature of result does not take
away the reality from a negative fact. The Buddhists cannot
sacrifice a negative real at the altar of practical efficiency.
Our direct knowledge contradicts such an attempt. The vain
cry of the Buddhists merely dries up their throat.
The Buddhists have denied existence to negation on the
ground that there is no possibility of any relation between nega-
tion and its locus. The possible relation of the qualifying to the
qualified presupposes another relation as its basis. As the basic
relation is impossible so the relation of the qualifying to the
qualified cannot unite negation with its locus. The presupposi-
tion of a basic relation holds good only in case of a positive
real. This rule does not apply to the case of a negative real.127
Establishment of Negation
Hence, the Buddhist criticism has no force behind it. The above
law does not also apply to positive reals as well. We do not find
that whenever an object is related to another object the former
inevitably qualifies the latter. When a man presses a stick under
his feet or carries it on his hand he is not cognized as possessed
of a stick (dandin). There is also no such law as shows that
whatever qualifies an object is related to it by another relation.
The relation of inherence qualifies its relata but is not related
to them by an ab-extra relation. The relation of the qualifying
to the qualified like the relation of universal concomitance or like
that of a word to its meaning is a relation sui generis, Le., a
class by itself. It presupposes no other relation to unite its relata.
The very source of this distinct relation is our experience. The
adjective and the noun may change their mutual functions.
Hence a noun may be sometimes cognized as an adjective and
vice-versa. This syntactic relation may be reshaped by the will
of a person. If a corresponding change by awareness takes place,
awareness is not to blame. Hence, negation is connected with its
locus such as the spot, etc, by means of the relation of the
qualifying to the qualified. The same relation holds between
time and the positive objects which are events in time. A verb,
e.g., 'to go' in the active voice or a verb. e.g., ‘to break' in the
passive voice, used in the present tense is related to time by
means of the same relation. (In other words, the sentence,
"Râma goes", purports to convey that the specific action, locat-
ed upon Rāma, the subject, belongs to the present time and
qualifies it. The sentences "The bread is divided into two
pieces" imports that the resulting act of division, located
upon the object, the bread, belongs to the present time
and qualifies it. A relation other than that of the qualifying to
the qualified does not hold between time and action as noted
above. An action does not require the help of any other rela-
tion to relate itself with time). Similarly, the relation of the
qualifying to the qualified holds between negation and its locus.
But the only relation which subsists between negation and the
object negated is that of opposition or incompatibility. The rela-
tion of opposition or incompatibility signifies that the two relata
are incoordinate, i.e., they cannot simultaneously occupy the
same locus. The specific relation being fixed between negation and128
Nyayamanjari
the object negated, the possible objection that on the destruc-
tion of a particular jar the universal destruction of all jars would
emerge does not affect the Nyaya position. The destruction of
a particular jar is only opposed to that particular jar but not to
all jars. The Buddhists have goaded the Naiyāyikas with the two
horns of a dilemma whether negation emerges or not, (i.e. is
eternal). The Naiyāyikas meet it with the following reply:
"Negation does not emerge" is the assumption of the Nyaya
school. Morcover, even if it is admitted that negation emerges
then it is not to be admitted that it is non different from
a positive real since the positive facts themselves, viz., colour,
taste, etc., which come into being are mutually diffe-
rent. Our experience bears convincing evidence to their
mutual difference. The causal relation which holds between
the condition of negation and negation is established by the
joint method of agreement and difference. The emergence
and the destruction of a jar depend upon their respective condi-
tions. A jar depends upon a lump of earth, a stick etc. for its
appearance. Similarly, it depends upon a mace and such other
objects for its destruction. If somebody holds that a mace and
such other instruments do not destroy a jar but produce a series
of dissimilar objects then he must admit that the power of pro-
ducing a series of similar objects has been negated. Otherwise,
when the conditions like a mace, etc., assemble, a series of simi-
lar objects should have come into being along with the series of
dissimilar objects. It may be further contended that a jar has
the capacity for producing both the series of similar and dis
similar objects. Such a contention is not tenable. If a jar itself is
sufficiently strong to bring about such effects then it should pro.
duce pot-sherds (broken pieces of a jar) in the absence of its
contact with a mace, etc., and should also produce a series of
jars in spite of such contact with a mace, etc. There should be
no reign of law in the matter of production of its effects. More-
over, if the dissimilar objects owe their existence only to the
intrinsic power of a jar then the conditions such as a mace, etc.,
will have no contribution towards the production of effects by a
jar. The assumption of such conditions will be simply gratuitous.
If the dissimilar effects are generated by the instrinsic power of
a jar then the conditions such as a mace, etc., have no part to129
Establishment of Negation
play. If it is beyond the power of a jar to produce such effects
then the condition can offer no assistance to a jar to produce
such effects.
If the stroke of a mace terminates the series of similar transi-
tory jars and a series of another kind of momentary effects comes
into being then what has happened to a jar so that it is not pre-
sented to our consciousness as before.
The contender may hold that a jar does not exist. The rejoin-
der is that this admission amounts to the acceptance of the thesis
that negation is objectively real. In that case, the Buddhists
indulge in verbal jugglery for nothing. They use the word
abhavana whereas the Naiyāyikas use the word 'abhāva'. The
word 'abhāva' is formed by the suffix 'ghan' attached to the
root 'bhu' prefixed by the indeclinable 'nañ'. But the word
'abhavana', is formed by the suffix 'lyut' attached to the root,
'bhu' prefixed by the same indeclinable. Has the suffix 'ghan'
committed any offence against you ? Has the suffix 'lyut' render-
ed some service to you? The Buddhists admit that there is
'abhavana' of a jar but there is no ‘abhāva' of a jar.
The Buddhists may contend that when the conditions such as
a mace, etc., assemble, the jar in question does not acquire some
new positive character but it simply ceases to exist in the next
moment.
Such a contention is not tenable. The statement that the
transitory jar does not exist in the next moment signifies that
the negation of a jar exists. The Buddhists may further contend
that they have stated that it is not. But they have not stated
that the negation of a jar is. Such a contention does not hold
good. The pronoun saḥ (ii) and the indeclinable 'na' (not)
have two distinct meanings and produce two pieces of awareness
of the two different objects. The awareness which corresponds
to the pronoun 'sah' has for its object 'the jar', recalled in
memory. The awareness which corresponds to the indeclinable
'na' has for its object 'negation'. We shall not waste our time in
criticising the roundabout statement of a vain scholar.
Thus, the conclusion which follows from the previous discus-
sions is that negation is a distinct type of knowable reality. The
Buddhist thesis that negation is not objectively real but non-per-
ception alone accounts for a negative proposition.130
Nyāyamanjari
Moreover, non-perception cannot be comprised within
svabhāva-inference, i.e., (it cannot illustrate that form of syllo-
gism in which the middle term is non-distinct from the major
term). The Mīmāṁsakas hold that negation is objectively real
and non-perception is a distinct proof.
The non-perception of a cause, etc., may serve the purpose
of a mark which leads to the inferential knowledge of negation.
But the non-perception of a perceptible thing-in-itself is one of
the conditions of the perception of negation.
There are eleven ladies in the shape of all kinds of non-per-
ception in the harem of a section of the Buddhist Logic. One of
them is negative proposition of an object which is generated by
the perception of another object that is pervaded by the contra-
dictory negation of the object itself in question. The destruction
of a positive object which is an effect is not uncertain because
it does not depend upon a factor other than its condition for its
destruction. The destruction of an object which is dependent
upon such a factor is uncertain. The state of being is more
extensive than its mark, viz., non-dependence upon some other
factors. Hence the knowledge of the non-dependence of an
object upon some other factors leads to the negative proposi-
tion that it is not uncertain. This illustration of non-percep-
tion has been subjected to partial criticism. Its detailed criticism
will be given in connection with the refutation of the doctrine
of universal flux.
The sound logicians of the Mimāmsă school (the Prabha-
karas) have denied objective reality to negation. Of this act of
foolishness on their part we feel ashamed.
They hold that a jar is not perceived but its negation is cog-
nized. The implication of such statement is that perception and
non-perception respectively constitute the criterion of the
objective reality or that of the unreality of an object. Such a
view is not tenable. The positive or the negative character of
an object is respectively determined by its perception or
non-perception. But its perception or non-perception does not
respectively amount to its reality or unreality.
We cannot perceive water hidden beneath earth. The non-
perception of water, in this case, does not lead to the negative
proposition that water does not exist.Refutation of the hostile views of Prabhakaras
131
Similarly, mere non-perception does not lead to all sorts of
negative propositions. We think that the non-perception of
hidden water is in no way different from that of the sky-flower
and a demon.
The Refutation of the hostile views of the Prabhakaras
The Prabhakaras may contend that there exists a sharp dis-
tinction between universal and conditional non-perception. The
non-perception of hidden water is conditional. The absolute
non-perception leads to a negative proposition.
The sky-flower is never perceived. The demon is also never
perceived. Still, the sky-flower and the demon do not stand on
the same level of metaphysical existence. A demon may exist.
The possibility of its existence is assured by the scriptures and
inference.
The Prabhākaras hold that there is a temporary non-perception
but its real non-perception consists of repeated non-perception.
Such a thesis is merely an idle talk. By means of the specified
non-perception, i.e., the non-perception of a visible object the
negation of an object is determined. But it is not a fact that its
non-perception is only determined.
If the Prabhakaras deny objective existence to negation then
all the positive objects which are negated by their correspond-
ing negations would be eternal since they do not subscribe to
the hypothesis that they are transitory.
Now a question may be put to the Prabhākaras. What is the
effect of a mace, etc., which acts upon a jar? If they give a
reply to it that the effect in question is a series of pot-sherds
then the jar should exist and discharge its function since it is
not destroyed.
The Prabhākaras may contend that it does not do so because
it is not perceived.
Why is not this endurable and perceptible object perceived
though all the conditions of its perception, viz., the sense-organ
The real answer will be that it is not per-
etc. assemble ?
ceived because it does not exist.
The Prabhakaras should also hold that a negative judgment
is self-luminous and cannot exist without having an objective
reference since it is a judgment like all other positive judg-132
Nyayamanjari
ments. (The implication of it is that negation is objectively
real).
The Buddhists hold that the meanings of words are conceptual
but are not real. But the Prabhākaras do not subscribe to this
view. According to them the meaning of a word is real. What
is the meaning of the indeclinable ‘naň' (not)? (Hence the
reality of negation cannot but be admitted).
The Prabhākaras have discarded the time-honoured hypothesis
that negation is objectively real. But some concession has been
given to it since they cannot do without admitting it in some
form. They have neglected the import of the commentary of
Sabara. Wonderful is their skill in the art of interpretation !
They interpret Sabara but they are indifferent to his spirit.
Enough of criticism. Further wordy battle does not behove
us. Small men like us should pardon the mistakes of the great
ones.
In fine, negation is referred to by a negative judgment which
is expressed by the negative proposition containing the particle
'not'. This hypothesis has been established.
The Classification of the Negation
Negation admits of two types, viz., (1) Prāgabhāva (the
negation of an object prior to its appearance-pre-negation),
and Pradhvamsa abhāva (the destruction of the created object-
post-negation). Some other logicians hold that the division of
negation is fourfold, viz., prāgabhāva (pre-negation), Pradhvam-
sābhāva (post-negation), itaretarābhāva (mutual negation)and
atyantābhāva (absolute negation). Another sect of logicians
holds that it is divided into six classes, viz., the above four kinds
with the addition of the two more types, viz. sāmarthyābhāva
(the negation of capacity) and apekşābhāva (the negation of an
object confined to a limited space).
A detailed discussion about the definition and the character
of the different types of negation is as follows:
The non-existence of an object before its coming into being
is called prăgabhāva. The cessation of the essence of an object
which has come into being is designated as pradhvansa.
The other types of negation are not essentially different from
prāgabhāva. Prāgabhāva in the shape of the non-appearance133
Refutation of Probability and Rumour
of an object belonging to the other objects which delimit the
sphere of its appearance is called anyonyabhāva. When it
transcends all limitations imposed upon, it becomes atyantā-
bhāva. When it is restricted to a limited sphere, it acquires the
If an object loses its capacity
designation of apekṣābhāva.
already belonging to it then samarthyābhāva is no better than
pradhvamsa. If it denotes the negation of non-existent capa-
city, i.e., future capacity then it is not different from präga-
bhava.
The destruction of an object which has come into being and
the non-appearance of such an object constitute the two natura!
divisions of negation. The other divisions of negation are merely
artificial. The negative fact is a distinct kind of object of
It has been also established that
knowledge-a class by itself.
it is perceived by our sense-organs. The hypothesis of the sage
Akşapāda that there are four kinds of proof is also sound.
The Refutation of the Hypothesis of Probability and Rumour
The thesis of the Naiyãyikas that there are only four kinds of
'proof has not as yet been proved since there are two more dis-
tinct types of proof. One of them is sambhava (probability).
It means the knowledge of a part included in a whole by means
of the knowledge of the whole itself. If the weight of an object
is a Khārī then it is highly probable that its weight is a droņa
(Khārī included several dronas in itself). If there are a thou-
sand persons in the crowd then it is highly probable that there
are a hundred persons in it (the number 'thousand' includes the
number 'hundred' in itself). A series of rumours, the author of
which has not been traced out, is called aitihya. The popular
saying that there lives a Yakṣa (a semidivine being on this
Such a saying is not an example of
banian tree illustrates it.
verbal testimony since the source of the above saying has not
been found out and verified to be a trustworthy person. Such a
. contention is not sound.
The above mentioned 'sambhava' (probability) is
different from inferential knowledge. The probable knowledge
of 'drona' on the basis of the knowledge of khārī is really a
deduction which follows from an induction. (Where there is
.khārī there is a drona! Here is khāri. Therefore here is
not134
Nyayamanjari
drona). But a rumour is not reliable, i.e. untrue. Who knows
whether a Yakṣa lives on a banian tree or not? Has any
person ever seen the exact features of the body of a Yakṣa? If
the rumour is true then it is not different from verbal testimony
since it is as good as a sound advice (upadeśa). We shall show
in the subsequent section that the term 'apta' is an adjective of
upadeśa having the same inflexion if we expound the
compound word in the sūtra Săptopadeśaḥ.
The clever dialectician of the Carvãka school (most probably
Jayarasi Bhaṭṭa-vide Tattvopaplava Simha p. 1) has proposed
to expound the truth with the words "After Brihaspati we
shall explain the truth in order to vindicate our views". But
what he has actually done is this that neither proof nor reality
(the object of true knowledge) can be defined and that their
number cannot be fixed up. This is his exposition of the truth.
In order to establish his point that the number of proof cannot
be fixed up
he has shown that there are some other forms of valid
knowledge which are not based upon perception, etc. (Jayarāśi
simply banks upon negative criticism but has no solid ground
to stand upon. So Jayanta ironically remarks that he has other
forms of knowledge which do not owe their existence to the
known and accepted sources of knowledge).
The character of the other forms of true knowledge has been
humorously described by means of a simile.
In nocturnal darkness a man with his eyes shut up knows
whether the hand has its fingers contracted or extended. In
order to establish his point he holds that this piece of know-
ledge is not produced by the touch-organ since his touch-
organ is not pervasive and does not belong to his hand. But on
the other hand, he illustrates cases which establish that percep-
ion and inference are the sources of true knowledge. At night
the flame of a lamp is known to us from a distance by means
of its rays
diffused on all sides.
A person infers the existence of a cluster of lotuses, shaken
by the breeze, by means of its fragrance carried to a great
distance if he stands on a spot towards which the breeze laden
with fragrance blows from the bed of lotuses.
The poor materialist logician does not know the character of
perception and of inference but is adept in imagining almost• Refutation of Probability and Rumour
135
such wild form of knowledge as has been shown above. We
perceive the fingers as contracted by means of touch since the
touch-organ is not incompetent to grasp, being itself pervasive.
When persons drink iced water which reaches the farthest end
of the alimentary canal (i.e. navel) they feel the cold touch
oficed water all along inside the canal.
As we perceive conjunction by means of the touch-organ so
we perceive the negation of it by means of the same organ. If
we perceive a particular motion of fingers, i.e., contraction by
means of a particular sense-organ (tactile organ) then we can
also perceive the negation of contraction by means of the same
organ.
The knowledge of a lotus by means of the smelling of its
fragrance and the knowledge of the distant flame by means of
the perception of its rays are instances of inference which
presupposes the previous knowledge of the invariable mark as
its antecedent condition. Is there any kind of knowledge which
does not depend upon the four types of knowledge mentioned
before? The Cārvākas have tried in vain to establish that the
number of the sources of valid knowledge cannot be fixed up
since they have failed to realise the nice shades of distinction
existing among the four kinds of proof and their efficacy.
We confidently assert that the number of the kinds of true
knowledge is strictly definite but not indefinite. Similarly, the
definition, number etc. of the different kinds of objects of true
knowledge are also definite and rigidly obey the logical
discipline. The goal of the Cārvāka logic is that nothing can
be conclusively said either of the objects or of their proofs.
Their declaration of such a logical goal before the sound critics
will simply bear evidence to the paucity of their intellect.ÄHNIKA II
The Definition of Perception
The definition and the division of a means of proof have been
thoroughly discussed. Now, the occasion of defining the species
turns up. The author of Nyâya-sutra selects at the out-set,
perception for definition since it constitutes the foundation of
all other sources of valid knowledge, being mentioned first.
Nyaya-sutra on Perception
His definition of perception is as follows:-Perception is
such consciousness as arises from the contact of a sense-organ
with an object, has not the name of an object as its object
(i.e. is not verbalised experience), is not an error (accords
with its object) and is determinate. The term 'perception'
(pratyakṣa) signifies the object to be defined. The remaining
terms of the sūtra constitute the definition of perception. The aim
of a definition is to distinguish it from similar forms of conscious-
ness and dissimilar knowable objects. The similar forms of
consciousness are inference and other sources of valid knowledge
since they come under the same genus. The knowable objects
are dissimilar since they are not subsumed under the same
genus. Such an exact definition has been proposed by the
above sütra (aphorism).
A preliminary objection has been raised by some critics. They
put this question to the Naiyāyikas whether the adjectival
clauses such as 'as arises from the contact of a sense-organ with
an object' etc. apply to the means of knowledge itself or to
the assemblage of conditions of perception or to the resultant
consciousness attained by the source of knowledge viz., percep-
tion. If the means of perceptual awareness is predicated by
these clauses then the above sutra signifies that consciousness,
thus qualified by these adjectives, is perception, the means of
knowledge. Now, if perception, the means of knowledge, is only
specified that the adjectives mentioned above do not qualify
the resultant-consciousness then the above definition of per-
ception should be both too wide and too narrow. Let us sec137
Nyaya-sutra on Perception
how it turns out to be too narrow. The cases of direct aware-
ness which are really free from blemishes but are not qualified
by the above adjectives cannot be recognized as perception.
The sense-organ and other such inanimate conditions which
produce true perceptual knowledge and rightly deserve the title
of perception cannot be the means of knowledge since the above
adjectives are not applicable to them. Let us also see how the
above definition is too wide. If the perceptual awareness which
is qualified by the above mentioned adjectives, does not gene-
rate a further resultant-awareness then the former instance of
awareness will be called a means of knowledge. Moreover, if an
instance of direct awareness, qualified by the above adjectives,
produces either an impression or recollection or a doubt or an
illusion will be entitled to the designation of a means of know-
ledge since the result to be produced by it has not been speci-
fied. Now, if the defender of Gautama contends that the
adjectives which qualify the means of knowledge also qualify
the result of it then he should postulate a new sūtra since such
a sūtra does not find a place among the sutras of Gautama. The
above sūtra still remains open to the charge of being too narrow
in spite of the proposed improvement. Therefore, the hypothe-
sis that the above adjectives qualify perception, the means of
knowledge is not tenable.
The second alternative hypothesis that the above adjectives
qualify the collocation of all conditions of perceptual awareness---
the result, is not tenable. If one subscribes to the second hypo-
thesis then he should change the sense of compound word 'in-
driya-artha-sannikarşa-utpannam' (arising from the sense
object-contact) into that of the compound word indriya-artha-
sannikarşa-upapannam (the list of conditions being made
complete by the inclusion of sense-organs, objects and their
contacts in it). The compound words such as avyapadeśyam,
avyabhiciri and vyavasāyātmaham and the term 'jñanam'
should not be used in the primary sense of the words but should
be used in the secondary sense. They should secondarily point
to their conditions which bring about such consciousness as is
signified by them (the above words). The upholder of the
hypothesis will have to twist these terms in order to obtain such
meaning as will suit their purpose. Such an attempt represents
.}
Nyayamanjari
for nothing a laborious process. The third alternative hypo-
thesis that the above adjectives qualify the resultant perceptual
consciousness does not hold good. If the above sūtra represents
both the means of perception and the result produced by it then
the very construction of the constituent words of the sūtra in-
dicates that there should be perfect co-ordination between the
means of knowledge and its result. From the context it is evi-
dent that the sūtra intends to define the means of direct aware-
ness. Such a means has also been described as an instrument.
Consciousness which is produced by such an instrument is its
result. How can there be co-ordination between an instrument
and its result? (Co-ordination implies the numerical iden-
tity between an instrument and its result). For the reasons
noted above the above three alternative hypotheses are not
sound. Moreover, it is also impossible to conjecture a new
alternative suggestion which may satisfactorily interpret the
sūtra. In fine, the drift of the objection is that the sūtra which
defines perception is not tenable.
A reply to the above objection is as follows. It is a truism
that the first two alternative hypotheses are open to the charges
mentioned above. But we approve of the last one. It has also
been pointed out that this one is not immune from the charge
of the incoordination between the instrument and its result.
This charge will be avoided by the insertion of the word 'yataḥ'
(whence). The boiled down meaning of the above sutra amo-
unts to this that perception, the means of direct awareness, is
that which is the source of such consciousness as has been
specified by the above mentioned adjectives. Thus, the defini-
tion of perception is neither too wide nor too narrow. Moreover,
we are not to twist the words of the sūtra to make out the real
sense of it. By the mere insertion of the word 'yataḥ' every word
of the sutra becomes significant and all the words which consti-
tute the sutra convert it into an ideal definition of perception.
Now, a question arises in our mind that in the original form of
the sútra the terms 'pratyakṣa (perception) and jñana signify
the same object but in the new form of it why are they (the two
terms) not allowed to co-ordinate? What is the purport of
inserting 'yatah' into the sutra? An answer to this question is
as follows. An instrument plays the part of the means of know-
138139
The view of Acarya Uddyotkara
ledge and consciousness resulting from the operation of that
instrument is the result and that the instrument and its result
are neither identical (i.c. they are distinct), nor refer to the same
object. The net result of our discussion is this :-If the colloca-
tion of the conditions of perceptual consciousness is the instru-
ment i.e. the means of awareness then consciousness described
by the sutra is the result. If, again, consciousness, thus specified,
is the means of awareness then the subsequent judgment that
the object of perception is either acceptable or avoidable or
indifferent to us is the result.
How does the sense-perception which owes its existence to
sense-object-contact bring about the resultant judgment that
the object perceived is avoidable etc. by means of its operation
since many discrete mental phenomena such as judgment of
memory etc. intervene between the sense-perception, the means
of awareness and the resultant judgment? Let us substantiate
our point. A man perceives an object, viz., a wood apple. Then
he remembers that it is conducive to pleasure in the form that a
similar object (an object belonging to its class) gave him plea-
sure in the past. Then he recollects his previous generalisation
that all wood-apples are conducive to pleasure and applies it to
the new object. The particular form of the application of
generalisation is that this object belongs to the class of wood-
apples which are conducive to pleasure. Having applied the
above generalisation to the particular case he arrives at the
definite conclusion that it (the object of perception) is conducive
to pleasure. Then the resultant judgment that it is worth-having
(acceptable) comes into being. The form of the judgment is that
as this particular object which belongs to the class of wood-
apples is conducive to pleasure so it is worthy of being accepted.
In the meantime the initial perceptual judgment which arises
from the sense-object-contact is long past but even its faint
trace does not survive. How can we accept the hypothesis that
a sense-perception plays the part of an instrumental cause to
bring about the remote final judgment that the object of such
sense-perception is worth having.
The view of Acarya (Uddyotakara)
A great teacher of the Nyaya school holds a different view140
Nyayamanjari
on this point. He remarks, "Oh critics! your criticism of the
above view is sensible. The successive order of different judg-
ments which follow in the wake of perception is really such as
you have pointed out. We do not also hold that the initial per-
ceptual judgment is the instrumental cause of the final judg-
ment that the object of perception worth-having or otherwise
etc". He now expresses his own view along with the negative
criticism of the earlier one. The initial perception of an object
owes its existence to the sense-object-contact. In this case, the
collocation of its object, the particular sense-organ, their con-
tact etc. is the means of the direct awareness of the object. This
awareness is a mere result but not a means to a further valid
knowledge. As it only begets memory so it is not a source of valid
knowledge since memory is not a piece of valid knowledge. The
initial perception revives the recollection of the induction that
all such objects are conducive to pleasure. Though this memory-
judgment which follows in the wake of the initial perception is
not produced by a means of perceptual knowledge yet it may
play the part of a means of perceptual knowledge. The above
memory-judgment is followed by another judgment that the
object which is being perceived belongs to the class of wood-
apples which are conducive to pleasure like the wood-apple
perceived before. This judgment owes its origin to the operat-
ion of the sense-organ assisted by the preceding memory-judgment
This judgment is itself perceptual. But it is a source of inferential
knowledge like the perception of smoke. As we infer fire which
remains beyond the reach of our sense-organ so we infer that
the particular object is conducive to pleasure on the basis of
the above judgment. It is a truism that we do not subscribe to
the hypothesis that an object possesses super-sensuous poser.
But still we hold that the assemblage of conditions visible and
invisible renders itself supersensuous. The so-called power is
nothing but the assemblage of conditions. In this particular
case, the collocation of conditions is beyond the reach of our
sense-organs. Hence, the judgment that this object which
belongs to the class of wood-apples is conducive to pleasure is
inferential like the judgment that the hill is fiery since this
judgment is brought about by the knowledge of its unfailing
mark. Though the judginent that the wood apple is conduciveThe place of Paramarta Judgment
to pleasure is deduced from the premises yet it in co-operation
with the object in question, the sense-organ, the contact etc.
produces the perceptual judgment that this is acceptable. The
preceding judgment in itself is mediate, is a source of an imme-
diate awareness by virtue of its association. The Author of
Nyaya-bhāṣya, holding all these complicated processes before
his mind, has remarked that if a judgment plays the part of an
intermediate process then the judgment that an object is either
worth-accepting or worth-rejecting or indifferent is the result
of the means of perceptual knowledge.
141
Objection to the place of Paramarsa Judgment in the Definition of
Perception
Some interpreters of Nyāya-bhāṣya subscribe to a different
view. They hold that judgments which arise in our mind one
after another do not obey the above order. It is a fact that the
initial perceptual judgment revives the memory of the induc-
tion that all wood-apples are conducive to pleasure. The
phenomenon of memory is the cause of destruction of its condi-
tion, i.e., the initial perception. The very moment when the
initial perception passes away it is followed by the judgment
that the wood-apple just now sensed, is conducive to pleasure.
This judgment is equivalent to the judgment that the wood-
apple is worth-having. These two judgments are not mutually
different from each other. The judgment which applies induc-
tion to a particular object, i.e., the minor term does not inter-
vene between the judgment of memory and the final judgment.
What is the good of assuming a judgment which is not intros-
pected? But it is contended that the judgment involving the
application of induction to a particular case is introspected but
is not a mere article of conjecture. In case of an inference the
minor premise that the hill is smoky is immediately followed
by the major premise 'what is smoky is fiery'. It is a memory
judgment which owes its revival to the minor premise. Then a
synthetic judgment appears in the mind of the person who
infers. It assumes the form 'thus this is', the minor term con-
tains the middle term which is an invariable concomitant of
the major term. If this intermediate judgment had not appear-
ed then the minorpremise could not have effectuated deduc-Nyayamanjari
tion since it operates only to revive the memory of the major
premise. What revives memory only cannot be admitted to be
a source of valid knowledge. The memory judgment may be
followed by the awareness of the major term but this awareness
cannot assume the form that the hill is fiery, i.e. (the minor term
accompanies the major term) since this judgment refers to a
new element, viz., the relation of the minor term with the major
term-not experienced before and this new element cannot be
supplied by the memory judgment which simply repeats the old
story. Moreover, those who deny existence to the judgment
involving the application of induction to a particular case can-
not explain the premise called upanaya, e.g., thus, sound is a
created object-the premise which has been included in the
Nyāya syllogism. It will be shown later on that as the premises
are required for one's own understanding so they are required
for the understanding of others. Hence, the hypothesis of a
judgment involving the application of induction should not be
discarded.
142
The critics oppose it thus :-
No judgment involving the application of induction inter-
venes between the memory of induction and the final deduction.
Therefore, when a person perceives an object he makes neither
much delay to accept it nor to reject it nor to be indifferent to it.
Though the knowledge of the invariable concomitant passes
away yet it through its intermediate process becomes the source
of true knowledge, i.e. deduction. The knowledge of the major
term again is brought about by means of the minor premise.
Deduction is not a piece of new information. We now know
the major term as we have learnt it in time of induction.
The perception of a wood-apple, etc. without generating the
intermediate process in the shape of a judgment involving the
application of induction produces the resultant judgment that
the object of perception is worth-having etc. Moreover, in case
of inference the resultant judgment that the object inferred such
as fire etc. is worth-having etc. is not due to the causality of
the recollection of the judgment that fire is conducive to
pleasure. You should admit an intermediate judgment that fire
which is inferred is also endowed with the characteristic fea-The place of Paramarša Judgment
143
as a
ture of fire in general that it is conducive to pleasure. Which
cause brings it about? A sense-organ fails to produce it since
fire, the subject of the judgment in question is not sensed. It is
absurd to enter in the supposition that it is known by means of
either verbal testimony or comparison. Smoke, the invariable
mark of fire, cannot produce it since it produces another judg-
ment involving the application of induction to a particular
-case-the judgment which is essentially required for the inference
of fire. Smoke which is the content of the first judgment of
application cannot produce the second judgment of application
content of the first one since the first one does not
exist when the second one comes into being. Let the
point be clearly stated. The succession of judgments is as
follows: At the outset there is the judgment involving the in-
variable mark (i.e., the minor premise occurs), then induction
follows it (i.e. the major premise comes into being), then the
judgment which links up the middle term, c.g., smoke with the
major term by means of the tie of invariable concomitance
takes place (i.e. the synthesis of the minor and major premis-
es) and then the inference of an object such as fire is drawn
(i,e, the conclusion is deduced from the above premises). The
conclusion opposes the persistence of the third premise. Then
the judgment of memory on the form that fire is conducive to
pleasure arises. At this moment the third premise definitely
passes away for good. When the judgment in the shape of the
third premise ceases to exist smoke which is no more its content
cannot by itself produce the judgment that fire is endowed with
the characteristic feature of fire in general that it is conducive
to pleasure. It may be contended that just after the remem-
brance of the judgment that fire is conducive to pleasure a fresh
perceptual judgment having smoke as one of its objects is pro-
duced by the sense-organ. (The drift of this contention is that
this fresh judgment will bring about the required intermediate
judgment that fire is such and such), Such a contention is not
tenable. Our experience bears no evidence to such an assumption.
On the other hand, even if it is admitted that the perception
of smoke as described takes place then it should also be again
followed by the remembrance if the above induction, i.c., the
major premise and then the judgment involving the application
of such induction to a particular concrete case should also comeNyayamanjari
into being, In the mean time, the memory of the judgment
that fire is conducive to pleasure has faded away. Hence, it
would be impossible for this judgment accompanied by the
judgment involving the applied induction to produce the judg-
ment that the inferred fire is conducive to pleasure. But the
perceived object is determined as conducive to pleasure because
such knowledge appears at the time when the universal judg-
ment that all such objects are conducive to pleasure passes
away. Now, the upholder of the hypothesis may think in a
different line and hold that the perception of smoke will not
be followed again by the remembrance of inductive judgment
and by the judgment involving the applied induction but the
previous judgment referring to the applied induction will be
revived in one's mind just after the remembrance of the judg-
ment that fire is conducive to pleasure. When this judgment
remains fresh in one's memory the judgment that the in-
ferred fire is conducive to pleasure like the previously known
fire will come into being. Such a line of defence is not tenable
since when fire will be inferred (deduced) the judgment should
be simultaneously remembered. Let us illustrate our point of
criticism. At the same point of time the judgment that fire is
conducive to pleasure will be remembered and the memory of
the judgment that the hill contains smoke which is an invari-
able concomitant of fire will be revived. There is no assignable
reason which will determine them to appear one after another.
The simultaneous appearance of the two events of consciousness
has been ruled out by this system of thought. However, let the
two judgments appear successively. Still the above difficulty
will not be solved. The two judgments, viz., 'fire is conducive
to pleasure' and 'the hill contains smoke which is an invariable
concomitant of fire' are remembered by us in close succession.
Then the judgment that fire which is inferred is like fire that is
conducive to pleasure comes into being. But this judgment
does not refer to such an object as is referred to by its antece-
dent one. Moreover, the hypothesis of the succession of judg-
ments does not help anybody to get rid of the real difficulty.
Let us examine the order of the appearance of the judgments
which are required in this context. The inference of fire comes
first. The judgment that fire is conducive to pleasure is remme-
144The place of Parămarša Judgment
bered next. The memory of the judgment that the hill contains
smoke which is an invariable concomitant of fire will be revived
at he next moment. The second judgment is on the point
of destruction at this moment. Then the fourth judgment that
fire, an inference, is like the known fire which is conducive to
pleasure comes into being. But at this moment the memory of
the second judgment has already faded away. It is axiomatic
that the memory of the judgment which has ceased to exist will
not function to produce the judgment that fire is worth having.
When fire is inferred on the strength of the premise that there
is smoke, its unfailing mark, it is unreasonable to conjecture that
the memory of the premise that there is smoke which is the
constant concomitant of fire unnecessarily reappears. It is
quite natural that if a person knows fire by means of inference
then he remembers that fire is conducive to pleasure but not the
premise that there is smoke which is a reliable concomitant of
fire.
145
In fine, we come to the conclusion that the resultant judgment
that an object of inference is worth having etc. is not due to
the causality of such an intermediate judgment as involves the
application of induction, since it is impossible to establish
causal relation between them. Similarly the resultant judgment
regarding the object of perception does not owe its existence to
similar judgment. What is the good of assuming such a worth-
less intermediate judgments ?
The objection that if the hypothesis of the penultimate pre-
mise of the Nyaya syllogism (i.e., the judgment involving
the application of induction to a particular case) is not assum-
ed then the term 'upanaya' becomes meaningless will be
discussed in the proper context when the premises of a syllogism
will be taken into consideration. Hence in the absence of an
intermediate judgment involving the applied induction percep-
tion will lead to the resultant judgment that such and such
object is worth having or worth avoiding in and through such
process as has been already described. It only awaits discussion
what is, from this stand-point, the exact result of perception.
The judgment that an object is conducive to pleasure is an
inference since it is derived from the knowledge of the sure
mark, viz., its belonging to the same class. Hence, it cannot be}
146
Nyayamanjari
the result of perception. It is true that there is much sense in
this criticism. But it is also a fact that the judgment that an
object is conducive to pleasure follows sometimes from percep-
tion. When we discover the relation of invariable concomitance
holding between the major term and the middle term both the
terms are perceived by us. Let us illustrate our point by means
of a familiar example. When we discover the universal relation
of concomitance holding between fire and smoke in a kitchen
we perceive both fire and smoke. The author of Nyāya-bhāṣya
(a commentary upon Nyaya-sutra) thinks of such character of
the judgment that an object is conducive to pleasure as it is in
time of discovery of the universal relation of invariable con-
comitance and has described that it (the above judgment) is the
result of perception.
The Establishment of the Hypothesis that Conduciveness to Pleasure
is perceptible
When we discover the relation of invariable concomitance how
can we know that an object is conducive to pleasure since such
a character is supersensuous? If it is held that its capacity for
giving pleasure is also inferred from the mark, viz., its belong-
ing to the same class then a regressus ad infinitum is forced on
us since the very discovery of the relation of invariable con-
comitance being an inference, an endless series of inferences
should be postulated. Now it may be answered that pleasure,
the effect of the object is felt and from the effect we infer its
cause, viz., its power of giving pleasure. Such an answer is not
tenable since if we do not know the relation of invariable con-
comitance holding between the terms, we cannot infer one from
another. The relation of invariable concomitance is not to be
perceived in this particular case since its power, one of the con-
comitants, is imperceptible. If it is inferred then a regressus ad
infinitum will be forced on us as stated before.
Let us meet this objection. We do not subscribe to the view
that power is supersensuous. Hence, it is not impossible for us
to discover the relation of invariable concomitance holding
between power and its effect.
The cause viz. force or power is, in our view, nothing but the147
Perception of conduciveness to Pleasure
assemblage of the cause and the conditions. This assemblage
is easily perceived. But among the conditions the invisible
residue of a previous unmerited action is also included. It is
supersensuous. Hence, the assemblage under consideration is
also beyond the range of perception since it contains an invisible
element in it. Such an objection is not tenable. Merit, demerit
and such other objects in some sense are not transcendental to
our perception because they are in this context no better than
an aspect of a material thing. They are so because nature has
made them to be so. We shall discuss later on how merit and
demerit are inferred from the diversity of this world. Thus the
power of bringing about a result amounts to the assemblage of
all conditions excepting the invisible principle, viz., merit or
demerit. It is possible to perceive this power. Hence, it is
justifiable to hold that the relation of invariable concomitance
obtaining between the object such as a wood-apple and its
belonging to the same class is discovered by the sense-organ
since a wood-apple is grasped by our eyes. But pleasure which
is derived from it is its effect. It is not perceived by our eyes.
Now, how can you explain that the causal relations holding
between a wood-apple and pleasure is grasped by our eyes, one
of the two terms remaining outside the range of our eyes? The
answer to this question is that the relation is not visualised but
is grasped by our inner perception.
We are immediately conscious of the feeling of pleasure,
etc. by means of our internal organ but we see a wood-apple,
etc. with our eyes. But we grasp the causal relation holding
between a wood-apple and pleasure by means of our inner
organ.
Now, a question arises in our mind that if we hold that
we directly know a wood-apple to be conducive to pleasure
then we should also admit that our inner organ, having
no restriction, grasps external objects as well at its sweet
will. In that case, has the hypothesis of external organ
some solid ground to stand upon? It also follows that there
should exist neither a blind person nor a deaf man. Such an
objection does not affect us. At the outset an external organ,
coming in contact with the internal organ, does its work (i.e,
produces perception). The external object which is grasped by146
Nyayamanjari
the result of perception. It is true that there is much sense in
this criticism. But it is also a fact that the judgment that an
object is conducive to pleasure follows sometimes from percep-
tion. When we discover the relation of invariable concomitance
holding between the major term and the middle term both the
terms are perceived by us. Let us illustrate our point by means.
of a familiar example. When we discover the universal relation
of concomitance holding between fire and smoke in a kitchen
we perceive both fire and smoke. The author of Nyāya-bhāṣya
(a commentary upon Nyaya-sutra) thinks of such character of
the judgment that an object is conducive to pleasure as it is in
time of discovery of the universal relation of invariable con-
comitance and has described that it (the above judgment) is the
result of perception.
The Establishment of the Hypothesis that Conduciveness to Pleasure
is perceptible
When we discover the relation of invariable concomitance how
can we know that an object is conducive to pleasure since such
a character is supersensuous? If it is held that its capacity for
giving pleasure is also inferred from the mark, viz., its belong-
ing to the same class then a regressus ad infinitum is forced on
us since the very discovery of the relation of invariable con-
comitance being an inference, an endless series of inferences
should be postulated. Now it may be answered that pleasure,
the effect of the object is felt and from the effect we infer its
cause, viz., its power of giving pleasure. Such an answer is not
tenable since if we do not know the relation of invariable con-
comitance holding between the terms, we cannot infer one from
another. The relation of invariable concomitance is not to be
perceived in this particular case since its power, one of the con-
comitants, is imperceptible. If it is inferred then a regressus ad
infinitum will be forced on us as stated before.
Let us meet this objection. We do not subscribe to the view
that power is supersensuous. Hence, it is not impossible for us
to discover the relation of invariable concomitance holding
between power and its effect.
The cause viz. force or power is, in our view, nothing but thePerception of conduciveness to Pleasure
assemblage of the cause and the conditions. This assemblage
is easily perceived. But among the conditions the invisible
residue of a previous unmerited action is also included. It is
supersensuous. Hence, the assemblage under consideration is
also beyond the range of perception since it contains an invisible
element in it. Such an objection is not tenable. Merit, demerit
and such other objects in some sense are not transcendental to
our perception because they are in this context no better than
an aspect of a material thing. They are so because nature has
made them to be so. We shall discuss later on how merit and
demerit are inferred from the diversity of this world. Thus the
power of bringing about a result amounts to the assemblage of
all conditions excepting the invisible principle, viz., merit or
demerit. It is possible to perceive this power. Hence, it is
justifiable to hold that the relation of invariable concomitance
obtaining between the object such as a wood-apple and its
belonging to the same class is discovered by the sense-organ
since a wood-apple is grasped by our eyes. But pleasure which
is derived from it is its effect. It is not perceived by our eyes.
Now, how can you explain that, the causal relations holding
between a wood-apple and pleasure is grasped by our eyes, one
of the two terms remaining outside the range of our eyes? The
answer to this question is that the relation is not visualised but
is grasped by our inner perception.
We are immediately conscious of the feeling of pleasure,
etc. by means of our internal organ but we see a wood-apple,
etc. with our eyes. But we grasp the causal relation holding
between a wood-apple and pleasure by means of our inner
organ.
Now, a question arises in our mind that if we hold that
we directly know a wood-apple to be conducive to pleasure
then we should also admit that our inner organ, having
no restriction, grasps external objects as well at its sweet
will. In that case, has the hypothesis of external organ
some solid ground to stand upon? It also follows that there
should exist neither a blind person nor a deaf man. Such an
objection does not affect us. At the outset an external organ,
coming in contact with the internal organ, does its work (i.c,
produces perception). The external object which is grasped by
147Nyayamanjari
our determinate perception, produced by the external sense-organ
is also grasped by our internal organ. This is all what we admit.
Such an external object imposes limitation upon the free
movement of our internal organ and causes it to concentrate
upon itself. Hence, our internal organ cannot grasp any and
every object at its sweet will (i.e., in an unrestricted manner).
A further question troubles our mind that if at the time of
the discovery of the relation of invariable concomitance an
object is determined as conducive to pleasure by means of inner
perception then why should we not have recourse to the same
means of proof in order to demonstrate it as such? Why should
we depend upon the invariable mark, viz., its belonging to the
same class? Is it not superfluous? We cannot entertain such
a suggestion. In order to explain some cases of consciousness
we assume the internal organ as their instrumental cause since
either verbal testimony or the knowledge of the invariable
mark or the external sense-organ fails to explain them and the
facts of consciousness which are being experienced by us can-
not be ignored. If we can prove that superseding the claim of
a particular means of proof, such as the knowledge of an in-
variable mark the internal organ has been arbitrarily asserted
as the only cause of a particular phenomenon of consciousness
then the charge that there is the only one means of proof, viz.,
the internal organ, applied to our decision but in the instance
under consideration there is no scope for the four means of
proof. We think that there is no further necessity of pushing the
matter to a greater length.
148
Thus the commentator of the Nyāya-sūtra has thought only
of the immediate judgment that a wood-apple is conducive to
pleasure as the result of the visual perception of a wood-apple
since he remembers the possibility of such immediate judgment
at the time of discovery of invariable concomitance. It has
been already stated that the judgment that it is worth-having is
the same as the judgment that it is conducive to pleasure.
The Refutation of the hypothesis that Consciousness is the Instrumental
cause of Itself
Why do you take so much trouble as to establish your point?
Let a means of proof be identical with its result. The veryConsciousness as the instrumental cause of itself refuted
perception of a wood-apple which is produced by our eyes may
be called the instrumental cause since it appears to function in
and through an intermediate process in the shape of the illumi-
nation of an object. This very perception may also be called
the result since its nature is to reveal an object. Thus, the
means of proof and its result will not be inco-ordinate as they
are supposed to be. The means of awareness and its result
do never co-exist in the same locus. It has been stated (in
Diinaga's Pramāṇasamuccaya) that perception seems to us
to be possessed of an intermediate process and thus turns out to
be the means of awareness but is really a result. This hypothesis
of Dinnaga is not sound since it is open to the charge of depriv-
ing a means of awareness of its very essence.
149
If we analyse the word 'pramăņa' into its elements, we get
the root and the suffix. The primary meaning of the word is
derived from them. The word signifies that by means of which
something is truly known. Hence, it denotes the instrumental
cause of true knowledge. An act itself is never an instrumental
cause. But something else becomes the instrumental cause of an
act which is to be accomplished. When we say that Caítra mows
the sheaves of Sali corn with a scythe, the subject, the object
and the instrument are presented to our consciousness as distinct
from the act itself. Similarly, when we say that a man sees a jar
with his eyes, the subject, the object and the instrument should be
held as different from the act of seeing. Hence, the act of seeing
is not an instrument. Sometimes, the word 'pramã' and pra-
māņa' are used as synonyms. The use of the word 'pramāņa'
in the sense of the resultant consciousness is not a faulty one since
the use of a word in an unusual sense is sometimes noticed. The
word 'karaṇa' which usually denotes an instrument is also sanc-
tioned by the current idiom to denote simply an act(kṛti). Dinnaga
has suggested that if pramāṇa, the means of proof, and pramā,
the resultant true consciousness, be not one and the same thing
then they should not exist in the two separate locii. Such a sug-
gestion is a sample of unprecedented eloquence. What does he
purport to convey by the term 'adhikaraṇa'? If any real object
is merely meant by it then they two point to the same object.
The object which is grasped by the act of seeing is also the
target of the instrumental cause of seeing, viz., the eyes etc. If150
Nyayamanjari
the word 'Adhikaraṇa' denotes locus then it will not be found
in the Buddhist literature. Every object having merely momen-
tary existence, requires no locus to stand upon. But, on the
. other hand, we hold that the instrumental cause and its effect
have been observed by us to stand upon the two distinct locii.
Similarly, the eyes and the visual perception will be held to be
causally connected though they do not stand upon the same
locus.
On the other hand, in the same case two pieces of knowledge
which are causally connected exist on the same locus like the
knowledge of an invariable mark and that of the object marked
and like the knowledge of a predicate and the relational know-
ledge, i.e., a judgment. There is no hard and fast rule that
they must co-exist since the eyes do never exist on the locus of
consciousness which is effectuated by them.
In some cases though the two distinct phenomena of cons-
ciousness are related to each other in the same way as an
instrumental cause is to its result yet they co-exist in the same
locus, viz., the soul. We may cite two examples to substantiate
our stand-point. The knowledge of the probans and that of the
probandum co-exist in the experiencing mind. The non-rela-
tional intuition of the predicate is, also, co-ordinate with the
perceptual judgment which follows it in immediate succession.
Such co-existence serves no purpose since eyes, etc., the ins-
trumental cause, do not require such co-existence to bring about
its result. It may be contended that if the cause and the result
are of the same kind then they are co-ordinate elements belong-
ing to the same locus. This co-ordination suggests that the
antecedent condition determines the consequent one by means
of an intermediate process and really becomes the cause of it,
i.e. the instrumental cause. This suggestion applies to condi-
tions other than a phenomenon of consciousness since conscio-
usness, being itself a result does not require the help of an
intermediate process to bring about a homogeneous result but
requires it to produce a heterogeneous effect. As a matter of
fact, the result which follows its conditions is consciousness.
The awareness of an object which causes another phenomenon
of awareness does not demand the aid of an intermediate
process to do so. Now, the opponent may contend that theConsciousness as the instrumental cause of itself refuted
151
awareness of an object presupposes self-consciousness in order
to generate another piece of consciousness. (When a person
apprehends an object he becomes aware of the fact that he
apprehends it. Later on, the awareness of an object leads to
another act of awareness. Self-consciousness intervenes between
these two acts of awareness. The suggestion is that self-cons-
ciousness is the intermediate process. Thus an act of awareness
may be as well an instrumental cause.) A rejoinder to the
opponent is as follows:-May we request you to explain self-
consciousness? Is it identical with or different from the aware-
ness of an object? If you hold that self-consciousness is not a
separate act then it is absurd to assert that self-consciousness
follows from the awareness of an object. If you subscribe to the
view that the awareness of an object is distinct from self-cons-
ciousness then you really side with us. Moreover, let us dive
into this problem and discuss whether consciousness which is
absolutely contentless at the initial stage produces Self-cons-
ciousness that this object is known by us in and through an
intermediate process engaging itself in generating the awareness
of an object or consciousness which is the awareness of an object
directly generates self-consciousness. After a thorough scrutiny of
the above hypotheses we arrive at the conclusion that consci-
ousness is by its nature object-awareness since the process of con-
sciousness which is distinct from object-awareness and leads to
object-awareness is not found out. The awareness of an object
directly produces self-consciousness. Thus, consciousness is
always a result at first but is never an instrumental cause in the
initial stage. The people also approve of the hypothesis that con-
sciousness is a mere effect but not a cause abinitio. They say
in this manner. "We see with our eyes and we know by means
of a mark". But we find no body to say "I know by means of
consciousness".
The Buddhists review the above criticism and point out that
the people designate eyes, etc. as an instrumental cause only
when they produce the awareness of an object. But they do not
call them as such if they do not generate the awareness of an
object. It should also be borne in mind that they are so-called
by the people because they are the cause of a cause but are not
the direct cause of the awareness of an object. This review is152
Nyāyamanjarī
not sound. The eyes and their like are the only cause but the
cause of object consciousness is not produced by them. If they
produce at all a cause then what is this effect cause? If the
Buddhists answer that consciousness which is a cause is generated
by them then it is to be examined of which particular form of
consciousness is the instrumental cause. It is a truism that no
cause is held to be a cause if it produces itself. In other words,
it is untenable to hold that consciousness is an instrumental
cause if it applies itself to itself as a cause. The view current
among the people that eyes, etc. which do not produce cons-
ciousness do not deserve the designation of an instrumental
cause, is quite reasonable. If a condition does not operate to
bring about an action then it does not become an instrumental
cause. Hence eyes etc. which produce the act of cognition
attain the status of an instrumental cause and the cognition
which is thus produced is nothing but a result. Therefore, the
designation of result given to consciousness is quite appropriate.
In fine, if we admit that the term 'pramāṇa' the instrumental
cause of pramâ, (a piece of true knowledge) is significant then
it should also be admitted that the cause and its result are
different. Hence, one and the same act of cognition cannot be
both a pramāṇa and pramā its effect.
More illogical is he who holds that a single act of cognition.
may be designated as an instrumental cause of true knowledge,
an object of true knowledge and its effect.
(The view of such a thinker is as follows. A concrete act of
cognition is divided into three elements by a process of abstrac-
tion, a faculty of imagination. Every act of consciousness if
self luminous). What is truly cognised is called prameya (an
object of true knowledge). What illuminates correctly is called
pramāņa (an instrumental cause) and the awareness of a
particular form is called a result. These three awarenesses are
imagined to be different but are really identical. (This is the
view of Dinnāga vide Pramāņa-samuccaya, chapter I, verse 11).
We shall take this bad logician to task in the section on apa-
varga (the absolute cessation of all sorrows) in connection with
the refutation of Subjective Idealism. Now, we refrain from an
elaborate discussion of this view. Hence, it has been well stated
that if the determinate perception is a pramāṇa then the judg-The charge that definition is too wide refuted
153
ment that the object perceived is conducive to pleasure, etc. is
the result.
The refutation of the charge of being too wide
It follows from the previous discussion that in the Sutra on
perception all the adjectives given in it qualify the resultant
form of perception since the sutra with the word 'yataḥ' insert-
ed into it points to this conclusion. That from which the
resultant consciousness, arising from the sense-object-contact and
having other characterizations, springs up is perception. The
compound word 'indriya-artha-sannikarşa-utpanna' (arising
from the sense-object-contact) is given in the sutra in order to
distinguish this resultant consciousness from remembrance
which is not produced by the object remembered and from the
inferential knowledge which refers to an object lying beyond the
range of sense-organs though it owes its existence to an object.
Thus the definition of perception is not too wide since it does
neither apply to the source of memory nor to that of inference.
The inferential knowledge of the movement of sense-organ owes
its existence to the sense-object-contact. An invariable mark
which determines inference is, in this case, the sense-object-
contact. Likewise we infer the motion of the sun by means of
sun's contract with the different parts of the horizon. How
does the adjective-clause 'arising from the sense-object-contact
distinguish perception from inference?" We solve this problem
thus. The above-mentioned clause suggests that the sense-organ
coming in contact with the object produces perceptual know-
ledge. The inferential knowledge of the movement of a sense-
organ is not thus produced by the sense-organ. How do you
mark off the origin of one knowledge from that of another? An
answer to this question is that the word 'utpanna' (generated
by) clearly indicates their difference. It suggests that the
sense-object-contact produces perceptual knowledge which re-
fers only to such object as comes in contact with the sense-organ.
The sense-object-contact does not produce the inferential know-
ledge of the movement of a sense-organ but simply indicates
it. Therefore, the knowledge of the sense-object-contact is
essential in case of an inference but, on the other hand, in case
of perceptual knowledge, e. g., the direct awareness of colour154
Nyayamanjari
the very presence of sense-object-contact is required. Its know-
ledge has nothing to do with perceptual knowledge.
The Necessity of the Assumption of Sense-Object-Contact
The sense-organs of smell, taste, sight, touch and hearing
which are constituted by five elements such as the earth etc.,
will be described later on. The objects which are sensed are as
follows: odour, flavour, colour, touch, and sound together with
their respective species, some of the substances having these qua-
lities, some other qualities such as number etc., belonging to the
above substances and their movements such as going up, going
down, lifting up and other such movements etc., and the genus
and the species inhering in all of them, i.e., the universals. The
followers of the Vaiseșika system hold that the sensed objects are
those which are grasped by both the organs of sight and touch.
Negation which has been proved as objectively real is also in-
cluded in the list of objects. The contact of the sense-organs
with their objects is six-fold. A substance is grasped either by
the sense-organs of sight or by that of touch by means of the
relation of conjunction. The quality such as colour etc., be-
longing to a substance by means of a complex relation viz.,
conjunction cum inherence. The species belonging to colour
etc., such as colourness is grasped by means of a complex rela-
tion of the second degree such as conjunction cum inherence
cum inherence.
Our eyes are in direct contact with a substance, i.e., they are
directly conjoined to a substance, colour inheres in it and
colourness, i.e., the universal belonging to the colour, inheres in
it. Sound is grasped by the relation of inherence. The sky
constitutes the ears and sound inheres in the sky. The universal
belonging to sound, i.e., soundness is related to our ears by
means of a complex relation, viz., inherence cum inherence and
is grasped. Sound inheres in the sky which assumes the form
of the ears under certain conditions and the universal of sound
inheres in sound. It has been already explained that negation
is related to our sense-organ by means of a complex relation,
viz., conjunction cum the relation of the qualifying to the
qualified and is directly perceived. The perceptual negation
judgment is that there is no jar on this spot. A particularAssumption of Sense-object-contact
surface of the spot is conjoined to our eyes and negation qualifies.
the spot in question.
155-
How can we prove the existence of sense-object-contact?
We say in reply because we cannot perceive a veiled object. If
our sense-organs were competent enough to perceive an object
with which they are not in contact then they would have
grasped even the veiled objects. But it is a fact that they do
not sense the veiled ones. Therefore, the hypothesis that the
sense-object-contact exists is proved. Those who are opposed to
this hypothesis may contend that the absence of a veil is one
of the conditions of perception and that there is no necessity
of assuming the sense-object-contact as a condition of percep-
tion. Such a contention is not tenable. As the sense-organs are
the instrumental cause of the act of perception so they must
be united with the other conditions of perception. The maxim
based upon observation points to the totality of conditions
that they yield results when they are mutually combined.
Therefore the sense-object-contact should be admitted. We
shall not elaborately discuss it now since it will be elaborately
discussed in the chapter on the examination of sense-organs.
The sense-organs of taste and touch, with the least shade of
doubt, come in contact with such objects as they taste and
touch respectively. As the rest sense-organs share some common
character with the above two so it is assumed that they also come
in contact with the objects of which they produce perception.
If this is the drift of your reasoning then the sense-object-
contact being clearly suggested to our mind why has it been
directly mentioned? It has been mentioned to indicate the six-
fold division of sense-object-contact. The word 'utpanna'
(generated by) suggests that both the sense-organ and the object
condition the perception of an object. The object is what is
perceived. As an objective case it determines the act of percep
tion. How is it known that the object is causally connected with
the act of perception? The answer is that the objection ques-
tion is only organised, the representative character of consci-
qusness has been refuted and the definite relation obtaining
between an act of perception and a particular object is hard to
establish. You simply state the necessity of your assumption.
But you have been asked to give the proof. How do you proveNyayamanjari
its necessity ? Our reply is that this is our proof. We cite
other instances which clearly show that an accusative is the goal
of a verb. In the sentence 'Sa vīraṇaṁ kaṭam karoti (he makes
a mat of a kind of straw) there are two accusatives 'viraṇam'
and 'katam' of the verb 'karoti'. By the methods of agreement and
difference based upon perception, and perception assisted by non-
perception the causal relation subsisting between viraņa (straw)
and kața (mat) is detected. Similarly, the same relation holding
between an object and its perception is detected. Let us take an
example. A person in search of Devadatta visits his house but does
not see him there since he is absent at that time. After a while,
when he comes back he is seen by the person. Thus we see that
when Devadatta is present he is perceived but when he is absent
he is not perceived. Hence, by the joint method of agreement
and difference, we learn that the perception of Devadatta and
his non-perception follow respectively his presence and absence.
Straws and a mat are distinctly perceived by all. It is, there-
fore, reasonable to admit that the causal relation subsisting
between them is detected by means of the joint method of
agreement and difference. But an object is never cognized as
distinct from its awareness. Hence, the application of the joint
method of agreement and difference, in the above case, to
ascertain the causal relation subsisting between an object and
its perception, is inadmissible. The distinct awareness of an
object consists in this that the true perception of an object does
not take place when an object lies beyond the field of percep-
tion. The opponent seems to take his stand upon the doctrine
of Subjective Idealism and intends to refute our hypothesis in
the light of it. We shall meet the argument of our opponent
in the proper place. The word 'utpanna' of the adjective
clause suggests that as the joint method of agreement and
difference proves that the sense organs are the necessary condi-
tions of perception so it proves that the object which is perceiv-
ed is also a condition of its perception.
156
The Refutation of the charge against the Definition of Perception that
it is too narrow to apply to Inner Perception of pleasure etc.
Do not think that the adjective clause which arises from the
sense-object-contact excludes the inner perception of pleasure156
Nyayamanjari
its necessity ? Our reply is that this is our proof. We cite
other instances which clearly show that an accusative is the goal
of a verb. In the sentence 'Sa vīraņaṁ kaţaṁ karoti (he makes
a mat of a kind of straw) there are two accusatives 'viraṇam'
and 'kaṭam' of the verb 'karoti'. By the methods of agreement and
difference based upon perception, and perception assisted by non-
perception the causal relation subsisting between vīraņa (straw)
and kața (mat) is detected. Similarly, the same relation holding
between an object and its perception is detected. Let us take an
example. A person in search of Devadatta visits his house but does
not see him there since he is absent at that time. After a while,
when he comes back he is seen by the person. Thus we see that
when Devadatta is present he is perceived but when he is absent
he is not perceived. Hence, by the joint method of agreement
and difference, we learn that the perception of Devadatta and
his non-perception follow respectively his presence and absence.
Straws and a mat are distinctly perceived by all. It is, there-
fore, reasonable to admit that the causal relation subsisting
between them is detected by means of the joint method of
agreement and difference. But an object is never cognized as
distinct from its awareness. Hence, the application of the joint
method of agreement and difference, in the above case, to
ascertain the causal relation subsisting between an object and
its perception, is inadmissible. The distinct awareness of an
object consists in this that the true perception of an object does
not take place when an object lies beyond the field of percep-
tion. The opponent seems to take his stand upon the doctrine
of Subjective Idealism and intends to refute our hypothesis in
the light of it. We shall meet the argument of our opponent
in the proper place. The word 'utpanna' of the adjective
clause suggests that as the joint method of agreement and
difference proves that the sense organs are the necessary condi-
tions of perception so it proves that the object which is perceiv-
ed is also a condition of its perception.
The Refutation of the charge against the Definition of Perception that
it is too narrow to apply to Inner Perception of pleasure etc.
Do not think that the adjective clause which arises from the
sense-object-contact excludes the inner perception of pleasure
"Meaning of Consciousness Jaana
etc. from the province of perception but, on the contrary, in-
cludes it. The internal organ is also one of the organs of con-
sciousness. It causes the inner perception of pleasure etc. The
internal organ has not been included in the list of sense-organs
because it is not elemental like the external sense-organs, cố,
the organ of smelling. The perception of an object may be
produced by four or three or two contacts. When we perceive
the colour of an external object four contacts are required to
produce its perception. The individual soul is conjoined to the
internal organ, which is in contact with the external sense-organ
which is united with the coloured substance in which colour,
the object in question, inheres. The inner perception of inter-
nal phenomena such as pleasure etc. requires two contacts to be
produced since the external organs such as eyes etc. have no
part to play. The transcendental perception of the soul by a sage
is produced only by a single-contact since in that stage a third
object does not exist besides the soul and the internal organ.
The adjective clause 'arising from the sense-object-contact' has
been rightly used since the inner perception of pleasure etc. is
included in the class of perception. The sutra on perception
does not include the contact of the soul with the internal organ
in the list of the causal factors of perception though it is one of
its conditions because the above contact is the common factor of
all forms of consciousness but not a special condition of percep-
tion.
157
The Service of the term jääna
The word jaana' (consciousness) mentioned in the sutra
stands for the substantive. There are several adjectives and
adjective clauses in the sutra, e.g., 'indriyàrtha' etc. They re-
quire at least a noun to qualify. If their function is gone then
their very existence will be threatened. Another alternative
suggestion may be offered. The word 'ñana' (consciousness)
has been given to exclude (pleasure) etc. Pleasure abo arises
from the sense-object-contact. The assemblage of conditions
which is the source of pleasure should not be mistaken for a
proof. But the source of true knowledge should only be called
a proof. In order to indicate the instrument of true knowledge
the word 'jääna' finds an important place in the sūtra.Nyāyamanjari
158
The Buddhists hold that Consciousness itself is pleasure
The Buddhists join issue with this solution. It is not proper
to exclude pleasure, etc. by the use of the word 'Jñana'. It is
also beyond our power to exclude 'pleasure' etc. by the use
of the word Jñana. Pleasure, pain, desire, hatred, and vo-
lition are nothing but the forms of consciousness. The diffe-
rence in causes explains the difference in the nature of effects.
If one notices that the different effects follow from one and the
same cause then he arrives at the conclusion that the character
of an effect is not determined by its cause but it is accidental.
The Buddhist argument has been expressed by the following
verse. An effect of one kind and that of another owe their
existence to the two different sets of causes. Is pleasure
really different from consciousness? No, 'certainly not' is
the answer since pleasure owes its existence to such a cause as
produces consciousness. In a nutshell, the Buddhist argument
is that pleasure is a form of consciousness because it is produced
by the same cause as produces consciousness.
The Refutation of the Buddhist hypotheses from the Nyaya-stand
point
This syllogism is not sound. The material validity of this
conclusion is questionable. Pleasure is a feeling which is an
object of consciousness. It is intuited as a joyful state. On the
other hand, the essence of consciousness lies in illuminating an
object. The evidence of our direct experience on this point is
incontrovertible. Inference cannot make head against a fact,
the object of sound experience. In other words, inference is
not strong enough to establish the identity of pleasure with
consciousness. The Buddhists cannot even hold that pleasure,
pain etc. are essentially consciousness and the transformation of
them are mirth, dejection etc. Different names may be given to
these derivatives according to the sweet will of a person. The
Buddhist position will not be affected by this act of naming.
But the Buddhists forget the main point. We are always aware
of our awareness as illuminating an object but no feelings of
pleasure and pain are intuited as revealing an object. Thus an
awareness involves a reference to its object. Our direct expe-Buddhists and Nyâya on pleasure-consciousness
rience teaches that it is the essence of awareness. But pleasure or
pain is never experienced as involving a reference to an object.
The awareness of pleasure and that of pain are two distinct
forms of consciousness. They are not different by their own
nature, as a doubt and an illusion differ from each other by
their essential character. A doubt and an illusion partake of
the essential character of consciousness, viz., the illumination
of an object. A doubt is experienced as revealing an object. The
object of a doubt is indefinite. An illusion also reveals an
object. It either mistakes one thing for another or reveals an
absence of object. But neither pleasure nor pain is experienced
as an awareness revealing an object. Pleasure and pain are
merely inner phenomena. They are only objects. They are
other than consciousness. The awareness of pleasure and pain
are distinct from each other on the basis of their references to
the objects like the awareness of a jar but unlike a doubt which
is essentially different. (In other words, the awareness of plea-
sure distinguishes itself from that of pain because pleasure and
pain which are referred to by them are mutually different.
The awareness of a jar is also distinct from that of other objects
because a jar which is referred to is distinct from the other
objects. But a doubt is distinct from the other forms of con-
sciousness because the specific character of this type of consci-
ousness is essentially different from that of the other forms of
consciousness. But the awareness of pleasure is not essentially
different from that of pain but the objects of these two aware-
nesses are only different.
Now the Buddhists may contend that pleasure, pain, etc. are
not merely objects of knowledge since they are self-luminous;
they are also self-conscious. Hence, they are identical with
consciousness. This contention is not tenable. The hypothesis
that consciousness is self-luminous has been refuted and will be
more elaborately refuted. If consciousness is not self-luminous
then how is it that pleasure, pain etc. are to be admitted as
self-luminous? The reason behind our criticism is obvious since
no body experiences pleasure, etc. as self-conscious conscious-
ness. Very well, in the face of criticism, the Buddhists may
press their point with great force. They may argue that if
pleasure is not self-luminous then as there will be no distinction
159"
160
Nyayamanjari
between pleasure that has arisen and what has not yet arisen
along with the result viz., either people should always enjoy
pleasure or they should never enjoy it. Such an argument does
not hold good since pleasure is intuited only when it comes in-
to being. Hence, we do not follow the argument of the Budd-
hists why there should be no distinction between pleasure that
has come into being and what has not as yet come into being.
But a serious charge rebounds upon the Buddhists since a self-
luminous object like a lamp is a public property the benefit of
which is shared by all alike. If the Buddhists stick to the hypo-
thesis that pleasure is self-luminous then though it may arise in
a particular series yet it should render happy the members of
the other series as well.
Moreover, does a single individual phenomenon of consci-
ousness possess the complex character of partly pleasure and
partly pain? Or does an individual phenomenon of conscious-
ness partake of the character of pain? If the Buddhists sub-
scribe to the first alternative then one should simultaneously
experience both pleasure and pain contrary to each other with
the appearance of his consciousness which is partly pleasure
and partly pain. If the Buddhists accept the second alternative
then as some forms of consciousness are to be held as pleasure
and some other forms of consciousness are to be held as pain so
they should also admit the verdict of experience that some
other forms of consciousness are neutral and that they are nei-
ther pleasure nor pain but they reveal their objects only. The
last type of consciousness is not absolutely blank, i.e. objectless.
It involves a reference to an object such as a jar. It is known
to us by means of the joint method of agreement and difference.
This type of consciousness even involves a reference to an
object which has ceased to exist. This assertion is made on the
strength of our experience. In the light of this type of consci-
ousness if we try to understand the real character of the cons-
ciousness of pleasure then we arrive at the conclusion that
consciousness itself is not pleasure but it involves a reference to
pleasure which is its object as it does with regard to a jar, its
object. Moreover, we can strengthen our position on the basis
of our experience that consciousness which is not pleasure illu-
minates it since it is sometimes experienced by us. (The sumBuddhists and Nyāya on pleasure-consciousness
161
and substance of this argument is this that we can explain the
awareness of pleasure in terms of neutral consciousness but fail
to explain neutral consciousness in terms of the awareness of
pleasure). Hence pleasure or pain is not consciousness.
The Buddhists infer that pleasure is consciousness because the
conditions of pleasure and those of consciousness are the
same. The reason is materially invalid. The inherent cause
being the soul, is the same. Similarly, the non-inherent cause
which is the contact of the internal organ with the soul is also
the same. But the efficient causes are different. The efficient
cause of pleasure is the universal of pleasure whereas the
efficient cause of consciousness is the universal of consciousness.
These causes should assemble together to produce the effect.
The universal of pleasure cannot exist alone but requires a
locus, viz., an individual in the shape of a phenomenon of
pleasure to stand upon. Hence, before the appearance of plea-
sure, how can the universal of pleasure be present there? How
can the universal of pleasure be united with the other causes
of pleasure? Which will be the specific relation that binds
them together? If the universal of pleasure stands unrelated
then how can it be a cause? A reply to these objections is this:---
It will be proved later on that all the universals are omnipre-
sent. Hence, the universal of pleasure is present there. It co-
operates with the other causes of pleasure in order to bring
about the effect, viz., pleasure. Co-operation is the specific
relation. Moreover, the universal in question behaves like merit
and demerit. The invisible principle of merit and demerit is
the cause of the sali corn which is the source of pleasure or
pain of all beings. They co-operate with the other causes of
śāli corn, viz., seeds, the earth, water, etc. Similarly the uni-
versal of pleasure co-operates with the other factors of pleasure.
Hence consciousness and pleasure are not identical since their
efficient causes are different.
The difference in the efficient causes accounts for the diver-
sity in the nature of effects. The natural colour of a jar is des-
troyed when it is burat by fire. A new colour emerges. The
emergence of this new colour due to the causality of a dis-
tinct efficient cause.
All logicians do not agree on the point that consciousness isNyāyamanjari
162
always preceded by another antecedent consciousness. But
pleasure, pain and other feelings are invariably preceded by
the knowledge of an object which one seeks either to obtain or
to avoid.
Pleasure, pain, etc. are not always preceded by the direct
awareness of an object. When they are not preceded by the
direct awareness of an object they are invariably preceded by
the remembrance of an object.
In some cases, the self-consciousness of a resolution leads to
pleasure. Therefore, the proposition that pleasure and other
feelings are preceded by consciousness is universal. It may be
contended that consciousness is also preceded by consciousness
and that there is no distinction between pleasure, etc., and
consciousness. The hypothesis that consciousness precedes cons-
ciousness will be refuted later on. The dawn of consciousness
of a foetal baby is not preceded by antecedent consciousness.
The appearance of consciousness after a period of unconscious
state due to an attack of swoon is not due to the said an-
tecedent consciousness. Some points of criticism in a nut-shell
have been indicated here. The above hypothesis will be elabora-
tely discussed and criticised later on. Thus, we see that there is
a distinction between pleasure, etc., and consciousness. The
'Jñana' (awareness) has been given in the sutra on perception
in order to preclude pleasure, etc., from perceptual awareness.
The Refutation of a probable doubt that the adjective avyabhicãri is
enough to suggest the noun jñāna and that the use of the term jñāna
is redundant
It is a fact that truth and falsehood are the specific proper-
ties of knowledge. Among many adjectives, the adjective 'true'
finds a place in the sutra. It being applicable only to know-
ledge, the term denoting the noun, viz., awareness, is unmis-
takably guessed since the property of 'truth' belongs to none
else. In that case, is the term 'jñāna' not superfluous? The
whole objection is based upon a wrong assumption that truth
and falsehood are the specific properties of awareness since un-
real pleasure is also experienced by all. Which pleasure is ex-
perienced as unreal? The pleasure which is derived from doing
forbidden deeds such as the enjoyment of another's wife, etc. isThe Term Jñana is Redundant-refuted
163
a false one. What makes pleasure false? What makes a piece
of knowledge false? False knowledge is such as asserts a predi-
cate of a thing which has not in reality the property corre-
sponding to the predicate. Similarly, false pleasure is also a
case of wrong reference. Does not the pleasure derived from the
enjoyment of another's wife produce pleasant sensation? Does
not a false knowledge, e.g., the mistaking of conch-shell for
silver reveal an object? Yes, it is a piece of knowledge but a
false one. Similarly, the instance of pleasure mentioned above
is undoubtedly a pleasant feeling but at the same time a false
one. It is not false since it is nothing but a pleasant feeling. If
you argue like this then the mistaking of conchshell for silver is
not false since its essence lies in the illumination of an object.
You may answer that though an illusion reveals an object yet
it contains a wrong reference. We may also answer in the same
strain that though false pleasure is a pleasant feeling yet it is
not produced by a real cause. Now a question may be put to
them. Is it produced by a cause which does not produce plea-
sure? We may also raise a similar question. Is an illusion
produced by a cause which does not produce consciousness?
Your answer to the question will be that it is produced by a
real cause but its reference is wrong since it is contradicted by
perception. Pleasure is produced by a condition which is condu-
cive to pleasure but such a condition has been prohibited by
the Sastras such as the enjoyment of another's wife. Is not
another's wife a real condition of pleasure? In case of an
illusion also the object which is wrongly referred to is also real.
But we call it as unreal since it is contradicted by perception.
Similarly, though another's wife is a real source of pleasure yet
it should be called unreal since it is condemned by the scrip-
tures. How does the scripture contradict it? How does percep-
tion contradict an illusion? "The object which is referred to
by an illusion is not true" is the verdict of perception. It is
also declared by the scriptures that the cause which produces
pleasure is now a source of true pleasure. Is not that object
conducive to pleasure ?
As the object referred to by an illusion is the condition of
untrue knowledge so the condemned source of pleasure produces
such pleasure as turns out to be misery in the end. Such bitterNyayamanjari
pleasure is called unreal. Enough of this verbal jugglery. For
the same reasons pleasure should also be admitted to be un-
real. Hence the adjective phrase 'not untrue' does not in-
variably qualify apprehension.
Some other logicians hold that this foolish disputation is of
no use. The word 'avyabhicãri' may not be suggestive of the
term ‘jñāna' but the word 'vyavasāyātmaka' (determinate)
suggests it. The adjective 'determinate' is not applicable to
pleasure, pain etc., but is applicable only to consciousness. It is
a truism that the word 'determinate' finds a place in the sutra
in order to exclude a doubt from perception. It is not only
competent enough to exclude a doubt from perception but also
it is competent enough to distinguish perception from pleasure,
pain etc. since it is impossible to use an expression like this that
pleasure or pain is determinate. Thus, without mentioning the
word 'jñāna' perception is easily distinguished from pleasure,
pain etc. In spite of this fact the word 'jñana’ should find a
place in the sūtra since the noun should be mentioned by the
denotative term. All the adjectives are given in the sutra. But
if the noun is conspicuous by its absence then the adjectives,
having no noun to qualify, will surely lose their significance
(they will float in the air having no solid ground to stand
upon). Moreover, the attention of the listener will be diverted,
having no concrete object to concentrate upon. Hence, though
the word 'a jñāna' is suggested by the power of suggestion
belonging to the adjectives yet the noun i.e. jñāna should be
specifically mentioned in the sutra. If we do not mention what
is intelligently guessed by an adequate expression then the
word of the sutra would be "pratyakṣam pratyakşam' since
everything else, given in the present sūtra, can be easily guess-
ed. Therefore, the sūtra has done the right thing viz. the use
of the word 'jñāna' in order to state clearly the substantive.
164
Various meanings of the word Avyapadesya
(i) The negative thesis that words do not interpenetrate
real objects will be established when we shall refute the
hypothesis of the Buddhists on this point. When words inter-
penetrate our knowledge it is called vyapadeśya i.e. it becomes
inter-woven with words. In order to exclude such knowledgeInterpretation of the word Auyapadesya
165
from perception the word avyapadeśyam (not inter-mixed with
words) has been given. The old logicians interpret this term in
their own way. What finds expression in words is called 'vyapa-
deśyam'. Thus, an expressible knowledge is designated as
vyapadeśyam. The awareness which arises from the sense-
object-contact and is named after its object such as the aware-
ness of colour, the awareness of taste etc. is called as 'vyapade-
śyam' The term 'avyapadeśyam' finds a place in the sutra to
suggest that no such expressible awareness is the resulting form
of perception. Such an interpretation is untenable. The mere
association of an apprehension with a word cannot discredit it
as untrue. If the awareness of colour or that of taste is
represented by language but it rightly refers to its object and
does not oscillate between two objects then how can it be
called as a false one? If it contains a wrong reference then the
term 'avyabhicări' given in the sutra is competent enough
to exclude it from the domain of true perception. In that
case, is
not the term in question superfluous? In due
course it will be shown that the awareness interpenetrated
by a word owes its existence to the source of valid
knowledge. What will be its fate? Will it be excluded from the
state of being the resulting perception by the mere term
'avyapadeśyam' contained in the sutra in spite of the fact
that it is generated by the source of valid knowledge? It is not
also produced by the source of an inferential knowledge. There
is also no provision in Gautama's logic of the fifth source of
valid knowledge. Thus, the four-fold division of valid know-
ledge would be too narrow to include it within itself. Hence,
it is a riddle which defies the finding of our intelligence (or
it represents a glaring instance of oversight on the part of our
intelligence). Therefore, we arrive at the conclusion that the
so-called interpretation is really a misinterpretation.
Some teachers of the Nyaya School have shown, that the
term 'avyapadeiya' excludes some other form of knowledge from
the domain of perception. A man who learns the meaning of
a word from the usage of an experienced man solves his doubt
about the identity of an object on hearing a sentence indicat-
ing the name of the intended object from the mouth of an
expert. He listens to the sentence of an expert that this is aNyayamanjari
jack-fruit tree. He ascertains that the yonder object having
branches etc. is signified by the word 'jack-fruit tree'. Though
the apprehension of the tree is of sensuous origin yet it should
not be solely sensuous since if the sentence which throws light
on its name had not been present then his present apprehension
would not have arisen. Hence words and his sense organ have
jointly produced it. It is an effect of the joint effort of the
two types of causes. As words play an important part in its
production so it is called as Vyapadeśyam. Such an apprehen-
sion is excluded by the term 'avyapadeśyam'. This apprehen-
sion is not a class by itself. Therefore, the proposal of a fifth
type of knowledge does not mature. But the people hold that
it is a piece of verbal knowledge. If somebody asks him, "How
do you know that this is a jack-fruit tree" then he says in
reply, "I have been instructed by Devadatta that it is so and
so". But again, he does never say even in a dream "I have
seen it with my eyes that it is a jack-fruit tree". Though we
know from the joint method of agreement and difference that
the sense-organ is one of its conditions yet words play the part
of an instrumental cause in its production. For this reason, the
author of the Nyâya-sūtra has not framed the definition of
verbal knowledge in such a way as to exclude the dependence
of verbal knowledge upon a sense-organ as its condition. The
definition of verbal knowledge as given by Gautama is this that
the knowledge which is derived from the words of a trustworthy
person is verbal. It shows that the room of verbal knowledge
is spacious. Gautama also approves the entry of a sensuous
element into the body of verbal knowledge. But he has narrow-
ed down the scope of perception as he shuts his door against an
element of verbal knowledge, having qualified perception by
the term "avyapadeśya". Hence, experience interpenetrated
by words cannot be the resulting form of perception. There-
fore, the term 'avyapadeśya' has been used to exclude the
above experience from the perception proper.
166
The subsequent interpreters do not assent to the above
conclusion. If such apprehension as is produced by the joint
causality of the two distinct factors is excluded from perception
then it turns out to be a piece of false direct knowledge but
the definition of false knowledge does not apply to it. Again,Interpretation of the word Auyapadesya
if it is true then it should be decided with which kind of true
knowledge it is to be identified. Word-interpenetrated
experience is verbal since it is causally connected with words
as its causal relation is detected by the joint method of agree-
ment and difference. It is also sensuous since it is causally
connected with the sense-organs and its causal relation is also
similarly detected.
167
It is also incompatible to hold that word-interpenetrated
experience is verbal since it is produced by the two distinct
sources of knowledge. Again, if it is held that it is a class by
itself then such a hypothesis meets with the dilemma which
has been shown before.
How is it that the previous teachers, having noticed the
perilous journey on the path of logic, have accepted the
popular view that such an experience is verbal on the strength
of the evidence that it has been instructed by Deva Datta
that this is a jack-fruit tree? What a fine decision! The author
of Nyaya-Sūtra, being a man of super intellect, has little faith
in popular saying like an ordinary fellow. The character of
an object is not such as the people believe and express. The
people say that this small reservoir of water is reserved for the
use of Nandin though the bathing place is used by all the sages.
But even in the face of this criticism if we try to make out the
real intention of the author of the Nyaya-Sūtra then we arrive
at the conclusion that this piece of knowledge is verbal.
Gautama cautiously defines perception and adequately quali-
fies it with the purpose of excluding any element of verbal
knowledge from it. But on the other hand, he does not qualify
the definition of verbal knowledge so as to exclude it from the
partly sensuous one. From this attitude of his mind, we come
to the conclusion that piece of knowledge which is produced
not by words alone but by words accompanied by some other
factors required for the appearance of some other form is of
knowledge surely verbal.
A critical review of the above hypothesis is as follows: The
author of the Nyāya-Sutra is not an instructor of moral duty
like Manu so that we should hold that the piece of knowledge
in question is verbal as he so commands.Nyayamanjari
On an adequate examination of the nature of this object we
find that this piece of knowledge is perceptual since it is causally
determined by the sense-organ and this causal connection is
based upon the joint method of agreement and difference.
When its sensuous origin will be negated it is wise to hold that
it belongs to another kind of valid knowledge.
We shall follow a different line of interpretation since we
are divided in our opinion. In other words, we mean to say
that we may be right in our interpretation but our opponents
are not satisfied with our interpretation. Therefore, we should
try to convince them.
168
Another Interpretation to avoid the defect of being impossible
The adjective 'avyapadeśyam' given in the sûtra is to guard
against the possible defect of the definition of perception in
being impossible. A critical thinker discusses the point thus :-
If an object to be defined is existent then its definition is given.
But perception which arises from the sense-object-contact does
not really exist if perception refers to the object as qualifed by
a word which denotes it. The so called perception referring to
a qualified object as indicated above is essentially verbal. The
distinction-perceptions cannot be established if their reference
to their corresponding different objects is not admitted. The
function of consciousness is simply to reveal an object. The
judgment that a man has a stick or the judgment that a man
is white is distinct since each one refers to the relational
object containing noun qualified by an adjective. Similarly,
the judgment that this is a cow is distinct since it refers to an
object which is qualified by its name. Such a judgment (i.e.
a judgment similar to the last one) is verbal since a word is
the only instrumental cause of it. No sense-organ can play the
part of an instrumental cause to bring about the above judg-
ment since the predicate lies beyond the range of eyes and the
subject is beyond the reach of ears.
Nobody has ever experienced that a perceptual judgment is
the joint effect of the two different sense-organs. An exception
may be cited in this connection. As objector may urge that a
word interpenetrated experience owes its existence to the inner
organ just like the judgment that the Bandhūka flower is scent-Another Interpretation of the word Avyapadesyam
169
ed. But we should also remember in this context what has
been stated about this type of judgment. When a word or a
mark or a similar source of knowledge fails to discharge its
function as an instrumental cause and an effect in the shape of
a judgment arises in our mind we entertain a hypothesis that
the inner organ plays the part of an instrumental cause to
generate it. But if the possibility of a source of knowledge
as an instrumental cause is not ruled out then the
causality of the inner organ should not be relied upon. If we
violate this rule then the inner organ should be the only source
of valid knowledge. A word is the instrumental cause of the
judgment in question. It reveals itself and the object meant
by itself like thousand-rayed sun. Therefore, though the judg-
ment that this is a cow refers to a cow which is a perceptible
object yet it is not perceptual but mediate, i.e. it is derived
from a word. A question arises in our mind with regard to
this hypothesis. We have heard the word 'cow', etc. when we
have been initiated into its signification. The word has ceased
to exist. How is it that the judgment in question is due to
the instrumentality of the past word? Do not think that we
entertain such an absurd hypothesis. Though the word is not
heard at the time of the formation of the judgment yet it
being recalled in our memory, generates it.
When the particular word consisting of many letters is heard
do we really perceive all the letters at a time? (When we
actually hear the last letter the first has passed away. Thus, a
complete word is never heard. The last letter is heard but
other letters which are absent are recalled in our memory.
The relevant portion of our point is this that when a word
conveys its meaning all the letters are not perceived). Is there
any distinction between the communication of sense by the
two different words? A word expresses its meaning when all
its constituent letters are supplied by memory and another
word carries its sense when its last letter is only audible and
the rest are supplied by memory.
We arrive at the conclusion that the judgment in question is
due to the instrumentality of words which are not directly
given to us but are recalled in our memory. As a word reveals
itself along with a supersensible object so it does with a170
Nyayamanjari
perceptible object. Thus it should be admitted that judgment
of this type refers to an object which is qualified by a word
which denotes it.
An experienced teacher refers to an analogous case. He
holds that the word 'saṁjñítva' is a classical example of an
object having a word as its predicate. Let us see the derivation
of the word 'samjñitva'. The noun 'saṁjñã' is the base. The
nominal suffix in 'having the sense of 'matup' suffix has been
attached to it. The resultant form is 'samjñin'. Again, the
nominal suffix 'tva' denoting the sense of an abstract quality
has been attached to the word 'samjñin'. But the nominał
suffix 'tva' denotes a relation when it is attached to a word
which is derived from a basic word with a nominal suffix imply-
ing the sense of the 'matup' suffix added to it. Thus the word
'samjñitva' denotes the relation obtaining between 'samjñā
and 'samjñin'. If we recall the ruling of the learned gramma-
rians on this point in our mind then we see that the-tva
suffix after a word derived from a root with a verbal suffix
attached to it or that derived from a base a nominal suffix
attached to it or a compound word signifies a relation. The
term 'saṁjñā' stands for a word. Thus the import of the word
'samjñítva' is that an object which is denoted by a word is
presented to our consciousness along with its denotative word
as its predicate. We are aware of no awareness which is not
associated with words. When definite words are not presented
to our consciousness there is possibility of some general words
being associated with our consciousness. If words are not
associated with consciousness then consciousness lacks its power
of illumination.
Bhartṛhari says to this effect
There is no such consciousness in this universe as is not
associated with words. We are aware of all awarenesses as
qualified by words. Thus the definition of perception turns out
to be merely verbal having no real thing to define. Anticipa-
ting the possible charge of absurdity to be levelled against the
definition of perception the author of the Nyaya-sutra puts in
the adjective 'avyapa-deśyam'. The consciousness of a person
who is innocent of a word and of its denotation and of theirOn the insertion of the word Avyapadesyam
relation is not associated with words. When the direct aware-
ness of a person who is even conversant with words, their
meanings and their mutual relation arises from the contact of
the sense-organ with an object in immediate succession it is not
associated with words. It helps to bring back the proper words
to our minds. Such an awareness which is an antecedent condí.
tion of word-interpenetrated experience does not owe its existence
to the words. No word contributes to the power of illumination
of awareness. The power of illumination constitutes the essence
of conciousness. No body's experience is interpenetrated with
an adjective thus, denoting an object close at hand when he
has the initial sense-perception known as indeterminate
perception. Though the judgments such as this is a cow, etc.
come under the species of verbal knowledge yet the initial
sense-perception is a fit object which is to be defined. There-
fore, the definition of perception is not futile. In order to
meet the charge of absurdity which may be levelled against
the definition of perception the adjective 'avyapadeśyam' has
been given in the sutra.
171
The Refutation of the above hypothesis
Some teachers of the Nyaya school disapprove of this solu-
tion. They believe that the judgment that this is a cow owes
its existence to the sense-object-contact, and also hold that it
cannot be a piece of verbal knowledge. Moreover, they point
out that this judgment does not refer to an object which is
qualified by a word since an instrumental cause of such a
judgment is not possible. Words are the source of such judg-
ment as has the subject supplied by them. But let us now find
out the instrumental cause of a judgment in which the word
plays the part of a mere predicate. Our auditory organ is not
the instrumental cause in question since it cannot produce its
result by fits. If we closely examine the process of associating
the synthetic judgment that this is a cow with words then we
at once abandon the idea of entertaining the hypothesis that
the auditory organ is the instrumental cause of it. The first
step towards the association of the judgment with words is our
knowledge of the relation between a word and its meaning.
Then the word which is recalled in our memory is associated172
Nyayamanjari
with the objective consciousness. How does the auditory organ
come in to produce the judgment in question? The inner organ
unaided by an external sense-organ, is not competent to
produce a judgment which refers to an external object; other-
wise, no body should be blind, etc. The objector may urge that
the words alone play, here, the part of an instrumental cause
and may suggest that one should not search for another
instrumental cause. Such a contention does not hold good.
The object of a verb cannot be its instrument. The objector
cites an illustration in support of his view that sun light is
both the object and the instrument of the verb to see. We see
sun's light by means of itself. This is not an apt illustration.
The illustration arises from the wrong identification of one act
of seeing with that of another. There are two acts of seeing.
When sun's light is an instrumental case it is not an objective
case and vice versa. We see an object, e.g. a jar by means of
sun's light; light is merely the instrumental cause but is not the
objective case. When we see light it is merely an object but
not an instrumental cause. What is the instrumental cause in
this case? We see light only with our eyes. Therefore, the eyes
are the only instrumental cause. When we see light we require
no instrumental cause like light. How is it that we see without
light? We are to accept facts but cannot challenge them. We
see an object such as a jar with the aid of light. But when we
see light we require no such aid. Who is to blame? Sun's
light is, at first, seen independently of any other light with our
eyes. It endures long and serves the purpose of an instrumental
cause when the other objects are beheld with the same organ.
This conclusion seems to us to be reasonable.
Sound endures only two time-atoms. It is audible. If it plays
the part
an instrument when the consciousness of an object
which is grasped by a source of knowledge other than the audi-
tory organ is produced then how can it be an object of such
awareness? A word is a means of knowledge like smoke but is
never an object of such knowledge. In other words, a word
itself is not referred to by a judgment which owes its existence
to its instrumentality. When a word, being recalled in our
mind, leads to the knowledge of an object, i.e. its meaning let
us pay attention to the following steps. At the outset we re-On the insertion of the word Avyapadesyam
173
member a word. Then we know the object denoted by the
word. Thus, when we know the object it is in no way possible for
us to cognize the word itself. Thus, no judgment refers to an
object which is qualified by its denotative word. Moreover, the
judgment that this is a cow is causally connected with the
sense-object-contact since its causal connection is determined by
the joint method of agreement and difference. How can you
per force, i.e, violating the law of logic, hold that the above
judgment is a piece of verbal knowledge? Though it is due to
the function of a sense-organ in co-operation with the impres-
sions of the knowledge of words yet it is asserted by you to be a
piece of verbal knowledge. Then we see that you are a great
logician indeed.
It has been pointed out by you that neither the visual organ
nor the auditory organ is instrumental to the production of such
a judgment as refers to an object as qualified by its denotative
word. But, oh Sir, why do you not hold that such an object is
perceived with our eyes alone ?
Very well, you may contend that our eyes do not apprehend
an object which is not visible. Hence, the judgment which
refers to an object which is qualified by its denotative word is
not visual.
This contention does not hold good. How do you hold that
your illusion is optical when you mistake the rays of the sun for
water? The eyes are not in contact with water. Therefore,
your statement is baseless.
We beg to mention in this connection that water which is at
first recalled in our mind is perceived with our eyes. Similarly
here too, why is not the word which is at first remembered per-
ceived with our eyes.
Now, you may contend that a word which is essentially a
sound ever remains beyond the reach of our eyes. We also put
this question to you, viz., “Is water which is not in touch with
our eyes, ever seen with our eyes?"
You may still contend that if sound is at all visualized then
only one kind of sense-organ, viz., the eyes, should be admitted.
We also meet this contention with the following counter argu-
ment. If you admit that an object which is not in contact with
our eyes is visualized then all the objects of the universe shouldNyayamanjari
be perceived with eyes. In other words, every body having nor-
mal eyes should have seen each and every object of the universe.
Why do you illustrate an illusion by which the rays of the
sun are mistaken for water? What is it that makes an illusion?
Is it so since the sense-organ does not produce it? Or, is it so
because it does not correspond to the object referred to by it?
Now, if it is held that it is illusion because of its non-sensuous
origin then the phrase 'not produced by the sense-object-con-
tact' being sufficient to exclude an illusion from perception the
phrase 'not corresponding' should be abandoned as superfluous.
As the latter phrase finds a place in the sutra which defines
perception so it is admitted that the essential character of an
illusion lies in its non-correspondence. Thus it should be surely
assumed that the illusory judgment which refers to water not
united with the sense-organ is produced by the sense-organ.
As the optical illusion of water refers to water lying beyond
the reach of our eyes so why do you not subscribe to the hypo-
thesis that the perceptual judgment refers to an object which is
qualified by its denotative term?
As you hold that the colourless objects such as time, etc. are
visualized, why do you not maintain that an object which is
characterized by its name is also visualised? Moreover, the
causal relation obtaining between the perceptual judgment
which refers to an object as qualified by its name and the
sense-organ will not be contradicted.
174
An objector to the view may contend that he cannot support
the above view that sound is visualized as long as he is alive.
He advises his rival thinkers to give us his tenacious attempt
at bringing home the point that an object qualified by its name
is visualised.
(If this contention is thoroughly scrutinized then its hollow-
ness will be transparent). Moreover, if the above judgment is
said to be a piece of verbal knowledge as it has been suggested
by objector then he should explain how he does acquire the
knowledge of signification. A word cannot communicate its
meaning if the signification of a word remains unknown. The
signification of a word is not grasped if one has only the in-
determinate perception of the object denoted by it. The objec-
tor stands committed to the view that all determinate percep-On the insertion of the word Avyapadeśyam
175
tion is a piece of verbal knowledge. Therefore he cannot hold
that the knowledge of the signification of a word is due to the
determinate perception. The knowledge of the signification of
a word is not acquired if it does not come through a distinct
source of valid knowledge other than a verbal one. If it is held
that the signification of a word is learnt from the verbal testi-
mony then it is an instance of circular reasoning. No body un-
derstands that the object which is signified by a word is qualified
by the word itself. If it had been so then the meaning of the
word 'cow' would have been grasped as the word 'cow' itself.
The last sentence of the above paragraph requires a bit ex-
planation. If we take a concrete case then our point will be
clear. If the word 'cow' denotes a cow as qualified by the word
'cow' then it will also be an element of its meaning (the word
'cow' will signify itself).
(
If a term signifies its denotation as qualified by itself then the
knowledge of a mark should also lead to the knowledge of the
object marked as qualified by the mark itself.
But fire is never inferred as qualified by smoke. Similarly, a
cow and such other objects are never known as qualified by
their denotative terms. The state of being signified is never a
property of an object. If it had been so then it would have been
grasped by the indeterminate perception (i.e. the initial sense-
perception) just as colour is sensed.
The Buddhists, the bad logicians, hold that the words cannot
signify the real objects. They should be vanquished by an
appeal to the evidence of determinate perception. If you (the
objector) hold that the so-called determinate perception is a
piece of verbal knowledge then how can you win victory over
them (the Buddhists)?
How do you hold that a word relates itself with an object
which is perceived? A word should be at first related to its
object. At this stage it should be known independently of the
word itself. If it is held that a word at all stages associates it-
self with its meaning then the knowledge of an object would be
piece of verbal knowledge. It that case, the Buddhists will
surely get the upperhand of you.
You also work under an assumption that the diversity of
objects alone accounts for the difference in the character of anNyayamanjari
awareness. Owing to the obstinate inclination to cling to this
wrong assumption you have had to imagine that the object of a
determinate perception, being qualified by a word, is distinct
from that of an indeterminate perception. Proceeding in this
path do not you realise that you mistake perception for verbal
knowledge? What a perversion of intellect! Doing so you have
become an object of the following censure viz. "Oh fool ! you
only see honey but do you not see the pit under your feet-the
pit where you will drop".
176
Thus, the judgment that this is a cow is perceptual since it is
produced by the eyes in co-operation with the recollection of a
word.
It is reasonable to hold that it has not been the creation of
the internal organ alone. It is due to the function of the external
organ since it is causally connected with it and the causal rela-
tion is determined by the joint method of agreement and
difference.
Some stalwart followers of the line of the objector come
forward with a new objection and hold that it has been proved
to the hilt that the judgment that this is a cow and such other
judgments do not refer to objects, qualified by their denotative
terms. Now, how shall we distinguish a determinate perception
from an indeterminate one? Because an apprehension is not
distinct from another if the latter does not refer to a distinct.
object. When we hear the term-'a club-man', a man who
carries a club is present to our consciousness. If this conscious-
ness were not a distinct one then it would have been simply an
awareness of a man. Again, a man and a club are not present
to our consciousness as unrelated since the club qualifies the
man i.e. the relation of the qualifying to the qualified governs
this consciousness which arises from the knowledge of the term
'a club-man' (The drift of the whole argument is that the diffe-
rence in the nature of an object explains only the difference in
the corresponding awareness). The acts of consciousness corres-
ponding to the words 'remote, near, slow, quick, successive,
simultaneous etc.' refer to an object which is either qualified
by space or by Time.
Otherwise, the distinction in their
meanings would not have been grasped.176
Nyayamanjari
awareness. Owing to the obstinate inclination to cling to this
wrong assumption you have had to imagine that the object of a
determinate perception, being qualified by a word, is distinct
from that of an indeterminate perception. Proceeding in this
path do not you realise that you mistake perception for verbal
knowledge? What a perversion of intellect! Doing so you have
become an object of the following censure viz. "Oh fool ! you
only see honey but do you not see the pit under your feet-the
pit where you will drop".
Thus, the judgment that this is a cow is perceptual since it is
produced by the eyes in co-operation with the recollection of a
word.
It is reasonable to hold that it has not been the creation of
the internal organ alone. It is due to the function of the external
organ since it is causally connected with it and the causal rela-
tion is determined by the joint method of agreement and
difference.
Some stalwart followers of the line of the objector come
forward with a new objection and hold that it has been proved
to the hilt that the judgment that this is a cow and such other
judgments do not refer to objects, qualified by their denotative
terms. Now, how shall we distinguish a determinate perception
from an indeterminate one? Because an apprehension is not
distinct from another if the latter does not refer to a distinct
object. When we hear the term—'a club-man', a man who
carries a club is present to our consciousness. If this conscious-
ness were not a distinct one then it would have been simply an
awareness of a man. Again, a man and a club are not present
to our consciousness as unrelated since the club qualifies the
man i.e. the relation of the qualifying to the qualified governs
this consciousness which arises from the knowledge of the term
'a club-man' (The drift of the whole argument is that the diffe-
rence in the nature of an object explains only the difference in
the corresponding awareness). The acts of consciousness corres.
ponding to the words 'remote, near, slow, quick, successive,
simultaneous etc.' refer to an object which is either qualified
by space or by Time. Otherwise, the distinction in their
meanings would not have been grasped.On the insertion of the word Aryapadeśyam
If you put a question to me whether Time or Space is directly
known then I simply ask you to put this question to your ex-
perience but not to me. It is a fact that an object qualified by
Time or Space is presented to our direct awareness but on the
contrary, it is also strange that they themselves (Time and
Space) are never perceived.
This admission also points to the acceptance of the hypothesis
that the relation of inherence is perceived under certain circum-
stances. The judgment that the cloth rests upon this (the collec-
tion of interlaced threads) reveals that the cloth inherent in the
threads, is perceived. (Thus, the relation of inherence which
unites the cloth with the threads is perceived).
The judgment that this is a piece of cloth is distinct from the
judgment that this piece of cloth inheres in the threads. If the
relation of inherence which subsists between this piece of cloth
and the threads is not perceived then the distinction between
the above two judgments will not arise since the apprehension
of the cloth alone cannot account for the distinction. Now, a
second alternative suggestion on this point is as follows: The
difference in the two awarenesses focused upon the same object
is explained by the distinction in the nature of conditions. The
following illustrations will bring home our point. The same
post is differently presented to our consciousness when it stands
close at hand or is far away from us. The same thing is diffe-
rently perceived when it is seen with normal eyes or with diseas-
ed eyes. The alternative hypothesis does not stand to reasons.
The difference in the nature of awareness due to the diversity
of conditions is hard to establish. The condition brings about
some special feature in the effect viz., an act of awareness reveals
but cannot alter an object in the least. But the Naiyāyikas
hold that when one is aware of an object he is not aware of the
awareness of an object. The act of awareness which is marked
by some distinction is not intuited. The object which is pre-
sented to our consciousness has no distinction. But it is a fact
that a distinction is presented to our consciousness. Thus, the
line of the hypothesis is dangerous. The awareness of a near
object does not differ from that of the same object, being distant
though their conditions are distinct but they differ since the
objects are not the same.
177178
Nyayamanjari
When we look at an object from a distance we perceive it as
outlined by its general features only. But when we see it from
a close quarter we behold it as qualified by its vivid distinctive
features.
Māgha has given a description that lends support to our view.
He (Vasudeva) knew at first the object as a collection of rays
when it just entered the field of his vision. When it came closer
to his sight he saw his form and knew it to be a corporeal being.
When it approached nearer still the limbs being distinctly seen
he knew that being as belonging to the male sex. When that
person gradually came very close to him he recognized him to
be Närada.
We do not mind whatever else may account for the diversity
of acts other than that of awareness but the difference in the
act of awareness is absolutely due to the diversity of objects.
Some teachers of the Nyaya school join issue with the above
thinkers. They hold that the distinction of awareness is not
only due to the diversity of objects but also is due to the
difference of means. The objector has pointed out that when an
object is presented to our consciousness we are not aware of
the awareness of an object and if it is held that an act of
awareness acquires a distinction without a reference to its
object then the hypothesis is beset with enormous difficulty.
But such a criticism comes from the lips of a person who is
innocent of the Nyāya system of thought. The appearance of
apprehension amounts to the perception of an object accord-
ingly to our system. But we are not self-conscious of this act
of perception. When we have the indeterminate perception of a
person, the object of such perception is only presented to our
consciousness but the awareness of this perception remains
absent. Though the awareness of an awareness does not take
place yet the object is cognized. When the determinate percep-
tion of the same object takes place it acquires distinction as it
is conditioned by the awareness of its predicate. The above
perception is expressed in the judgment that a person is posse-
ssed of a stick or clad in a white cloth. This judgment is not
self-consciousness but reveals the same object. Thus, the
hypothesis in question does not meet with disaster though it
acquires a distinction without referring to a distinct object. WeOn the insertion of the word Avyapadeśyam
also beg to mention in this connection that the judgment that
this is a club-man refers only to a person. If you ask, "Who
is a club-man" then the answer is "A club-man". Thus we
see that the term 'club-man' denotes simply a man having no
intimate connection with a club-since in the judgment that a
man is a club-man, club-man being a case in apposition with
the subject 'man'. Moreover, when we say "Feed a club-man
--and give it to a club-man" then we ask some body to feed a
man or to give him something. But in these cases the acts of
feeding and giving have no bearing upon the stick. Now, a few
cases may be pointed out to contradict the above solution.
When we say that a club-man is climbing up a mountain the
club belonging to him also ascends the mountain. In the Vedic
literature, too, the sentence that an assistant priest (Maitrā-
varuņa) having a stick in his hand gives direction to his
subordinate priests purports to convey that the said assistant
priest should have a stick in his hand since the function of
giving directions follows from the previous text. The objector
cites, also, another analogous sentence to confirm his view.
The Vedic sentence that the priests with red turbans on their
head should roam about, does not purport to convey that they
should roam about but should have red turbans on their heads
since in a śyena sacrifice (a sacrifice which is performed with
the object of killing an enemy) the roaming about of the priests
has been already enjoined by the basic injunction. (In other
words, the objector means to emphasise the point that the
distinction of an awareness is explained only by its special object.
When we see a club-man we do not merely see a man but a man
having a stick. The stick which qualifies the man is also
perceived along with the man, qualified by it). A review of the
above criticism is as follows: Though there is much truth in
the statement of the objector yet a man having a stick in his
hand mounts the hill but the stick itself does not ascend it.
The above Vedic sentence directs that a priest having a stick
in his hand should give directions to his subordinates but not
the stick itself should do it. Similarly, the other text does not
direct that only the red turbans should roam about. Its
direction is that the priests who have red turbans on their
heads should only move. In every case, the noun which is
179Nyāyamanjari
signified by a compound word becomes the sole object of know-
ledge. If both the noun and the adjective had been the objects
of knowledge then the corresponding knowledge would have
been expressed in the proposition that there are a man and a
stick but not in the proposition that there is a man having
a stick. Now, the objector may contend that the knowledge
should not be expressed in the proposition that has been
pointed out by the critic since the relation of the qualifying
to the qualified determines the form of knowledge. The con-
tention of the objector is not tenable since the net result of
this determination is that the sole object of knowledge is only
the noun. Let us find out the meaning of the word 'daṇḍin'.
The word 'danda', occupies a subordinate place in the deriva-
tive word 'dandin'. Its literal meaning is that one possesses a
stick. Hence, it signifies only a person but does not signify
both a person and a stick. Thus, our knowledge of 'before' and
'after' etc. that of 'slow' and 'quick' etc. and the judgment
that a cloth inheres in threads etc. refer to such objects as are
qualified by space, time and the relation of inherence
respectively. These factors viz., space, time and the relation of
inherence are included in the conditions of knowledge and
determine its distinctive character. But they are never cogniz-
ed as a cloth is cognized. Thus, the judgment that a slab of
stone is heavy refers to a substantive the predicate of which
refers to a supersensible quality. This imperceptible quality
which is an inference is one of the conditions of the judgment.
It is inferred from its effect viz., the going down of the slab of
stone. It is needless to multiply the number of examples to
establish our point the conditions which are not perceived
contribute to the distinct character of a judgment framed by
them. Hence, the judgment that this is a cow does not refer to
an object as qualified by its name. Therefore, it is not a
piece of verbal knowledge. But it is a clear case of perceptual
judgment. The judgments of this type come within the
province of perception, so the assertion of the futility of the
definition of perception becomes baseless. Hence, the adjective
'avyapadelyam' has not been given in the sutra to meet the
charge that it is impossible to define perception.
What is the function of this adjective? We simply repeat
180On the insertion of the word Avyapadesyam
the answer, given by the celebrated teachers of the Nyaya
school that it has been given to exclude such knowledge as
arises from the two distinct sources of knowledge within the
field of perception. The hypothesis that the experience of
objects qualified by denotative words is perceptual has not as
yet been conclusively proved. When we perceive an object
before us we apprehend only the objective features belonging to
it. But when we know that the object 'cow' is denoted by the
word 'cow' we entirely depend upon a sentence which enjoins
that such and such word signifies such and such object for our
knowledge, though we may learn the relation of signification
subsisting between an object and a word from other sources of
knowledge yet the verbal testimony is the only source of
knowledge in some cases. Suppose, when an experienced
teacher imparts instructions in nomenclature to a common
*man with regard to objects in the following manner that this
is a cow, this is a jack-fruit and so on, the denotation of a
word is learnt only from the source of verbal testimony.
181
For this obvious reason, a man in the street takes this piece
of knowledge as arising from the verbal testimony since he is
satisfied with this instruction which contributes a new inform-
ation to the stock of his existing knowledge.
Though his sense-organ plays some part in the acquisition of
this knowledge of signification yet he would not have known
that this object is denoted by this word if he had not listened to
the above instruction. Hence, the verbal testimony plays the
most important part in this context.
Hence, the author of the Nyaya-sutra does not formulate a
moral ordinance if he holds that the adjective 'avyapadeśya'
excludes the knowledge of signification from the province of
perception because he has realized the important role of verbal
testimony in its production. Hence, we arrive at the conclusion
that the term under discussion is indispensable for the exclusion
of such knowledge as owes its existence to the two distinct types
of sources of knowledge.
Some other logicians argue thus. The above teachers of the
Nyaya school may represent their view that the term 'avya-
padesya' excludes only such knowledge as arises from the twoNyayamanjari
signified by a compound word becomes the sole object of know-
ledge. If both the noun and the adjective had been the objects
of knowledge then the corresponding knowledge would have
been expressed in the proposition that there are a man and a
stick but not in the proposition that there is a man having
a stick. Now, the objector may contend that the knowledge
should not be expressed in the proposition that has been
pointed out by the critic since the relation of the qualifying
to the qualified determines the form of knowledge. The con-
tention of the objector is not tenable since the net result of
this determination is that the sole object of knowledge is only
the noun. Let us find out the meaning of the word 'daṇḍin'.
The word 'danda', occupies a subordinate place in the deriva-
tive word 'daṇḍin'. Its literal meaning is that one possesses a
stick. Hence, it signifies only a person but does not signify
both a person and a stick. Thus, our knowledge of 'before' and
‘after' etc. that of 'slow' and 'quick' etc. and the judgment
that a cloth inheres in threads etc. refer to such objects as are
qualified by space, time and the relation of inherence
respectively. These factors viz., space, time and the relation of
inherence are included in the conditions of knowledge and
determine its distinctive character. But they are never cogniz-
ed as a cloth is cognized. Thus, the judgment that a slab of
stone is heavy refers to a substantive the predicate of which
refers to a supersensible quality. This imperceptible quality
which is an inference is one of the conditions of the judgment.
It is inferred from its effect viz., the going down of the slab of
stone. It is needless to multiply the number of examples to
establish our point the conditions which are not perceived
contribute to the distinct character of a judgment framed by
them. Hence, the judgment that this is a cow does not refer to
an object as qualified by its name. Therefore, it is not a
piece of verbal knowledge. But it is a clear case of perceptual
judgment. The judgments of this type come within the
province of perception, so the assertion of the futility of the
definition of perception becomes baseless. Hence, the adjective
'avyapadeśyam' has not been given in the sutra to meet the
charge that it is impossible to define perception.
What is the function of this adjective? We simply repeat
180On the insertion of the word Avyapadesyam
the answer, given by the celebrated teachers of the Nyaya
school that it has been given to exclude such knowledge as
arises from the two distinct sources of knowledge within the
field of perception. The hypothesis that the experience of
objects qualified by denotative words is perceptual has not as
yet been conclusively proved. When we perceive an object
before us we apprehend only the objective features belonging to
it. But when we know that the object 'cow' is denoted by the
word 'cow' we entirely depend upon a sentence which enjoins
that such and such word signifies such and such object for our
knowledge, though we may learn the relation of signification
subsisting between an object and a word from other sources of
knowledge yet the verbal testimony is the only source of
knowledge in some cases. Suppose, when an experienced
teacher imparts instructions in nomenclature to a common
man with regard to objects in the following manner that this
is a cow, this is a jack-fruit and so on, the denotation of a
word is learnt only from the source of verbal testimony.
181
For this obvious reason, a man in the street takes this piece
of knowledge as arising from the verbal testimony since he is
satisfied with this instruction which contributes a new inform-
ation to the stock of his existing knowledge.
Though his sense-organ plays some part in the acquisition of
this knowledge of signification yet he would not have known
that this object is denoted by this word if he had not listened to
the above instruction. Hence, the verbal testimony plays the
most important part in this context.
Hence, the author of the Nyaya-sutra does not formulate a
moral ordinance if he holds that the adjective 'avyapadesya'
excludes the knowledge of signification from the province of
perception because he has realized the important role of verbal
testimony in its production. Hence, we arrive at the conclusion
that the term under discussion is indispensable for the exclusion
of such knowledge as owes its existence to the two distinct types
of sources of knowledge.
Some other logicians argue thus. The above teachers of the
Nyaya school may represent their view that the term 'avya-
padeśya' excludes only such knowledge as arises from the twoNyayamanjari
distinct types of sources of knowledge and that this knowledge
appears only when the signification of a word is learnt from a
sentence employed for instructing the name of an object. If this
is their view then the judgment that this is a cow, meant for
communicating the acquired signification, should be necessarily
generated by the two distinct types of sources of knowledge
since the judgment is produced by the sense-organ together with
the memory of a sentence learnt by us. We remember that we
have correctly learnt that this word signifies the object in question
since we have been taught by Devadatta, a reliable person, and
so on. Now, the question is. "Why do not you exclude such a
judgment from the field of perception by the term in question?"
Now, they may contend that words do not directly condition
the above judgment but their memory. Such a contention is not
tenable. The memory of words does also condition the know-
ledge of signification. The syllables-the constituents of a
word, which come in succession are not simultaneously heard by
When the last syllable is heard the preceding ones have
disappeared. Does a word operate in a different manner to
produce the knowledge of its signification by means of its last
syllable which is either heard or recollected? They may fur-
ther contend that when the knowledge of signification is commu-
nicated by a judgment the judgment is produced by the sense-
organ together with the memory of the word denoting an object
as an accessory condition. They may also point out that the
sentence of an expert, expressing a significant word, directly
condition the knowledge of the signification of a word. This
contention is not also sound. When the signification of a word
is communicated by a judgment the sentence of an expert,
pointing out the significant word, is remembered. If it, were
not recalled in mind then we could not know that such an
object is denoted by such a word. When it is recollected that
Devadatta has instructed that the word 'cow' denotes this
object a person expresses his judgment in the proposition that
this is a cow. Therefore, the judgment in question is due to
the revival of the memory of the above sentence.
us.
182
Hence, the judgment in question is a piece of verbal know-
ledge since the sentence instructing the denotative word condi-
tions it. If they (some teachers of the Nyaya school) subscribeOn the insertion of the word Avyapadesyam
to this view then the determinate perception of the poor logi-
cians will be absolutely precluded from the field of perception.
183
Even, if the knowledge of the signification of a word is ascer-
tained by some other means of knowledge (say, inference) then
the statement that this knowledge of signification is a piece of
verbal knowledge cannot be controverted (since a sentence,
conveying the required signification, may be imagined as a
condition of the subsequent judgment).
The Naiyâyikas firmly stick to the hypothesis that the vali-
dity of determinate perception is the life blood of their Episte-
mology. Hence, the knowledge which owes its existence to the
two distinct types of sources of knowledge should not be desig-
nated as a piece of knowledge derived from the verbal testi-
mony. The relation of signification subsisting between a word
and the object signified is grasped by means of various proofs.
Each of them plays its own independent part. Kumārila also
holds that the source of the true knowledge of the relation of
signification is three-fold Hence, the verbal testimony alone
should not be saddled with the burden of revealing the said
relation. When we receive the instruction that this word signi-
fies the object before us and assimilates it we perceive it all along.
Similarly, when in order to communicate our acquired know-
ledge we frame the judgment that this is so and so, we perceive
the object as before. Hence perception plays more important
part in these two cases. In other words, the sense-organ consti-
tutes the very canvas of this judgment whereas the verbal testi-
mony supplies us with the mere embroidery. Hence, the
tentative hypothesis that the term 'avyapadeśya' has been used
to exclude such knowledge as is the joint product of the two
distinct sources of knowledge is not without its defects (i.e., is
not fair). The import of this argument is that the judgment in
question is perceptual. Realising the limitation of the hypo-
thesis in question as contrasted with the previous hypothesis,
offered by a band of ancient logicians, the ancient thinkers
seem to us to be more reasonable. They hold that the term
'avyapadesya' excludes interpenetrated with word perception
from the field of valid perception. Moreover, the term 'vya-
padesya' conveys more literal sense.
Very well, if we accept the hypothesis of the ancient logicians184
Nyayamanjari
then the objection, raised before against it, dogs it. It is
neither invalid nor a class of valid knowledge by itself, i.e., it is
a fifth type of valid knowledge. In other words, it has neither
head nor tail. But we may meet this objection thus: the ancient
logicians intend to mean that word-interpenetrated perception
may be analysed into two elements, viz., (1) its knowledge-
element and (2) its word-element. The knowledge-element,
represents perception. It is generated by the sense-organ. If
it illuminates its object aright then it is a piece of valid perce-
ptual knowledge. Again, if its word-element, i.e., the designation
of the above perception such as the apprehension of colour
or that of taste is stressed upon then it does not discharge the
function of an apprehension (i.e., the words, e.g., the apprehen-
sion of colour etc., do not reveal colour but simply signify an
object. Thus, the word 'apprehension' plays the role of an
object. Hence, in the capacity of a word, it is not at all, a
piece of knowledge. Thus, there is no possibility of its being
called a fifth type of valid knowledge, i.e., a new species of
valid knowledge.
Another logician holds that the term 'avyapadeśya' has been
used by the author of the Nyāya-sūtra to remove a possible
wrong impression that determinate perception is derived from
the verbal testimony. The possibility of this wrong impression
is due to the following factors that the object which is one of
the conditions of this perception is associated with a name and
that it also allows itself to be word-interpenetrated. This piece of
knowledge is sense-perception since it is causally connected with
the sense-organ and its causal connection is determined by the
joint method of agreement and difference. Moreover it is not
derived from the verbal testimony.
This piece of knowledge is sense-perception since it is vivid,
that it is not word-interpenetrated at the time of its appearance,
is causally connected with the sense-organ and gets the sanction
of the popular view.
Though, in some cases, the recollection of the name of an
object is one of the conditions of determinate perception yet
it is not derived only from the knowledge of the word since
the sense-organ plays the important role of a cause but theThe sense of the word Non-erroneous
185
remembrance of the name plays the subordinate part of an
accessory condition like a lamp to the eye.
Now, if the hypothesis that determinate perception is sense-
perception is thus proved then a new difficulty is to be faced
viz., indeterminate perception does not come within the pro-
vince of perception.
On the other hand, some critics think that the so-called
determinate perception is derived from the verbal testimony
since it is a piece of verbalised knowledge. Now, a retort to
this critical remark is as follows:
If even some word-interpenetrated knowledge is proved to
be sense-perception then there is no doubt that apprehension
which is absolutely free from the association with words is
sense-perception.
Hence, the author of the Nyāya-sūtra includes both indeter-
minate and determinate perception within sense-perception by
the term 'avyapadeśya'.
All the different views of the great teachers of the Nyāya
school on this point have been faithfully represented here. Let
the competent reader select for himself any one of them, that
makes an appeal to his mind to be true.
The word Non-erroneous
The adjective 'non-erroneous' excludes erroneous perception
from the field of true sense-perception. An illustration of per-
ceptual error is as follows. In summer when the sun shines
scorching the forehead with its heat its rays obliquely strike on
the surface of the sandy soil and are thrown back. The reflected
rays assume the form of waves. They appear as an ocean. The
appearance of the rays as an ocean is false since what is pre-
sented to consciousness does not correspond to reality. One
thing is mistaken for another. The erroneous sense-perception
is excluded from the realm of true sense-perception by the adjec-
tive 'non-erroneous'. The indeterminate perception (sensation)
is such apprehension as follows in immediate succession the
initial contact of the eyes with the object. It produces the deter-
minate perception of water. It itself reveals only water. In the
stage of indetermination one does not judge but as soon as he opens186
Nyayamanjari
his eyes for the first time water is presented to his consciousness
as a shining object. The Buddhists hold that indeterminate
perception has the rays of the sun as its object but as it gene-
rates such determinate perception as reveals water so it is
erroneous. Two consecutive perceptions which are causally
connected cannot but have the same object. Hence, the
Buddhist hypothesis is not sound. We have also proved that
determinate perception which also refers to (reveals) the name-
marked object is sense-perception. The reference to the old topic
suggests that determinate perception which refers to absent
water is an error of sense-perception. Hence, indeterminate or
determinate perception which makes a wrong reference is
erroneous. Such an erroneous sense-perception is to be excluded
from the province of perception in question. The mistake of
the rays of the sun for water refers to an absent water. Hence,
it is not produced by the sense-object-contact. Therefore, the
phrase 'generated by the sense-object-contact' excludes all
errors from sense-perception. Thus, the exclusion of errors
from sense-perception being established, what is the use of the
adjective 'non-erroneous'? Such an objection does not hold
good.
The illusion in question is produced by the sense-object-
contact since it depends upon the sense-object-contact for its
appearance. If a man shuts up his eyes he cannot cognize water
in a desert. A real object is one of the conditions of this aware-
ness since no unreal object is presented to our consciousness.
There are the three different hypotheses, framed by the great
teachers of the Nyaya school, with regard to the presented
form of an illusory experience. Some of them hold that
some of the rays of the sun, which conceal their specific cha-
racter and assume the form of water correspond to the presented
form in question. Let us now explain how some rays appear
as water. The three necessary conditions of illusion are as
follows. We perceive only those features which are commonly
shared by the waves and the rays of the sun. But the rays of
the sun do not give rise to the doubtful knowledge that they
are either the rays or the waves like the well-known instance of
doubt that it is either a post or a man. They produce only a
judgment of memory that they are water which is known beforeThe sense of the word Non-erroneous
187
to be contrarily opposed to them. If these conditions are ful-
filled then the external object itself, being coloured by the
subjective element contained in the judgment, fails to reveal
itself in its objectively real specific character but appears as
water.
Some other teachers hold that water, the memory of which
is recalled by the knowledge of its resemblance to the yonder
object, is presented to our consciousness. The form which is
presented to our consciousness is its älambana. But the object
which is close at hand, is not its alambana. No unreal object,
e.g., a sky-flower, is presented to our consciousness. So, water
which really exists in some other part of the country is recalled
in our mind owing to the revival of the impression of similarity.
Such water is presented to our mind.
The third batch of logicians hold that the condition of
awareness is one and what is presented to our consciousness is
something different. The rays of the sun constitute the objec-
tive condition of consciousness but what is revealed is water.
An alambana is such a condition of apprehension as is other
than the agent and the instrument. Therefore, a supersensible
object like an atom is never an alambana. These three hypo-
theses on illusion will be more elaborately discussed later on.
The sense-illusions which are causally connected with the sense-
organs and the external objects arise from the sense-object-
contact. Hence, such illusions cannot be excluded from the
province of true sense-perception if we simply qualify the true
sense-perception by the adjective phrase 'generated by the
sense-object-contact'. If it is a fact that subjective hallucinations
arise independently of the external sense-organs, they are pre-
cluded from the true sense-perception by the above phrase
'generated by the sense-object-contact'. The adjective 'non-
erroneous' will not be required to do so. It runs thus :
A lover with his eye-sight distorted by the excessive pressure
of love, excited by separation, sees his beloved lady by him
though she is actually far away from him.
Now a question arises in our mind, viz., "How does an object-
less hallucination reveal a form ?" i.e., "How does it refer to
an object ?" Our answer to this question is as follows:Nyayamanjari
doubt from the true sense-perception. The term 'determinate'
being superfluous, should not be used to preclude it.
Such an objection is not tenable. A doubt is essentially diffe-
rent from an error. Moreover, their causes are definitely dis-
tinct. An error is a piece of determinate knowledge which
reveals an object wrongly. If we either mistake a pole for a
man or we mistake a man for a pole then the predicate is the
wrong one. But the nature of doubt is defined as a piece of un-
certain knowledge revealing a subject as predicated of two or
more irreconcilable predicates at the same time. In other
words, when we doubt, our mind oscillates between the two
contradictory or contrary predicates of one and the same
subject and fails to arrive at a decision. But when we err,
we have a definite knowledge. A definite predicate is asserted
of the subject. Thus the certainty and the uncertainty of know-
ledge constitute their essential difference. Such a distinction in
their character is experienced by all. The condition of error is also
different from that of doubt. Error is conditioned by the remem-
brance of a property which does not belong to the object in
front of us. In other words, an object comes in contact with
our sense-organ. It awakens the impression of a property ex-
perienced in the past by us. This property which does not
belong to the object is remembered by us. Our sense-organ
which is in contact with the object and is accompanied by the
recollection of the property produces a judgment of sense-error
that the object has the property (which is really supplied by
memory). The person who remembers silverness at the time of
the contact of the mother-of-pearl with his eyes or recollects
water-ness at the time of the contact of the rays of the sun with
his eyes has illusory experience. But doubt is conditioned by
the recollection of the two specific properties, the perception
of general outline of an object etc. The disjunctive judgment that
this is a pole or a man is preceded by the memory of poleness and
man-ness disjoined, i.e., by the recollection of the two disjoined
alternative predicates of the subsequent judgment. Thus, a
doubt is a class by itself. A separate adjective is required to
exclude doubt from the province of the true sense-perception.
If we subscribe to the view of the band of the great logicians
viz., 'Pravaras' then the term 'avyapadeśya' is competent
190The sense of the word Non-erroneous
enough to exclude doubt and error from the range of true sense
perception since it is impossible to hold that doubt and error
are indeterminate. The sensation (i.e., the indeterminate per-
ception of the object before us such as a pole etc.) owes its
existence to the function of our sense-organ. But in the case of
a doubt or an error it is immediately followed either by the
remembrance of the one predicate or by that of the two such
predicates. An error or a doubt arises from the one or from the
other intermediate inner phenomenon. They also illustrate
word-interpenetrated experience. The memory of the predicate
which is the essential condition of the judgments of doubt and
illusion supplies the doubting and the erring persons with
the words, the designations of the predicates of judgments.
The adjectives 'non-erroneous' and 'determinate should not be
given to exclude them (error and doubt) from the domain of
true sense-perception. We have got something to say in this
connection. We have already refuted the hypothesis of the
Pravaras since we have established that the objects associated
with their names are revealed by perception. The objector
may contend still that though it is admitted that the hypo-
thesis of the Pravaras has been thoroughly refuted yet it can
never be established that doubt and error are produced by
our sense-organs since the eyes cease to function when they
detect similarity and the memory of the predicate is revived.
After the cessation of the operation of the sense-organ an error
or a doubt appears. The sense-object-contact is never the im-
mediate antecedent of either of them. Therefore, the initial
adjective phrase 'generated by the sense-object-contact' is com-
petent enough to preclude error and doubt from the province
of true sense-perception. Such a contention is not tenable. It
has been stated that the sense-organ continues to function
even after the intervention of memory. The unceasing opera-
tion of the sense-organ is known by means of the joint method
of agreement and difference since such an error or a doubt as
has been indicated above does not arise in the mind of a
person who remains with his eyes shut up. When a doubt and
an error arise in our mind they are not pieces of word-inter-
penetrated experience, made to be so by our voluntary effort.
When they arise they are intuited as dissociated with words
191192
Nyāyamanjari
but awaken the recollection of the designation of the objects
referred to by them. The recollection of the predicates refers
only to them. How the memory of the terms denoting them
revived? The remembrance of the terms denoting the predicates
presents them (the terms) before the mind. The recollection of
the denotative terms as an essential factor of an error or a doubt
has not been proved.
As a piece of determinate perception is not associated with
the words denoting its objects, so error and doubt owe their
existence to the function of our sense-organ but are not word-
interpenetrated. Now, how is the initial adjective phrase compe-
tent to exclude such error and doubt from the realm of true
sense-perception? Hence, it is highly reasonable to qualify
true sense-perception by the above two adjectives viz., 'non-
erroneous' and 'determinate' so that doubt and error are
excluded from the province of true sense-perception. Thus we
have explained all the terms that constitute the exact defini-
tion. But the term 'Pratyakşa' embodied in the definition
stands for the object to be defined. It conveys a conventional
sense and signifies also a particular species of knowledge. If it
had expressed only the etymological meaning of the word, it
would not have conveyed the above meaning. Let us explain
why the etymological one falls short of the accepted conven-
tional meaning of the term. The compound word 'pratyakṣa'
is derived from the original words 'akşam' and 'pratigatah'.
The original meaning is that which depends upon the sense-
organ, the generator. Such a meaning of the term may apply
as well to pleasure etc. Hence, the conventional sense is more
appropriate in this case. Another alternative suggestion is
that it should stick to the etymological sense since the word
'jñāna' (consciousness) has been definitely mentioned in the
sutra. The original sense of a word if it is clear, should not be
sacrificed. The scholars do not approve of such a meaning as is
both etymological and (yoga-rudha) conventional (rudha). If
it is admitted that a word has two kinds of meanings, etymolo-
gical and conventional, then it will also be held that it does
not simultaneously convey both the meanings but only helps
the selection of its meaning. Now, one should rationally
explain "How is some form of consciousness dependent uponThe Buddhists' definition of determinate perception
the sense-organ ?" If it is held that the term 'pratyakşa'
applies to those objects which are attached to the sense-organ
then it should apply as well to "stye' and such other objects.
Again if it denotes such objects as inhere in the sense-organ
then it should denote as well colour and such attributes that
inhere in the sense-organ. Moreover, if it denotes the consti-
tuents of the sense-organ then it should denote as well atoms
etc. that constitute the sense-organs. Hence, we should hold
that it applies to such consciousness as is generated by the
sense-organ. The term 'pratyakşa' is not an example of the
class of 'avyayibhava' compound (the resultant form of this
compound word becomes an indeclinable word) because the
word 'pratyakşa' takes the masculine form when it qualifies a
noun in the masculine gender and it takes the feminine form
when it qualifies a noun in the feminine gender. The corres-
ponding forms are 'Pratyakṣaḥ puruṣaḥ' and 'Pratyaksā strī'.
These illustrations are enough to prove our point. Here, there
is no need of multiplying the number of examples.
193
Hence, true sense-perception is such consciousness as is
qualified by the given adjective phrase and adjectives e.g.
'generated by the sense-object-contact' etc.
Aksapãda, the highly intelligent logician, has framed a
defectless definition of sense-perception whereas the definitions
of perception, given by the rival schools, do not satisfy
the mind of the critical thinkers. Dharmakirtti has defined
perception (sensation) as such form of consciousness as is
free from determination by imagination (i e. as is not the
product of synthetic imagination) and is not incorrect. This
definition is not sound.
}
The Buddhists' definition of determinate perception
Imaginary knowledge (kalpana) is that the objects of which
are expressible in words. (The Buddhists suggest that such
knowledge produces confusion in our mind. The objects are
presented to our mind as identical with their names (words).
Such presentation is the product of synthetic imagination).
Jayanta puts the following question to the Buddhists. Why do194
Nyāyamanjari
they not subscribe to the hypothesis that the synthetic judg-
ments of perception are true ?
(Jayanta, now, dives deep into the matter and raises the
crux of the problem). Is determinate perception invalid
according to you (the Buddhists) due to someother discre.
pancy besides the alleged defect that it reveals an object
which is expressible in words? (The clause 'which is expressible
in words' has been used by them instead of the clause 'which is
expressed in words' with a definite purpose. They have used the
clause in order to bring all sorts of determinate perception
under its scope. The determinate perception, as a matter of
fact, of a dumb and of a child does not reveal such an object
as is expressed in words. But that object is still expressible in
words). The Buddhist rejoinder to the question is that the real
nature of the determinate perception will not be discussed if it
is not pointed out that its object which is expressible in words
is unreal since all the objects signified by words are imaginary
and therefore unreal. When a word expresses its meaning it
does so if the listener grasps the relation of the word to the object
signified by it. But an exclusively particular point of reality is
never denoted by a word. Again, reality is only exhausted by
a multitude of such particular points of reality. No other kinds
of reality are apprehended. The synthetic judgment of deter-
minate perception which is the product of imagination does
not arise from the sense-object-contact. Their causal connection
is not determined by the joint method of agreement and diffe-
rence. Such a judgment takes place even if it is not preceded
by the sense-object-contact. Even, if such a judgment, the
product of imagination, is preceded by the sense-object-contact,
it is only generated by the synthesis of the memory of the name
of its object-the name that has been learnt before. If the sense-
object-contact had generated it, it would have done so before
the intervention of the memory of name. But it is a fact that
it does not do so. The Buddhists also subscribe to the view that
if the sense-object-contact fails to produce it at an early stage
then it will not also generate it after the appearance of the
memory of the scene.
It is stated in the following verse of a work on Buddhist
Logic. If the sense-object-contact does not bring about theThe Buddhists' definition of determinate perception
synthetic judgment of determinate perception before the appear-
ance of the memory of the name etc. because of its inadequacy
then it cannot do so after the appearance of memory because
of the same limitation. Hence, a conclusion is drawn that such
perception takes place even when the object has ceased to exist.
Moreover, though the sense-object-contact persists yet it is
to be admitted that it depends upon the memory of name to
produce the desired effect. In that case, the memory of name
stands between the sense-object-contact and the determinate
perception and separates the one from the other.
The Buddhists say :-
Even though it is admitted that an object has some part to
play in the production of a determinate perception yet it
should also be admitted that the said perception depends
upon the synthetic imagination which links up the memory of
name. In that case, the object should be separated from
its determinate perception.
195
Now, the Naiyāyikas may contend that the sense-organ,
accompanied by the memory of signification, produces such a per-
ception. Such a contention is not tenable. The contention of the
Naiyāyikas is based upon an assumption that the cause, accom-
panied by the accessory condition, produces its effect. Such an
assumption is unwarranted. It is shattered by the horns of a
dilemma that the benefit which the cause derives from the
accessory condition is identical with the cause itself or not.
Moreover, the judgments of determinate perception such as
"This is a man with a club' etc. do not immediately follow
from the sense-object-contact. But they presuppose many an
intermediate process. The Buddhists state clearly:-If one knows
the qualifier, the qualified, their mutual relation, their actual
order and all such prerequisite conditions then and then only
he has the determinate perception of an object. Some hold
that the indeterminate perception or sensation which follows
directly from the sense-object-contact cannot furnish the knower
with so many details (i.e. cannot amount to such a complicated
of
process perception). It has also been stated in this context.
How can we call the determinate perception which is manu-
factured by the recollection of signification, is a superimposition
upon sense-perception due to an act of imagination and is notNyayamanjari
directly related to the real object as true optical perception?
Now, an objection may arise in our mind with regard to the
above critical remarks. There are two types of the judgments.
The first type is illustrated by the judgments of pure imagina-
tion i.e. unrestricted imagination. Such judgments are purely
imaginary. The second type of judgments contains the form of
'this' a yonder object. These judgments such as "This is blue"
etc. illustrate the second type. Of them let the judgments,
belonging to the first type be false. Who will care to prove
them to be true as they are not based upon reality? But why
should not the judgments that belong to the second type be
true since they contain the form of the real objects and are
causally connected with them. This is the sum and substance
of the possible objection anticipated by the Buddhists. A re-
joinder to this hypothetical objection is as follows. But all these
judgments which are manufactured by imagination remain
absolutely unrelated to the points of reality. A point of reality
is completely grasped only by indeterminate perception. It has
been stated by the Buddhists. No portion of an exclusively
particular point of reality remains unapprehended by an in-
determinate perception and no subsequent determinate percep-
tion should be assumed to apprehend it. It is a fact that some
cases of determinate perception contain the forms of real objects
and are very vivid like an indeterminate perception. They are
so because they closely follow an indeterminate perception
which is only causally connected with a point of reality. The
form of an indeterminate perception is also imparted to deter-
minate perception, its immediate successor. No determinate
perception has direct relation to a point of reality since an in-
determinate perception alone receives the form of a real object.
In other words, a determinate perception merely repeats the
story of its antecedent indeterminate perception and is invalid,
having no new information to give.
The images produced by imagination reveal always unreal
forms. They do never exactly copy the forms of real objects.
There are five kinds of imaginative judgments vir. (1) judgment
having a universal as its content, (2) a judgment having an
attribute as its content, (3) a judgment having an action as its
content, (4) a judgment having a word as its content and
196A
The Buddhists' definition of determinate perception
(5) a judgment having a substance as its content. They are called
imaginative judgments as they sometimes superimpose difference
on a single unit or as they sometimes superimpose identity on
the two different objects. There is no real difference between
an individual and universal. A judgment involving a universal
is imaginary because it abstracts a universal from an individual
and imagines a difference between them. Nobody experiences like
this that this individual has cowness. Nobody apprehends differ-
ence. But a difference is imagined as belonging to a single unit.
The imaginative judgment involving an attribute follows the
step of its predecessor. There is no difference between a sub-
stance and an attribute. But a difference is imagined to exist
between them. A substance which possesses an attribute and
an attribute are never separately experienced. But it is strange
that one intends to thrust difference upon them.
The judgment involving an action is also a case of thrusting
difference on a single unit like the previous one. An action is
never distinct from the substance. When we say that Devadatta
does, we see neither more nor less than Devadatta.
197
The judgment involving a word i.c., a name is imaginative
since it imagines oneness in the two different things. The judg-
ment that this is 'Caitra' attributes identity to them i.e., it
imagines that the name is identical with the object named.
The above judgment has two contents viz., 'Caitra' and
'this' 'Caitra' stands for the word and 'this' represents the real
object. There is perfect co-ordination between them. The
co-ordination implies their thorough identity, How is such
co-ordination possible? The illustration of the judgment invol
ving a substance is that this is a club-man. The club, being a
predicate of 'this', there is perfect co-ordination between 'this'
and 'club'. They are two distinct substances. This co-ordina-
tion suggests the imaginative character of the judgment involv-
ing it. If imaginative judgments superimpose difference on an
object which is really one and if they superipose midentity on
an object which is really different then why do not the subse-
quent true judgments appear to cancel them like a true nega-
tive judgment negating the illusory judgment that this is silver
(when we mistake an oyster for silver)? A reply to this ques-
tion is as follows. If a real object appears to us to be another198
Nyayamanjari
then a sublative judgment arises in our mind to negate it. We
may illustrate our point by the following example. When we
mistake the rays of the sun for water a sublative judgment has
a scope to appear in our mind. But in the case of imaginative
judgments universals and other such objects are not real. So we
have no chance of mistaking one real object for another. But
the imaginative judgments only revolve round co-ordination or
in co-ordination and confine themselves to an individual. Hence,
no sublative judgment has an occasion to arise in order to con-
tradict an imaginary judgment which does not mistake one real
object for another. Therefore, no imaginative judgments are
the judgments of illusion. But they are not true because univer-
sals and such other objects which are revealed by them are un-
real. Therefore, the Buddhists hold that these judgments are
neither real nor unreal but are a class by themselves. There is
no need of further discussion.
Thus these five types of judgments are creatures of imagina-
tion. They also reveal a world of unreal imaginary objects like
difference etc. The Buddhist logician, having realised that the
imaginative judgments are absolutely untrue, has added the
phrase 'free from determination by imagination' to the body of
the definition of true sense-perception.
Jayanta gives a reply to these objections from the Nyaya point of view
A retort to these objects is as follows. The Buddhists have
made a mess of arguments. They have really rambled too
much and talked a lot of nonsense. But they have failed to
fix up a definite condition that clearly determines the in-
validity of the imaginary judgments of perception. Let us
suggest the possible alternative conditions of their invalidity
and examine them one by one: (1) Is a determinate perception
invalid because it reveals an object which is expressible in a
word and thus points to an imaginary object? (2) Or, is it in-
valid because it does not arise from the sense-object-contact,
being dependent upon the remembrance of signification for its
coming into being? (3) Or, is it invalid because it depends
upon many troublesome complicated processes for its appear-
ance? (4) Or, is it invalid because it is dissimilar to the initial
indeterminate perception which lacks representative characterThe Buddhists' definition of perception refuted
and because it judges? (5) Or, is it invalid because it appre-
hends an object already apprehended? We may clarify our
point and say that a determinate perception grasps an object
which has been sensed by its antecedent indeterminate percep-
tion. (6) Or, is it invalid because it mistakes one thing for
another? This reason has been expressed in a different langu-
age that it superimposes identity on the two different objects
(i.e. it mistakes identity for difference). (7) Or, is it invalid
because it refers to a universal and its like which are contradict-
ed by the dilemma of relation etc. Hence, it is surely sublated.
It is not fair to hold that a determinate perception is invalid
because it grasps an imaginary object. How do we know that
its object is imaginary? Because it apprehends an object which
is expressible in words. (The Buddhists mean to say that a real
object is exclusively particular and as such it cannot be ex-
pressed in a word. A word denotes something universal. A uni-
versal is a mere concept. It is manufactured by our imagi-
nation. Hence, it is unreal). We shall establish the point that
an object denoted by a word (i.e. the meaning of a word) is
real. Which is this object that is denoted by a word ? It is the
very same object as is revealed by an indeterminate perception.
Are universals and such other objects apprehended by an in-
determinate perception ? "Oh yes, they are apprehended" will
be our answer. Moreover, the Buddhists should not hold that a
determinate perception is invalid because its object is riddled
with contradictions. These contradictions are proved by the per-
sistent dilemma of relation. They will be got rid of as we shall
refute the horned syllogism of the Buddhists. A perceptual
judgment like a judgment of illusion that this is silver is not
as a rule held by the Buddhists to be contradicted by a corres-
ponding negative judgment that this is not so and so. The
Buddhists should not hold that a determinate perception does
not arise from the sense-object-contact because it depends upon
the remembrance of a word which is presented to consciousness
when the relation of a word to its denotation is grasped. The
sense-organ continues to function even after the production of
an indeterminate perception because it gets a new impetus
when it is united with an accessory condition in the shape of
the remembrance of a word. A sense organ which has hereto
199Nyayamanjari
failed to produce a determinate perception, produces it when it
receives the help of a favourable accessory condition after a
lapse of time. How can it be prevented from producing a new
effect? We shall refute the dilemma of benefit afforded to the
cause by its accessory conditions in the subsequent chapter on
the refutation of the doctrine of universal flux. If the Buddhists
admit that the eyes depend on the lamp for the sensation of
colour and then they will surely be easy prey to the dilemma
levelled against us and have no chance of escape. They also
subscribe to the hypothesis that no single cause produces an
effect. Thus, the dilemma set up against the hypothesis that a
cause accompanied by an assemblage of conditions produces an
effect will also place the Buddhists in an infinitely undesirable
position. In these circumstances, if both the contesting parties
are to blame then one of them should not be singled out as
target of condemnation. As the assemblage of conditions such
as a sense-organ (the eyes), light, the union of the internal
organ with the external one, the object etc. produces a true
sense-perception so the collocation of conditions which includes
the remembrance of the name of an object in itself will also pro-
duce the true perception of colour since each condition has always
its quota of contribution towards the production of an effect. A
determinate perception of which the remembrance of the name
of its object is a condition is not consequently imaginary in its
character and is not invalid thereby. The Buddhists also hold
that an indeterminate perception viz. the sensation of taste is
preceded by the remembrance of colour which constitutes the
antecedent condition. Now if the Buddhists urge that the
above illustration of determinate perception, offered by the
Naiyāyikas, is not a true one and is not true then this illustra-
tion of indeterminate perception of the Buddhists, laid on the
table, should also be treated as non-perceptual and untrue.
Another charge against the validity of determinate perception
is that the object of preceding indeterminate perception is
clouded by the revived memory of the name of the object of
the following determinate perception. But we cannot follow.
the true implication of this charge viz. the eclipse of an object.
It appears to us to be an enigma. The illumination of an
object is never obstructed by a condition of consciousness such
200The Buddhists' definition of perception refuted
as a lamp or the internal organ. The remembrance of the
name of an object is one of the conditions of perception like
the internal organ. As such it plays its part to bring about its
perception. How should it conceal an object from our sight?
The Buddhists may contend that a word (i.e. the name of an
object) which is recalled in memory obstructs the illumination
of the object in question. Such a contention is not tenable. A
word like an act of consciousness or like a lamp reveals an
object but does never throw an object into the shade. The
Buddhists might have said it in a figurative sense. They mean
to say that the revival of the memory of a name suspends the
function of a sense-organ. Such an argument of the Buddhists
is also untenable since a sense-organ still continues to operate.
201
As an indeterminate perception (the initial apprehension) is
brought about by a sense-organ so a subsequent perception
(i.e. a determinate perception) is generated by a sense-organ
since in both cases their causal relation is determined by means
of the joint method of agreement and difference. It is not a
fact that when a person recalls a word in his memory he shuts
up his eyes and imagines that this is a piece of cloth. Now, the
Buddhists may contend that when we remember the name of
an object the object of the antecedent indeterminate percep-
tion has passed away, since it enjoys momentary existence. The
passing away of the object has been figuratively expressed by
the sentence that it is obstructed from our vision. But such
an attempt to save their skin is really hoping against hope
since the doctrine of universal flux will be refuted later on.
(The Buddhists advocate the pragmatic test of truth. The object
of a perception is never reached. We perceive an individual
hut we never get it if we move towards it since it is transient.
They hold that the pragmatic test will be satisfied if an indivi-
dual of the series which the object of perception belongs to is
reached). Moreover, even if we assume the hypothesis of the
universal flux then we can show that an object is perceived.
We shall simply follow the practice of the Buddhists and hold
that the object which is grasped by a determinate perception
is the same as is sensed by the preceding indeterminate percep-
tion though these two objects are not numerically identical yet
they are the same in the sense that they belong to one and the202
Nyayamanjari
same series. The Buddhists have also done something when
they hold that a person gets the same object as is rightly appre-
hended by him. Thus, the suggestion of obstruction is absolutely
untenable. Thus, a determinate perception which depends upon
the remembrance of signification for its appearance is surely
generated by the sense-organ. How is it that it is not a case of
sense-perception?
It has been stated that a determinate perception is not true
because it presupposes troublesome complicated processes such
as the perception of the subject, the awareness of the predicate
and so on. Such a statement of reasons is a very cheap way of
criticism. It is not a fact that a judgment is wrong because one
undergoes a lot of trouble to frame it.
It has been rightly remarked that the perception of a person
is not wrong if he perceives, climbing up a mountain. If the
sensation of colour is compared with that of taste then we see
that the former requires a lot of troublesome conditions such as the
procuring of a lamp etc. Should that sensation be untrue thereby?
It has been stated that a judgment of perception is invalid
because it is qualitatively different from an indeterminate
perception which contains no element of recognition and because
it judges. But this argument is not sound. An awareness does
never judge.
It is a knower who alone judges. We shall bring home the
point that it is the subject who sees, remembers, recognizes,
judges, longs for an object, hates it, strives for it, catches hold
of it, gives it up and enjoys pleasure derived from it. Even if
we admit that an awareness acquires the power of judging,
having come in contact with an object then does it follow that
an awareness which judges should be invalid ?
The Buddhists may contend that even if it is assumed that a
determinate perception grasps such an object as has been
apprehended by an indeterminate perception then as an in-
determinate perception alone apprehends an object in its en-
tirety, a determinate perception is invalid because it knows
what is already known. The import of the Buddhist contention
is that a determinate perception is insignificant as it repeats
an old story (literally it presses what has been pressed). But
this contention is not sound. We have already met the BuddhistThe Buddhists' definition of perception refuted
argument. We have mentioned in this connection that novelty
does not constitute the criterion of true knowledge. Even if a
piece of knowledge apprehends a cognized object then it is not
bereft of its property of truth.
The judgments, the products of imagination, superimpose
identity on the different objects and difference on the identical
objects and are therefore false as they mistake one thing for
another. The falsehood of an awareness consists in mistaking
one thing for another. A determinate perception is not a case
of mistake because a mistake is detected when it is contradict-
ed. But we find no such judgments as contradict the five kinds
of imaginative judgments which have universals etc. as their
contents and which have been described by the Buddhists.
Hence they do not illustrate mistaking one thing for another.
An individual is different from a universal. A substance, the
possessor of an attribute, is not identical with a host of attributes.
An individual and a universal, a substance and an attribute
etc. are so perceived as they are in reality. Hence a determinate
perception is uncontradictably a synthetic judgment. We shall
prove this point later on.
A real thing and its name are really distinct from each other.
They are also presented to our consciousness as mutually dis-
tinct. Hence, it is not a case of superimposition of identity.
The judgment that this is Devadatta does not import that 'this'
is the same as the name Devadatta'. The Buddhists cannot
hold that the name 'Devadatta' is wrongly thought of as the
object Devadatta i.e. occupies the place of (Devadatta) and is
presented to our consciousness. It is not a case of ascription of
identity. They cannot also hold that the object Devadatta, is
in reality nothing but the name 'Devadatta' and is presented to
our mind as a word. What is the true import of this judgment?
It is a distinct judgment ! It has a special condition viz. the
remembrance of a name. This condition possesses a distinct
causal efficiency which contributes to the special character of
its effects. In other words, this judgment inherits its distinction
from its uncommon powerful condition. The distinct character
of this judgment has been already established.
The judgment that this is a club-man i.e. a man with a club
signifies that this is identical with a club. It has been illustrated
203204
Nyayamanjari
as an example of superimposition of identity by the logicians
of slow understanding. The judgment that this is a club does
not point to Devadatta but the judgment that this is a club-
man' does it. In the term 'dandin' the basic word 'danda' and
the nominal suffix 'in' are distinctly presented to our conscious-
ness. The term 'daṇḍin' signifies one who has a 'daṇḍa' (stick).
Our judgment corresponds to the real order of things. There is
a man named Devadatta. There is a distinct object viz. a stick.
It belongs to his hand. A man has a stick in his hand. The
objects which stand related in reality are presented to our con-
sciousness as such. Hence, there is no superimposition of identity
in the above case. The act of imagination does not discharge
the two-fold function viz. (i) it does neither ascribe identity to
two different objects nor (ii) it does create imaginary diffe-
rence in a single unit.
An action is really different from a substance in action. They
are also presented to our consciousness as such. When we see an
object move we know the true nature of an action.
Hence a determinate perception which apprehends an object
as qualified by an action, an attribute, a substance, a designa-
tion and a universal is not untrue.
We, the Naiyayikas, gladly subscribe to this part of the hypo-
thesis that it is not illusory but on the contrary, we record our
emphatic denial to the other part of the hypothesis that no
determinate perception is true.
If the Buddhists hold that all determinate perception is false
because a few cases of determinate perception are contradicted
then the Naiyayikas as well make a counter proposal that all
indeterminate perception is false because the double vision of
the moon, an example of indeterminate perception, is false.
Let the examples of determinate perception which refers to
imaginary objects be false. We take no exception to this
decision. But why should the concrete cases of determinate
perception which refer to the real objects as they are in reality
and are generated by the sense-organ be false?
The Buddhists put forward a thesis that determinate percep-
tion inherits its form from its immediate antecedent indeterminate
perception. The suggestion of this thesis is that a determinate
perception has no touch with the real object and is not causallyThe Buddhists' definition of perceptioon refuted
connected with the sense-organ. This thesis is untenable
because an awareness is formless by its own nature but cannot
acquire a form if it does not come in contact with an object.
The Buddhists may contend that the fact of succession of an
indeterminate perception will furnish it with the required form.
A memory-image sometimes follows an indeterminate perception
in immediate succession. But the memory-image does not bear
a resemblance to that of an indeterminate perception. They
hope against hope to establish their thesis.
205
The Buddhists have stated that the whole of an exclusively
particular point of reality is apprehended by an indeterminate
perception. This point has been confuted. It has been pointed
out in this connection that even though it is assumed that a
determinate perception cognizes what has been apprehended
yet it remains equally valid. Not to speak much of an indeter-
minate perception we do not follow quite well what is at all
apprehended by an indeterminate perception.
The Buddhists hold that the object of an indeterminate per-
ception is an exclusively particular point of reality which is
distinct from all homogeneous and heterogeneous objects.
Some other thinkers assert that the object of an indeter-
minate perception is the summum genus of all existent objects
viz. the genus of existence i.e. being. But another band of
thinkers advocates that an indeterminate perception appre-
hends a word which constitutes the knowable reality.
Some other thinkers hold that a real substance is variously
qualified by an attribute, an action, a substance, a universal
and the properties and accidens and it is apprehended by an
indeterminate 'perception'.
It is a wonder of wonders that there are so many conflicting
hypothesis with regard to the very object of perception. But
this perception is the highest court of appeal to settle the
dispute of the conflicting theories centering round a transcenden-
tal object. But how is it possible to settle the dispute over the
contradictory evidences of perception viz. 'this is perceived' and
"this is not perceived'? In order to convince others of his hypo-
thesis a person has recourse only to others.
We cannot find shelter in oath and refrain from all mentalNyāyamanjari
activities. But, on the other hand, we try to find out the
true object of perception by means of someother methods.
The object of a determinate perception is determined by its
antecedent indeterminate perception. By the method of back-
ward calculation we shall fix up such an object of an indeter-
minate perception as paves the way for the appearance of its
succeeding determinate perception.
The Buddhist hypothesis that an indeterminate perception
apprehends an exclusively particular point of reality which is
distinct from all sorts of homogeneous and heterogeneous
objects, is not tenable.
206
If an exclusively particular point of reality is the object of
an indeterminate perception then how can a judgment of im-
agination, its immediate successor, having a universal as its
content all of a sudden come into being ?
A determinate perception should imitate the form of an in-
determinate perception.
Moreover, if the Buddhists admit that the exclusion from hete-
rogeneous and homogeneous objects is apprehended by an inde-
terminate perception then the Naiyāyikas may as well point out
that a universal which is not distinct from the above exclusion is
the object of a determinate perception. (The Naiyāyikas suggest
that there is no qualitative difference between a determinate
and an indeterminate perception. If the suggestion is true, the
Buddhists are to face an awkward situation).
The exclusion mentioned above is not really different from
the object excluded (i.c., it is non-different from the exclusively
particular point of reality). Hence the apprehension of the
object excluded (i.c. a particular point of reality) implies that
of exclusion.
Thus, the awareness of a universal being implied only by the
apprehension of an exclusively particular point of reality, the
hypothesis that an exclusively particular point of reality is the sole
object of an indeterminate perception does not stand to reasons.
The monists who hold that existence is the only reality sub-
scribe to the hypothesis that existence is the exclusive object of
an indeterminate perception. This hypothesis is not sound.
Even if it is admitted that the summum genus viz, 'existence'
is apprehended by an indeterminate perception then how will aThe Buddhists' definition of perception refuted
207
monist account for the appearance of the direct awareness of its
subordinate species? If the genus of existence is the sole object
of an indeterminate perception then the doctrine of monism
with all its implications is established.
The genus of existence cannot be apprehended if its subor-
dinate species are not apprehended along with it. The antithesis
that the subordinate species are not mere creatures of Nesci-
ence will be established later on.
The hypothesis that the sole object of an indeterminate per-
-ception is a word which is the only underlying reality is similarly
confuted by us (the Naiyāyikas). How do we visualize a word?
How is a word (i.e. the name of an object) presented to our
determinate optical perception if we are unaware of the rela-
tion of a word to its meaning (i.e., the object denoted by it)
or if we are oblivious of it or if we fail to revive its impression
before the actual perception ?
If the hypothesis that a substratum is qualified by a variety
of inherent properties such as a universal, etc., catches popular
fancy then let us give our consent to it.
A substratum of various properties, etc., is not identical with
its properties and accidens since they are not cognized being
constantly present in it. Again, if we hold that substratum is
not something distinct from its properties and accidens but is
constituted by them, then the whole is surely distinct from its
parts, i.e., constituents.
The upholders of the above view which has been criticized
by us may point out that a substratum is not always cognized
as identical with all its properties, etc. but with a particular
property or accidens whenever or wherever it comes into
being or becomes the object of enquiry. Such a revised thesis
is also not tenable. Because we do not entertain the idea that
there is perfect co-ordination between a substratum and its pro-
perty. They too never co-exist on the same locus because a
substratum is the very locus of its properties, etc. but is not
identical with them.
The very real object which is apprehended by a determi-
nate perception is experienced by an indeterminate perception.
The only difference lies in an indeterminate perception that
it does not reveal the object as qualified by its name.210
Nyāyamanjari
operation of the intellect. (If the mode of a sense-organ or of
the intellect is the proof and if the awareness of an object is the
result determined by the proof then there is no co-ordination
between the proof and the result. The result belongs to the soul,
the proof belongs either to a sense-organ or the intellect.)
The Mimāṁsakas' definition of perception refuted
Perception is that form of consciousness which arises from the
contact of the sense-organs with the existent real object in the
mind of a person. As it throws light only on the existent percep-
tible objects it does not reveal 'Dharma'. For this reason the
sutra which deals with perception has been interpreted by the
followers of Jaimini that it is not a direct definition of percep-
tion. They hold that the initial proposition of Jaimini is the
definition of Dharma Dharma has been defined as the end of
human life which has been revealed only by the Vedic injunc-
tions. Though the definition of perception has no direct bear-
ing upon the initial proposition, i.e., upon Dharma yet it has
been given to indicate that perception has nothing to do with
the illumination of Dharma. If this is the real intention of
Jaimini, the sutra which deals with the definition of perception
does not introduce a new subject-matter but speaks about
something already known. If the interpreters insist on the point
that the above sútra embodies the definition of perception then
they act unwisely since the so-called definition does not escape
the defect of being too wide.
The boiled-down meaning of the sūtra amounts to this that
when the sense-organs come in contact with the existent objects,
an awareness which arises in the mind of a person is called
perception. This definition of perception is as well applicable
to the cases of doubt and illusion since they are also due to the
sense-object-contact. Now, if the compound word 'sat-samprayoga'
is interpreted as the contact of the sense-organ with the existent
real object then hallucinations which are not conditioned by
the real existent objects should only be excluded from the pro-
vince of perception but doubt and illusion which are condition-
ed by the real objects should not be excluded. The compound
word 'sat-samprayoga', they add, may be analysed into its
components in a different manner. The second meaning is notThe Mimāṁsakas' Definition of Perception refuted
211
also lost sight of. When the contact of the sensa-organ with
the existent objects of references takes place true sense-percep-
tion issues forth. The indeclinable prefix 'sam' in the 'sampra-
yoga' indicates such a sense-object contact as excludes doubt
and illusion.
It has been stated in the following verse (of the Sloka-vārttika
of Kumārila). The indeclinable word 'sam' signifies appropria-
teness or fitness. It excludes inexact sense-object-contact. When
a judgment of illusory perception that this is silver arises from
the contact of the sense-organ with the pearl-oyster such an
inaccurate contact is excluded because it leads up to the per-
ception of silver.
But the appropriateness of the sense-object-contact being
supersensuous it cannot be perceived. But it may be stated that
it is inferred from the effect. The effect of the sense-object-
contact is an apprehension. But if it is not adequately qualified,
it does not indicate the appropriateness of the sense-object-
contact.
There is neither a single word nor a letter nor the slightest
,indication found in the sûtra to qualify the resulting conscious-
ness. The object of the compound word signifying the contact
of the sense-organ with the real object has been narrated as to
exclude hallucination from the field of perception. Another
interpretation of the same word representing the precedence of
the sense-object-contact as the determining condition of perce-
ption amounts to the same thing and is, therefore, superfluous.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend that it is unnecessary to
insert in a word to qualify the resulting perception since the
proper adjective of it is supplied by the people themselves not
trained in any particular school of logic. If this be their con-
tention then the critics may as well hold that there is no
necessity of taking the pains of stretching the sutra to such an
extent as to show its competence to embody the definition of
perception since the people, innocent of the definition of
perception as given by the systems of logic, know perception as
an accomplished fact.
•
Regarding this matter the renowned commentator on the
Mīmāṁsā sūtra (the Vṛttikāra) has made his own observation.
He states that perceptual consciousness which does not corre-Nyayamanjari
spond to its object is illusory. He also adds that if our sense-organ
does not come in contact with such an object as is referred to
by the true perception then the true perception does not dawn.
He simply makes a reciprocal change of place of the words 'sat'
and 'tat' in the sutra and transforms it into a defectless one,
i.e., an ideal one. But such an attempt ends in wordy nothing-
ness. This new definition of perception is applicable to a doubt
as well. According to him the apprehension of an object is a
true perception if it arises from the contact of a sense-organ
with the object apprehended by it. Again, the apprehension of
an object is surely an illusory perception if it does not arise
from the contact of a sense-organ with the object apprehended
by it. (In a case of doubt there are two alternative suggestions.
One of them represents true perception. Therefore, the defini-
tion is too wide).
212
The Mimāṁsakas contend that the definition is exact since a
doubt throws light on the two distinct objects but one's sense-
organ does not come in contact with both of them in order to
generate it (a doubt). Such contention is not tenable. Unlike
a copulative judgment which refers to the two independent
objects standing side by side unrelated lika 'Dhava' and
'Khadira' (two trees belonging to different species) a doubt
does not refer definitely to the two objects. A doubt is an inde-
finite state of knowledge which oscillates between the two alter-
natives. The well-known illustration of doubt is that this is
post or a man. But it is, of course, a truism that the sense-
organ must have come in contact with one of the two objects.
But it is also a fact that the two objects have been alternatively
referred to by it. The eyes come in contact with that object
which has been referred to by it. Hence, the definition of true
perception applies to it and this application cannot also be
avoided by some tactful manipulation.
Now the Mimāṁsakas may give a new turn to the contention
and say that there is no need of taking so much trouble in
criticizing them since they do not intend to define perception
since the definition of perception has been assumed at first and
it will be an idle job to repent it. Moreover, the Sutra repeats
the description of perception which has been learnt from the
people at large but enjoins that perception is not
a sourceThe Mīmāṁsakas' Definition of Perception refuted
knowledge of Dharma. Perception is not a source of knowledge
of Dharma because it apprehends only an existent object.
Dharma is not an existent fact because it is not an event in
time, being conveyed by verbs such as 'should worship' 'should
give' 'should offer libation' etc. Why does the text of the sūtra
embody the description of perception? The reason is that it
embodies the minor premise. If a critic takes an exception to
the conclusion that perception is only a source of knowledge of
an existent object then a reply is given to him that perception
reveals only an existent object since it arises from the contact of
the sense-organ with an existent object. The sūtra represents
perception with the definite object of embodying the above
reason for its inability to apprehend Dharma. If one remarks
that it is not true that perception owes its existence to the real
sense-object-contact then his opinion is refuted by the sutra.
Perception arises from the real sense-object-contact because it
partakes of the character of perception. It has been stated in
the Śloka-vārttika that the very essence of perception con-
sists in its being produced by the real sense-object-contact
and that remaining conclusions follow from it. Or, it may be
stated that the very definition of perception determines the
essential character viz., the essence of perception. (Thus
Kumārila establishes the utility of the sutra on perception.)
Kumarila suggests an alternative interpretation and holds
that the essence of perception should be utilized as an inde-
pendent stop towards the negative conclusion so that percep-
tion is a source of knowledge of Dharma. As our normal percep-
tion does not apprehend Dharma so no perception apprehends
it. The sutra on perception does not suffer from the defect of
being too wide since it purports to convey some other signifi-
cance than the mere definition of perception. Such a conclu-
sion does not make an appeal to the mind of a person adept in
logic. The following question may be put to him: Does nor-
mal perception reveal Dharma? Or, does transcendental
perception of the stages reveal Dharma? But we all agree to the
point that normal perception does not reveal Dharma. Why
does he take so much pains to prove an agreed thesis? But
as he does not subscribe to the thesis that transcendental
perception of the sages is a fact so why does he try to prove
213Nyāyamanjari
that transcendental perception does not reveal Dharma? If
transcendental perception is a fiction as Kumārila believes then
there will be no minor term, i.e., the subject of inference will
be absent. Hence no conclusion will be deduced in spite of the
middle terms such as an illuminator only of the existent object,
a perception etc.
214
The Mimāṁsakas may contend that they assume the conclu-
sion of the rival school and base their argument upon it. What
is the nature of this conclusion? Is it based upon sound logic
or not? If they accept the first alternative then they will also
hold that transcendental perception is real since what is logical
in one system is also the same in the other systems as logic
partiality. Again, if the proof of transcendental
perception is not sound then it has got no solid ground to stand
upon in all the systems.
knows no
If they assume the existence of transcendental perception
with its predicate as given in the rival system and assert some
negative predicate of it afterwards then they make a contradic-
tory statement.
The rival thinkers hold that transcendental perception is an
illuminator of Dharma. If the Mimāṁsakas assume it in toto and
subsequently state that transcendental perception which is an
illuminator of Dharma is a non-illuminator of Dharma then
they flatly contradict themselves.
In inference we should not depend upon the observation of
the subject of inference made by others. This is what has been
stated by Kumārila himself in connection with the refutation
of Madhyamika system. If we have no first-hand knowledge of
a mark, we cannot infer on the basis of it. So, if we are not
ourselves sure of the subject of inference, but are in possession
of a second-hand knowledge from the rival school, we should
not proceed to make an inference.
The Mimāṁsakas may contend that it is an admitted method
of destructive criticism, i.c., reductio ad absurdum. This method
consists in assuming the conclusion of a rival party in examin-
ing it and in drawing an absurd conclusion from it. The rival
party holds that an existent object is only apprehended by
perception and perception arises from the real contact of our
sense-organ with an object. On that very ground it is justlyCognition of transcendental perception
pointed out that perception is not a proof of Dharma. Is there
any defect in this procedure? No, this is not so.
The method which has been adopted by the Mimāṁsakas is
not really the method of reductio ad absurdum. Their attempt
looks like drawing a picture on the void, i.e., without having
a canvas or its like. (In other words, if existence is denied to
transcendental perception it is silly to hold that the said percep-
tion is not a proof of Dharma.)
It is not sound to discuss whether the sky-flower is fragrant or
not. It is needless to discuss whether their method is proper
or not. Let it be the method of reductio ad absurdum.
215
We may also use the same method on our side as a defensive
measure. We do not arrive at the generalization that no per-
ception is a proof of Dharma. Who knows that nobody's per-
ception reveals Dharma ?
You cannot know that I do not perceive Dharma. I cannot
know that you do not perceive Dharma. Both you and I cannot
know that he does not perceive Dharma like us.
If you introspect the contents of the perception of all beings
then you have yourself become a sage. In that case why do you
vainly hate a sage?
Oh Vedic scholar! I just remind you of the fact that your
acquisition of the knowledge of the real supersensuous objects
is second hand. (The Vedic literature presupposes that there
is somebody who is directly aware of the supersensuous objects).
Therefore, I entreat you not to find fault again with the narra-
tion of supersensuous objects made by others.
Nobody can contradict a well-established fact or theory. It is
also futile to lend one's approval to something not based upon
sound proof, Please hold in your passion for discarding trans-
cendental perception but try to find out ways and means of
establishing it.
Cognition of transcendental perception
Now, if the critic of transcendental perception states sound
reasons for his disapproval then we are prepared to accept them.
But if he fails to do so then we shall believe that he has none to
his credit.218
Nyayamanjari
Dharma is perceived with eyes? Surely, it will be rash on our
part to hold that it is perceived with the mortal eyes of you
and me. But it is not at all difficult for the omniscient sages to.
behold it.
The knowledge or eternal Dharma is only derived from the
Vedic injunctions such as 'should sacrifice', etc. How can it be-
learnt from the sources of knowledge other than the Vedas ? But.
this argument is not based upon the observation of facts but
only upon the technicality of the Mimāṁsā system. We have
got nothing to do with the eternality or non-eternality of
Dharma. As we know that the act of going has an object in
view, viz., the reaching of some other place so the sages will
know that the religious acts such as the performance of Agni-
hotra (the recitation of praises in honour of Fire-god) will lead
the performer to heaven. Is it an act of rashness to draw a
conclusion like this? If the Mimamsakas find fault with the
external sense-organs and cannot admit of the excellence of them
(the Naiyāyikas) do not insist on the acceptance of the-
former hypothesis put forward by us, viz., the sages perceive
Dharma with their supernormal eyes.
then we
When a sage meditates on Dharma and practises constant
contemplation upon it he intuits Dharma with his internal
organ like a love-sick person who beholds his beloved lady by
means of meditation alone.
The reason behind such intuition is that the internal organ
is competent to comprehend all objects without an exception
and there is no such object in the universe as defies its pene--
tration. We have also got a lot of examples to show that men,
practising meditation upon objects which are beyond the reach
of sense-organs, have clear and vivid vision of them.Cognition of transcendental perception
yojanas) and an object covered by darkness, are beyond the
reach of our normal eyes but still are respectively sensed by
Sampāti and a cat. A natural reaction to this sort of reply
is that if a sage perceives a transcendental object then he should
also perceive odour, taste, etc., with his eyes. Kumärila argues
in this strain. If one imagines that an omniscient sage grasps
every object of the universe by means of a single source of
knowledge then he should admit that the sage perceives taste,
etc., with his eyes.
The point towards which Kumarila drives is not based upon
the solid rock of facts. The other sense-organs of the sages are
endowed with super-excellent powers like the eyes. Hence, the
fantastic hypothesis that a sage perceives taste, etc., with eyes
is not to be conjectured. The Mimāṁsakas may contend that
the Naiyāyika should not imagine that a sage perceives Dharma
with his eyes. The Naiyāyika gives a pertinent reply to this
that Dharma is not invisible like taste, etc. The Mimāṁsaka
argument is based upon the misrepresentation of the above
sentence that taste and similar qualities other than colour are
always imperceptible. This sentence is reduced to the logical
proposition that some objects are not perceptible. It is not a
universal negative proposition that no objects excepting colour
are perceptible. Moreover, how does the Mîmâṁsaka know
that Dharma is not perceived with eyes? The Mîmāṁsaka
replies that an object is known to be not fit for perception when
it is not perceived with eyes though it is present before the
eyes. Let us take the example of sound. It is not perceived
with eyes though it enters the field of vision. (An answer to
the above question is only suggested that Dharma is transcen-
dental.)
217
The Naiyāyika reviews Kumárila's arguments and points out
that the latter cannot say from his experience that a sage,
though endowed with super-eyes, cannot perceive Dharma be-
cause Dharma and the excellent power
are imperceptible to him. Therefore, Kumärila should not
hold that Dharma is not a fit object which is perceived with
eyes. This is the concluding portion of the above topic.
of the
of a sage
eyes
Dharma is the eternal fulfilment of Duty. Past, present and
future do not put a limit to it. Is it not a rash act to hold that216
Nyayamanjari
The critic may join issue with us and reply that the Naiya-
yikas are well conversant with the logical art of establishing
positive theories, but not merely adept in negative criticism.
He accepts the challenge and enquires about the positive proof
in favour of transcendental perception which apprehends
Dharma. A reply to this question is as follows: The compe-
tence of this perception lies in its superior quality. We only
perceive the near objects with our eyes when we receive assis-
tance from light. The cats (the enemies of mice) perceive
objects situated on a spot enveloped by pitchy darkness. It is
learnt from the Rāmāyaṇa that the king of Vultures, Sampāti by
name, saw the daughter-in-law of Daśaratha (Sītā) from a dis-
tance of a hundred yojanas (a yojana-4 miles roughly). The
superior quality of perception varies in degrees like the superior
quality of the colour 'white', etc. The truth also remains implicit
in the above statement that when the quality or perception varies
in degrees a section of the class attains the highest degree of
perfection. Those whose perception reaches the highest degree
of perfection are called 'sage'. The most excellent perfection
of perception is constituted by the apprehension of subtle,
separated from the field of vision by partition, remote, past and
future objects. The Mīmāṁsakas argue against the above hypo-
thesis thus Though perception reaches the climax of perfec-
tion yet it cannot violate the law which governs the nature of
its objects. Dharma is not at all a perceptible object.
Kumārila states that when one comes across the superior
quality of perception he notices that a man, possessed of the
superior power of vision, perceives only visible objects. The
examples of the perception of subtle or remote objects point to
this direction. We may have excellent ears but cannot perceive
colour with our ears.
Kumarila further adds that the superior order of genius and
memory is observed in men but nobody comes across such
superior order of sense-perception as apprehends the transcen-
dental objects.
Such criticisms are not fair. It is a truism that though
Dharma is transcendental to normal sight yet it is sensed by
the sages. The above examples, cited by us, show that a very
distant object (an object lying at a distance of a hundredCognition of transcendental perception
yojanas) and an object covered by darkness, are beyond the
Teach of our normal eyes but still are respectively sensed by
Sampāti and a cat. A natural reaction to this sort of reply
is that if a sage perceives a transcendental object then he should
also perceive odour, taste, etc., with his eyes. Kumārila argues
in this strain. If one imagines that an omniscient sage grasps
every object of the universe by means of a single source of
knowledge then he should admit that the sage perceives taste,
etc., with his eyes.
The point towards which Kumärila drives is not based upon
the solid rock of facts. The other sense-organs of the sages are
endowed with super-excellent powers like the eyes. Hence, the
fantastic hypothesis that a sage perceives taste, etc., with eyes
is not to be conjectured. The Mimāṁsakas may contend that
the Naiyāyika should not imagine that a sage perceives Dharma
with his eyes. The Naiyāyika gives a pertinent reply to this
that Dharma is not invisible like taste, etc. The Mīmāṁsaka
argument is based upon the misrepresentation of the above
sentence that taste and similar qualities other than colour are
always imperceptible. This sentence is reduced to the logical
proposition that some objects are not perceptible. It is not a
universal negative proposition that no objects excepting colour
are perceptible. Moreover, how does the Mimämsaka know
that Dharma is not perceived with eyes? The Mimāṁsaka
Teplies that an object is known to be not fit for perception when
it is not perceived with eyes though it is present before the
eyes. Let us take the example of sound. It is not perceived
with eyes though it enters the field of vision. (An answer to
the above question is only suggested that Dharma is transcen-
-dental.)
The Naiyayika reviews Kumärila's arguments and points out
that the latter cannot say from his experience that a sage,
though endowed with super-eyes, cannot perceive Dharma be-
cause Dharma and the excellent power of the eyes of a sage
are imperceptible to him. Therefore, Kumarila should not
hold that Dharma is not a fit object which is perceived with
eyes. This is the concluding portion of the above topic.
Dharma is the eternal fulfilment of Duty. Past, present and
future do not put a limit to it. Is it not a rash act to hold that
217218
Nyayamanjari
Dharma is perceived with eyes? Surely, it will be rash on our
part to hold that it is perceived with the mortal eyes of you
and me. But it is not at all difficult for the omniscient sages to.
behold it.
The knowledge or eternal Dharma is only derived from the
Vedic injunctions such as 'should sacrifice', etc. How can it be-
learnt from the sources of knowledge other than the Vedas ? But.
this argument is not based upon the observation of facts but
only upon the technicality of the Mimämsä system. We have
got nothing to do with the eternality or non-eternality of
Dharma. As we know that the act of going has an object in
view, viz., the reaching of some other place so the sages will
know that the religious acts such as the performance of Agni-
hotra (the recitation of praises in honour of Fire-god) will lead
the performer to heaven. Is it an act of rashness to draw a
conclusion like this? If the Mimāṁsakas find fault with the
external sense-organs and cannot admit of the excellence of them
then we (the Naiyāyikas) do not insist on the acceptance of the-
former hypothesis put forward by us, viz., the sages perceive-
Dharma with their supernormal eyes.
When a sage meditates on Dharma and practises constant
contemplation upon it he intuits Dharma with his internal
organ like a love-sick person who beholds his beloved lady by
means of meditation alone.
The reason behind such intuition is that the internal organ
is competent to comprehend all objects without an exception
and there is no such object in the universe as defies its pene..
tration. We have also got a lot of examples to show that men,
practising meditation upon objects which are beyond the reach
of sense-organs, have clear and vivid vision of them.
It is stated that men, oppressed by lust or excessive grief,.
disease, insanity, a dream of thieves etc., have clear, distinct
vivid vision of imaginary objects as if they are before him.
The Mīmārsakas may contend that the above examples illu-
strate false knowledge and it is not fair to establish the true
transcendental perception of the sages after their analogy. Such
a contention will not hold good. The point of similarity to-
wards which we drive is that the transcendental perception of
the sages is as clear and vivid as the above examples of falseCognition of transcendental perception
219
knowledge are. When we say that a sound is like a jar we do
not mean that they resemble each other on all points. The
clear and vivid vision of imaginary objects springs up from the
constant practice of contemplation upon them. Again this habit
of contemplation is determined by lust, excessive grief, etc.
The truth of such vision is contradicted by the corresponding.
opposite true judgment. But the transcendental perception of a
sage is not untrue because it is not contradicted by another
judgment. The quality of clearness and vividness is commonly
shared by these two pieces of knowledge (true and false).
Again, if we devote ourselves to the continuous practice of
some activity such as the act of jumping then we do not acquire
an unprecedented excellence in it thereby. He who practises
the act of jumping (high or long) everyday with undivided
attention, springs up or forward only a few steps more, i.e.,
makes a very little progress in his act but does neither jump
over the mountain nor the ocean.
A rejoinder to this objection is as follows. The act of jump-
ing is a property of our body. Phlegm is one of the constituents
of our body. Inertness is an innate attribute of it. It offers
perceptual resistance to the progress of jumping. The act of
jumping does not reach the climax because it faces hindrance
all along. But our knowledge reaches the highest summit
because there is no obstacle to its upward journey. The state of
excellence laboriously acquired by the body on the previous
day, is not retained by it on the following day. But by mere
practice phlegm and fat are considerably reduced. The body
becomes light. The person is able to jump over so much dis-
tance as his body permits.
Statement of intuitive knowledge
But in case of knowledge when we repeatedly concentrate
upon an object each act of concentration leaves an impression
behind it. These impressions accumulate on our soul. They
construct the stable background of our knowledge. When they
are arranged in a perfect order they produce the highest form
of knowledge.
Let us take an example which shows the acquisition of pro-
ficiency in learning. A young student undergoes a prescribed220
Nyayamanjari
course of discipline such as the strict observation of the vow of
celibacy, the regular revision of the old subject-matter learnt
by him, etc., in order to learn the Vedas by heart. He acquires
permanent impressions thereby. They, being stable as they
are, help him to recall the matters read by him in memory
with perfect facility and dexterity.
Or, as gold, being slowly purified in a closed vessel, acquires
matchless beauty, so the inner organ of a sage is capable of
perceiving all knowable objects by the constant practice of
meditation.
On the other hand, the inner organ of worldly men like our-
selves being enveloped by the veil of passions we do not acquire
the highest stage of knowledge, i.e., omniscience. Is there any
-object which is not directly grasped by the pure inner organ of
the sages? The reason of this direct awareness lies in the fact
that all the impurities of their mind are consumed by the daily
practice of meditation. The method of cleansing the impurities
of the inner organ such as worldly attachment, etc., will be
elaborately discussed in the chapter on Apavarga (Final eman-
cipation). Thus, when the sages consume all the inner drosses
and acquire high proficiency in the art of concentration by the
constant practice of meditation, they attain to faultless omni-
science.
We foresee sometimes future events. An illustration of the
true judgment of foresight is that my brother will come to-
morrow. Such foresight is called as Pratibhā Pramāṇa. This
piece of valid knowledge is not hallucinatory. It is not a doubt.
It is not even negated by its contradictory judgment. Its source
is not a defective sense-organ. Therefore, it should be treated as
a piece of valid knowledge.
If it is negated sometimes by its true contradictory judgment,
it will turn out to be a false one. But if the brother actually
comes on the day predicted then will not it be a true one? Do
the critics call it a true judgment ?
If the critics point out that the correspondence of the judg-
ment in question to facts is purely accidental then it is replied
that the plea of accidental correspondence does not hold good
since the real object has been truly revealed beforehand.Statement of Intuitive Knowledge
An argument against the validity of this piece of knowledge
is this that it is not generated by an object since the brother
who is the object referred to is absent at that time. Certainly,
this argument would have held good if he had known his
brother as present on that occasion. But he knows him as a
possible event in future. This idea of possibility, too, is an event
of the present time. The brother under consideration is present
as a possible object which is perceived. Hence, how can the
argument of the critic that it is not produced by an object be
tenable? The critics contend that it is unreasonable to hold
that an object is grasped with a future characteristic feature.
What is a future characteristic feature? A feature does not
exist now but will come into being at a later period. It is
really the pre-negation of an object which is limited in time.
How can a negative fact be related to a positive object?
Because, they are incompatible with each other by their very
nature. This misdirected old criticism is untenable. It is not the
pre-negation of the person (i.c., of the brother in question) but
the pre-negation of the contact of the person with the house in
question. This pre-negation is not incompatible with the person.
The brother, the substratum, actually exists. He is recalled in
our memory because he is anxiously expected at the time of
dinner. The brother who is thus recollected is presented to our
consciousness in the form that he will come here tomorrow. The
brother in question is one of the conditions of prophetic vision
(pratibhā-jñāna). Hence, this type of knowledge which is not
hallucinatory but is conditioned by a real object is really valid.
This type of valid knowledge is direct but not indirect. In-
direct knowledge admits of three species. It belongs to none of
them since it does not depend upon a word, a mark and resem-
blance for its appearance. It may be objected that it cannot
be direct since it is non-sensuous. Such an objection is not ten-
able since the inner organ determines it. Now, if the inner
organ could independently apprehend external objects then
there would have been no blind person in this universe. Such
an objection has been met before. It has been answered that
the external object which has been perceived with eyes is only
intuited by the inner organ. Thus, the objection that there
would be no blind person is fairly met. It has also been stated
221-222
Nyāyamanjari
before that a piece of knowledge which is true but comes into
being on the absence of the acknowledged conditions of know-
ledge such as a word etc. is an instance of valid inner percep-
tion. It bears a close resemblance to the judgments such as
"ketaka flower is sweet-scented'. 'Sugar is sweet' and so on. The
-critics are not in a position to take an exception to it with the
remark that the direct awareness of a sage is not determined by
a definite set of conditions like the normal perception. The
implication of the previous line is that it is not perceptual. The
-answer to the above charge is that the transcendental knowledge
of a sage is always perceptual. If it is not direct it is not the
knowledge of a sage. Some hold that the knowledge of a sage is
in toto derived from the scriptures. The implication of the
conjecture is that it cannot be direct. All the sources of the
knowledge of a sage have not been exhaustively given but have
only been illustrated by means of a single instance. The Vedas
are one of them. No such knowledge arises in the mind of a
sage as does not spring up from a source.
Now, another objection arises in our mind that foresight is
non-perceptual since perception refers only to a present object.
Kumārila has stated that an object which is present and comes
in contact with our sense-organ is only sensed. Moreover, it
should also be noted that the differentia of perception is that
it apprehends a present object. Such an objection is not ten-
able. The objectors themselves have been stated in another
place that an object with its future property is apprehended.
When silver is perceived it is also perceived that it will last
long. In fine, it is also established that the perception that my
brother will come to-morrow reveals a future object. As the
perception of an ordinary man refers to a future object so the
transcendental perception of the sage refers to future Dharma.
Thus, the argument against omniscience offered by Kumarila
is refuted. Kumärila has stated that: As an ordinary person
grasps a particular type of object by means of a particular kind
of proof so a similar object was grasped by a similar proof in
the past.
Now, the following objections appear in our mind. Is omni-
science constituted by a single act of transcendental perception
or by many acts of transcendental perception? The first alter-Statement of intuitive Knowledge
native is not possible since the incompatible objects like heat
-and cold are never present in a single act of consciousness, By
many acts of consciousness all the objects of the world are not
known. Do these acts of consciousness arise simultaneously
or successively? They cannot simultaneously arise since the
internal organ, the instrument of consciousness is so small that
it cannot simultaneously produce many acts of consciousness.
If it produces them one after another, it will not be able to
generate the direct awareness of all objects concealed in the
womb of the three worlds by the ten millions of Manu periods.
How are the sages omniscient? A rejoinder to the objection is
-as follows: The sages will simultaneously perceive all the
objects all over the world by a single act of perception.
223
The argument against the co-presence of the incompatible
-objects in one act of perception has no binding force since the
*contrary qualities such as 'blue', 'yellow', are co-present in the
awareness of a picture. We may also cite instances which show
that we simultaneously feel heat and cold on some occasions.
They are as follows a person who has descended the icy cold
water of a lake up to his navel with the upper part of his body
exposed to the spark-like hot rays of the sun in a midday of the
summer season simultaneously feels heat and cold. If the sages
perceive all the perceptible and imperceptible objects past,
present and future in the universe by a single act of perception,
how can they be distinguished from God, the greatest teacher
of the universe? There is a clear-cut distinction between them
and Him. His omniscience is eternal whereas that of the sages
is acquired as it arises from the practice of meditation.
One cannot meditate upon an object which has not been
known before. If the Vedas are the source of Dharma what is
the use of meditation ?
If the sages are pioneers to know the true nature of Dharma
from the Vedas then the well-ascertained proposition that the
Vedas are the only source of Dharma is never contradicted.
This is the final argument of the objector.
Our reply to the above objection is as follows: There is an
element of truth in the above objection that the sages are ini-
tiated into Dharma by the Vedas. Afterwards when they reap
the fruit of meditation the transcendental perception of Dharma224
Nyāyamanjari
flashes in their mind. The net result of it is that the ascertain-
ment of the truth of the thesis that the Vedas are the only
source of the Dharma becomes shaky. Moreover, the eternal
perception of Dharma belonging to God is the source of
Dharma. God is the author of the Vedas because of His per-
ception. This point will be discussed later on. If God's eternal
perception is proved then the above thesis that the Vedas are
the only source of Dharma is not conclusively proved. There-
fore, the argument offered by the Mimaṁsakas, against the
possibility of the transcendental perception of Dharma by the
sages, is not convincing. The Mīmāṁsakas have argued that
Dharma cannot be perceived by the sages because an existent
object is only perceived and perception arises only from the
contact of the sense-organ with an existent object.
Now, the view that the scriptures are the only source of
Dharma, i.e., the merit arising from the performance of the
acts enjoined by the Šāstras, has been confuted by the following
argument: Every word informs us only of known facts. The
Vedas are nothing but the sum-total of words. Hence, they
possess the character of words. Each of the words cannot fur-
nish us with a piece of knowledge of an object not known
before. (In other words, words do not denote novel objects.
The Vedas which are words do not signify novel Dharma.
Dharma is grasped by some other means of proof. Thus the
Vedas are not the only source of Dharma). A jar, being a know-
able object, is to be perceived by somebody in the universe. All
these counter-arguments are easily available (to silence the objec-
tors). Why do you vainly present a picture of a series of defective
arguments to negate the existence of transcendental perception,
resulting from meditation and revealing all objects of universe-
transcendental perception which is based upon uncontradict-
able reasons.
Therefore, the sutra on perception, put forward by Jaimini
thus interpreted, (i.c. meant for the refutation of transcendental
perception) is really irrelevant. It has been already shown
that the sutra does not serve the purpose of the definition of
perception,
Some logicians suggest a different definition of perception.
They hold that the consciousness which arises from the contactSamkhya definition of Perception refuted
225
of the soul, the internal organ, the sense-organ and the object
and which is other than inferential knowledge and such other
indirect knowledge is called perception. This definition suffers
from the defect of being too narrow and also too wide. It does
not apply to the introspection of pleasure of the soul and of
consciousness itself, since it arises either from the contact of the
two conditions of the above ones or from that of the three condi-
tions of them. It also applies to the case of perceptual illusion
and so on.
Samkhya definition of Perception refuted
Iśvara Kṛṣṇa, on the other hand, has defined perception as
a clear and distinct image of its corresponding object. This
definition is not defectless. But it is very wide since it is appli-
cable to an inference which is also a clear and distinct image
of an object. Räjä, the author of Yuktidīpikā explains the above
definition of perception given in the Samkhya-Karikā in the
following manner: According to him the indeclinable 'prati'
signifies 'in front of'. Hence, perception is the clear and dis-
tinct image of an object which is in front of the person concern-
ed. This definition, taken in the light of this interpretation,
does not overcome the defect of being too wide since it applies
to an inference as well. Like the perceptual judgment that this
is a jar, the inferential judgment that this hill contains fire
refers to an object which is cognized to be in front of the person
concerned. The object of every awareness is, of course, clear
and vivid. The above interpreter, contends thus : In case of
perception an image has only been mentioned whereas in case
of inference and verbal testimony the images have been speci-
fied. In the latter two cases, processes of framing images have
been specifically mentioned, viz., in case of an inference the
image is framed by means of a mark but in case of verbal testi-
mony the image is produced by means of a word. As a special
rule restricts and narrows down the wide application of a general
rule so the special images distinguish themselves from the parti-
cular image. Hence, an image which is other than the special
ones is perception. If this line of defence is final, perception
would not have been defined at the outset. When inference and
verbal testimony will be described we shall be able to recognizeNyayamanjari
perception as distinguished from them. Hence, if the definition
of perception does not contain the adjectival clause 'which
arises from the sense-object-contact', it is not logically main-
tained that perception is distinguished from inference, etc.
Hence, the above definition is not sound.
226
It is needless to speak much about it. For the reason indicated
above the definitions of perception offered by the other systems
are without defects. So, the definition of perception, framed by
Gautama, attracts the mind of high intellectual attainments.
Inference-its Definition
When perception which is the presupposition of all other
sources of knowledge has been defined, Inference which
occupies the next place in the hierarchy of ways of knowledge
will be defined in the wake of the treatment of perception.
Inference which is dependent on perception admits of three
kinds, viz., (1) Pūrvavat, (2) Šeşavat and (3) Sâmányato-
dṛṣṭa (Nyāya-sūtra I. 5).
The essential character of inference will be discussed at the
outset and then the sutra will be thoroughly explained.
We know for certain at first that the sign possesses five
characteristic features and that th relation of invariable
concomitance between the sign and the signified belongs to it.
The passage from the definite knowledge of the sign thus
characterized to the definite knowledge of the thing signified,
which is not an object of perception is called inferential know-
ledge.
The determinate knowledge of the sign or the sign thus
known together with the recollection of the relation of invari-
able concomitance between the sign and the signified belong-
ing to it is called the means of inferential knowledge (inference
as a process is the proximate cause of the valid inferential know-
ledge. The knowledge of the thing signified is its result. If the
knowledge of the thing signified is called a means then the
judgment that the thing signified is acceptable, or avoidable,
etc. will be the resultant form of inference. It has been fairly
decided that the proximate cause or an instrument of the true
knowledge is called a means par excellence. The term liiga'
is full of significance since its primary meaning is that a lingaInference-its Definition
is that by means of which an object, lying beyond the reach of
perception, is grasped (lingyate-made known). A sign
possesses five characteristic features which are as follows:
(1) The presence of the reason (sign) in the subject
(minor term), (2) the presence of the reason (sign) in the
positive example, (3) the absence of the reason from the
negative example, (4) the reason being not contradicted by
other sources of true knowledge, and (5) the reason being not
counterbalanced by another reason. The knowledge of such
reason, possessed of these five characteristic features, is the
proximate cause of the inference of consequence.
Paksa is the subject (i.e., the locus of the object signified)
regarding which there is a desire to establish the point by
inference that the thing signified belongs to it as its adjective.
The object signified is tentatively asserted of it as its adjective.
The syllogistic proposition that the middle term (the sign) is the
predicate of the minor term (pakşa) leads to the conclusion
that the minor term is predicated by the major term (the
signified object). Another positive example confirms the truth
of the concluding proposition. A negative example (vipakşa)
is such as contradicts the conclusion. The absence of the
reason from such a case is essential. The reason is free from
contradiction if the conclusion is contradicted neither by
perception nor by verbal testimony. If a reason is not counter-
balanced by another reason (i.e., the minor proposition is not
challenged by another counter-minor proposition), another
(conclusion) which creates doubt about the truth of the
conclusion does not arise. A reason which is possessed of
these five characteristic features leads to the inference of a
conclusion. The faulty or apparent reasons are those which
are devoid of any one of these five characteristic features. They
will be elaborately discussed later on. A faulty reason is called
the asiddha (unreal) when it does not belong to the subject.
An example of it is as follows :--
Sound is eternal because it is visible. A faulty reason is styled
the opposite when it is an invariable concomitant of the
contradictory term of the major term. An example of it is as
follows-Sound is eternal because it is created like the sky.
A faulty reason is designated as the indefinite when it does
227220
Nyāyamañjari
course of discipline such as the strict observation of the vow of
celibacy, the regular revision of the old subject-matter learnt
by him, etc., in order to learn the Vedas by heart. He acquires
permanent impressions thereby. They, being stable as they
are, help him to recall the matters read by him in memory
with perfect facility and dexterity.
Or, as gold, being slowly purified in a closed vessel, acquires
matchless beauty, so the inner organ of a sage is capable of
perceiving all knowable objects by the constant practice of
meditation.
On the other hand, the inner organ of worldly men like our-
selves being enveloped by the veil of passions we do not acquire
the highest stage of knowledge, i.e., omniscience. Is there any
object which is not directly grasped by the pure inner organ of
the sages ? The reason of this direct awareness lies in the fact
that all the impurities of their mind are consumed by the daily
practice of meditation. The method of cleansing the impurities
of the inner organ such as worldly attachment, etc., will be
elaborately discussed in the chapter on Apavarga (Final eman-
cipation). Thus, when the sages consume all the inner drosses
and acquire high proficiency in the art of concentration by the
constant practice of meditation, they attain to faultless omni-
science.
We foresee sometimes future events. An illustration of the
true judgment of foresight is that my brother will come to-
morrow. Such foresight is called as Pratibha Pramana. This
piece of valid knowledge is not hallucinatory. It is not a doubt.
It is not even negated by its contradictory judgment. Its source
is not a defective sense-organ. Therefore, it should be treated as
a piece of valid knowledge.
If it is negated sometimes by its true contradictory judgment,
it will turn out to be a false one. But if the brother actually
comes on the day predicted then will not it be a true one ? Do
the critics call it a true judgment ?
If the critics point out that the correspondence of the judg-
ment in question to facts is purely accidental then it is replied
that the plea of accidental correspondence does not hold good
since the real object has been truly revealed beforehand.Statement of Intuitive Knowledge
An argument against the validity of this piece of knowledge
is this that it is not generated by an object since the brother
who is the object referred to is absent at that time. Certainly,
this argument would have held good if he had known his
brother as present on that occasion. But he knows him as a
possible event in future. This idea of possibility, too, is an event
of the present time. The brother under consideration is present
as a possible object which is perceived. Hence, how can the
argument of the critic that it is not produced by an object be
tenable? The critics contend that it is unreasonable to hold
that an object is grasped with a future characteristic feature.
What is a future characteristic feature? A feature does not
exist now but will come into being at a later period. It is
really the pre-negation of an object which is limited in time.
How can a negative fact be related to a positive object?
Because, they are incompatible with each other by their very
nature. This misdirected old criticism is untenable. It is not the
pre-negation of the person (i.e., of the brother in question) but
the pre-negation of the contact of the person with the house in
question. This pre-negation is not incompatible with the person.
The brother, the substratum, actually exists. He is recalled in
our memory because he is anxiously expected at the time of
dinner. The brother who is thus recollected is presented to our
consciousness in the form that he will come here tomorrow. The
brother in question is one of the conditions of prophetic vision
(pratibhā-jñāna), Hence, this type of knowledge which is not
hallucinatory but is conditioned by a real object is really valid.
This type of valid knowledge is direct but not indirect. In-
direct knowledge admits of three species. It belongs to none of
them since it does not depend upon a word, a mark and resem-
blance for its appearance. It may be objected that it cannot
be direct since it is non-sensuous. Such an objection is not ten-
able since the inner organ determines it. Now, if the inner
organ could independently apprehend external objects then
there would have been no blind person in this universe. Such
an objection has been met before. It has been answered that
the external object which has been perceived with eyes is only
intuited by the inner organ. Thus, the objection that there
would be no blind person is fairly met. It has also been stated
221- 222
Nyayamanjari
before that a piece of knowledge which is true but comes into
being on the absence of the acknowledged conditions of know-
ledge such as a word etc. is an instance of valid inner percep-
tion. It bears a close resemblance to the judgments such as
""ketaka flower is sweet-scented'. 'Sugar is sweet' and so on. The
-critics are not in a position to take an exception to it with the
remark that the direct awareness of a sage is not determined by
a definite set of conditions like the normal perception. The
implication of the previous line is that it is not perceptual. The
answer to the above charge is that the transcendental knowledge
of a sage is always perceptual. If it is not direct it is not the
knowledge of a sage. Some hold that the knowledge of a sage is
in toto derived from the scriptures. The implication of the
conjecture is that it cannot be direct. All the sources of the
knowledge of a sage have not been exhaustively given but have
only been illustrated by means of a single instance. The Vedas
are one of them. No such knowledge arises in the mind of a
sage as does not spring up from a source.
Now, another objection arises in our mind that foresight is
non-perceptual since perception refers only to a present object.
Kumārila has stated that an object which is present and comes
in contact with our sense-organ is only sensed. Moreover, it
should also be noted that the differentia of perception is that
it apprehends a present object. Such an objection is not ten-
able. The objectors themselves have been stated in another
place that an object with its future property is apprehended.
When silver is perceived it is also perceived that it will last
long. In fine, it is also established that the perception that my
brother will come to-morrow reveals a future object. As the
perception of an ordinary man refers to a future object so the
transcendental perception of the sage refers to future Dharma.
Thus, the argument against omniscience offered by Kumärila
is refuted. Kumārila has stated that : As an ordinary person
grasps a particular type of object by means of a particular kind
of proof so a similar object was grasped by a similar proof in
the past.
Now, the following objections appear in our mind. Is omni-
science constituted by a single act of transcendental perception
or by many acts of transcendental perception? The first alter-Statement of intuitive Knowledge
native is not possible since the incompatible objects like heat
and cold are never present in a single act of consciousness. By
many acts of consciousness all the objects of the world are not
known. Do these acts of consciousness arise simultaneously
or successively? They cannot simultaneously arise since the
internal organ, the instrument of consciousness is so small that
it cannot simultaneously produce many acts of consciousness.
If it produces them one after another, it will not be able to
generate the direct awareness of all objects concealed in the
womb of the three worlds by the ten millions of Manu periods.
How are the sages omniscient? A rejoinder to the objection is
as follows: The sages will simultaneously perceive all the
objects all over the world by a single act of perception.
The argument against the co-presence of the incompatible
objects in one act of perception has no binding force since the
*contrary qualities such as 'blue', 'yellow', are co-present in the
awareness of a picture. We may also cite instances which show
that we simultaneously feel heat and cold on some occasions.
They are as follows a person who has descended the icy cold
water of a lake up to his navel with the upper part of his body
exposed to the spark-like hot rays of the sun in a midday of the
summer season simultaneously feels heat and cold. If the sages
perceive all the perceptible and imperceptible objects past,
present and future in the universe by a single act of perception,
how can they be distinguished from God, the greatest teacher
of the universe ? There is a clear-cut distinction between them
and Him. His omniscience is eternal whereas that of the sages
is acquired as it arises from the practice of meditation,
One cannot meditate upon an object which has not been
known before. If the Vedas are the source of Dharma what is
the use of meditation ?
If the sages are pioneers to know the true nature of Dharma
from the Vedas then the well-ascertained proposition that the
Vedas are the only source of Dharma is never contradicted.
This is the final argument of the objector.
Our reply to the above objection is as follows: There is an
element of truth in the above objection that the sages are ini-
tiated into Dharma by the Vedas. Afterwards when they reap
the fruit of meditation the transcendental perception of Dharma
223Nyayamanjari
perception as distinguished from them. Hence, if the definition
of perception does not contain the adjectival clause 'which
arises from the sense-object-contact', it is not logically main-
tained that perception is distinguished from inference, etc.
Hence, the above definition is not sound.
It is needless to speak much about it. For the reason indicated
above the definitions of perception offered by the other systems
are without defects. So, the definition of perception, framed by
Gautama, attracts the mind of high intellectual attainments.
226
Inference-its Definition
When perception which is the presupposition of all other
sources of knowledge has been defined, Inference which
occupies the next place in the hierarchy of ways of knowledge
will be defined in the wake of the treatment of perception.
Inference which is dependent on perception admits of three
kinds, viz., (1) Pūrvavat, (2) Šeşavat and (3) Sāmānyato-
dṛṣṭa (Nyāya-sūtra I, 5).
The essential character of inference will be discussed at the
outset and then the sūtra will be thoroughly explained.
We know for certain at first that the sign possesses five
characteristic features and that the relation of invariable
concomitance between the sign and the signified belongs to it.
The passage from the definite knowledge of the sign thus
characterized to the definite knowledge of the thing signified,
which is not an object of perception is called inferential know-
ledge.
The determinate knowledge of the sign or the sign thus
known together with the recollection of the relation of invari-
able concomitance between the sign and the signified belong-
ing to it is called the means of inferential knowledge (inference
as a process is the proximate cause of the valid inferential know-
ledge. The knowledge of the thing signified is its result. If the
knowledge of the thing signified is called a means then the
judgment that the thing signified is acceptable, or avoidable,
etc. will be the resultant form of inference. It has been fairly
decided that the proximate cause or an instrument of the true
knowledge is called a means par excellence. The term 'linga'
is full of significance since its primary meaning is that a lingaInference-its Definition
227
is that by means of which an object, lying beyond the reach of
perception, is grasped (lingyate-made known). A sign
possesses five characteristic features which are as follows:
(1) The presence of the reason (sign) in the subject
(minor term), (2) the presence of the reason (sign) in the
positive example, (3) the absence of the reason from the
negative example, (4) the reason being not contradicted by
other sources of true knowledge, and (5) the reason being not
counterbalanced by another reason. The knowledge of such
reason, possessed of these five characteristic features, is the
proximate cause of the inference of consequence.
Pakṣa is the subject (i.e., the locus of the object signified)
regarding which there is a desire to establish the point by
inference that the thing signified belongs to it as its adjective.
The object signified is tentatively asserted of it as its adjective.
The syllogistic proposition that the middle term (the sign) is the
predicate of the minor term (paksa) leads to the conclusion
that the minor term is predicated by the major term (the
signified object). Another positive example confirms the truth
of the concluding proposition. A negative example (vipakşa)
is such as contradicts the conclusion. The absence of the
reason from such a case is essential. The reason is free from
contradiction if the conclusion is contradicted neither by
perception nor by verbal testimony. If a reason is not counter-
balanced by another reason (i.e., the minor proposition is not
challenged by another counter-minor proposition), another
(conclusion) which creates doubt about the truth of the
conclusion does not arise. A reason which is possessed of
these five characteristic features leads to the inference of a
conclusion. The faulty or apparent reasons are those which
are devoid of any one of these five characteristic features. They
will be elaborately discussed later on. A faulty reason is called
the asiddha (unreal) when it does not belong to the subject.
An example of it is as follows:
Sound is eternal because it is visible. A faulty reason is styled
the opposite when it is an invariable concomitant of the
contradictory term of the major term. An example of it is as
follows-Sound is eternal because it is created like the sky.
A faulty reason is designated as the indefinite when it does228
Nyayamanjari
not universally belong to the positive instances (i.e. when the
middle term is not distributed). An example of it is as
follows:-Sound is eternal because it is knowable (the reason
is not absent from the opposite examples i.e. non-eternal
objects are also knowable). A faulty reason is called Kälätyayā-
padişța (contradictory if the probandum is contradicted by
our true experience or knowledge. An example of it is as
follows:-
Light which is a constituted whole consisted of light particles
is not hot because it is a created object like a jar. A faulty
reason is called inconclusive when it is not immune from being
counterbalanced by another reason. An example of it is as
follows:-Sound is non-eternal because eternality is known to
be absent from it (sound) as it is absent from a jar. This is
counterbalanced by another proof. Sound is eternal because
non-eternality is not found to be present as it is not found in
the sky. If the five characteristic features characterize the
reason, the reason becomes the invariable concomitant. A
criticism of the Nyaya theory that the five characteristic
features of a true reason are necessary for distinguishing it
from a faulty one is as follows:-The Buddhists subject the
Nyaya theory to severe criticism. Very well, you have stated
your point of view. But we have got something to speak
against you. A true probans is invariably concomitant with its
probandum if it possesses only the three characteristics in
lieu of the five ones mentioned by you. If the probans is thus
characterized then its possibility of being associated with a
probandum which is contradicted by a piece of valid knowledge
is ruled out since invariable concomitance and contradiction
are incompatible. The example of this type of faulty reason
selected by you is absolutely unreasonable.
In the syllogism "Fire is not hot because it is a product; the
reason, a product, has the three conditions; over and above
them it has another feature, viz., it is concomitant of the
major term, 'not hot' which is contradicted by touch-percep-
tion. But if this reason is carefully examined then it is clear
that it does not possess the three conditions of a sound reason.
A sound reason must be present in the subject of inference. But
the above reason does not belong to it. In the subject ofInference its Definition
229
inference the presence of a major term is doubtful. It may or
may not be present in the subject of inference. But its absence
in the subject of inference should never be determined by
another proof. If its absence is determined then the subject of
inference ceases to be so. A reason which is present in such a
defective subject of inference should not be taken as belonging
to the subject of inference. Moreover, the positive relation of
invariable concomitance holding between this middle term and
this major term has not been discovered. Had it been so, its
discrepancy would have been detected then and there. A
generalisation based upon the observation of positive instances
refers to all cases. Thus the major premise is "Whatever is a pro-
duct is not hot". When we verify it we see that fire is a product
but is hot. Thus how can the major premise be arrived at ?
It is contended that all the positive instances excepting fire
(the subject of inference) have been observed and the above
generalisation has been based upon them then our retort to it
is this induction is not universal since the class of the subject of
inference has been excluded but in case of true induction this
class cannot but be included. This all-inclusive induction is
called antar-vyāpti.
As this reason is not invariably concomitant of the major term
in question, the conclusion drawn from the reason in question
looks like approaching an impotent person with a prayer for love.
The negative instances should also be observed so that we
may arrive at the true induction. But the foundation of induc-
tion is the method of agreement. The method of difference is
merely a corrective process which clears the way to induction.
As the verdict of the observation of the positive instances does
not go in favour of the above induction so there is no possibility
for the method of difference to work on it.
Moreover, what you intend to infer is that fire is not-hot.
But it is perceived that fire is hot. Thus fire turns out to cont-
rary instance. But fire being a product the reason is present in
the contrary instance. Therefore the above reason does not ful-
fil the conditions of a true reason. But, on the contrary, it be-
comes a faulty reason. Hence the alleged condition of a truc
reason that it should not be invariable concomitant of such a
major term as is contradicted by another proof is logically un-228
Nyayamanjari
not universally belong to the positive instances (i.e. when the
middle term is not distributed). An example of it is as
follows:-Sound is eternal because it is knowable (the reason
is not absent from the opposite examples i.e. non-eternal
objects are also knowable). A faulty reason is called Kālātyaya-
padişța (contradictory if the probandum is contradicted by
our true experience or knowledge. An example of it is as
follows:-
Light which is a constituted whole consisted of light particles
is not hot because it is a created object like a jar. A faulty
reason is called inconclusive when it is not immune from being
counterbalanced by another reason. An example of it is as
follows:-Sound is non-eternal because eternality is known to
be absent from it (sound) as it is absent from a jar. This is
counterbalanced by another proof. Sound is eternal because
non-eternality is not found to be present as it is not found in
the sky. If the five characteristic features characterize the
reason, the reason becomes the invariable concomitant. A
criticism of the Nyaya theory that the five characteristic
features of a true reason are necessary for distinguishing it
from a faulty one is as follows:-The Buddhists subject the
Nyaya theory to severe criticism. Very well, you have stated
your point of view. But we have got something to speak
against you. A true probans is invariably concomitant with its
probandum if it possesses only the three characteristics in
lieu of the five ones mentioned by you. If the probans is thus
characterized then its possibility of being associated with a
probandum which is contradicted by a piece of valid knowledge
is ruled out since invariable concomitance and contradiction
are incompatible. The example of this type of faulty reason
selected by you is absolutely unreasonable.
In the syllogism "Fire is not hot because it is a product; the
reason, a product, has the three conditions; over and above
them it has another feature, viz., it is concomitant of the
major term, 'not hot' which is contradicted by touch-percep-
tion. But if this reason is carefully examined then it is clear
that it does not possess the three conditions of a sound reason.
A sound reason must be present in the subject of inference. But
the above reason does not belong to it. In the subject ofInference
inference the presence of a major term is doubtful. It may or
may not be present in the subject of inference. But its absence
in the subject of inference should never be determined by
another proof. If its absence is determined then the subject of
inference ceases to be so. A reason which is present in such a
defective subject of inference should not be taken as belonging
to the subject of inference. Moreover, the positive relation of
invariable concomitance holding between this middle term and
this major term has not been discovered. Had it been SO, its
discrepancy would have been detected then and there. A
generalisation based upon the observation of positive instances
refers to all cases. Thus the major premise is "Whatever is a pro-
duct is not hot". When we verify it we see that fire is a product
but is hot. Thus how can the major premise be arrived at ?
'
its Definition
229
It is contended that all the positive instances excepting fire
(the subject of inference) have been observed and the above
generalisation has been based upon them then our retort to it
is this induction is not universal since the class of the subject of
inference has been excluded but in case of true induction this
class cannot but be included. This all-inclusive induction is
called antar-vyapti.
As this reason is not invariably concomitant of the major term
in question, the conclusion drawn from the reason in question
looks like approaching an impotent person with a prayer for love.
The negative instances should also be observed so that we
may arrive at the true induction. But the foundation of induc-
tion is the method of agreement. The method of difference is
merely a corrective process which clears the way to induction.
As the verdict of the observation of the positive instances does
not go in favour of the above induction so there is no possibility
for the method of difference to work on it.
Moreover, what you intend to infer is that fire is not-hot.
But it is perceived that fire is hot. Thus fire turns out to a cont-
rary instance. But fire being a product the reason is present in
the contrary instance. Therefore the above reason does not ful-
fil the conditions of a true reason. But, on the contrary, it be-
comes a faulty reason. Hence the alleged condition of a truc
reason that it should not be invariable concomitant of such a
major term as is contradicted by another proof is logically un.230
Nyāyamanjari
tenable. How do we know that the alleged condition is an
essential one? The mere non-perception of contradiction does
not lead to the conclusion that there is non-contradiction here
since persons who are not omniscient cannot know truly non-
contradiction. If the condition of a true reason be non-contra-
diction, all reasons cease to be true ones since according to the
Buddhists a reason devoid of one of the three essential con-
ditions ceases to be a sound one. In fine, non-contradiction
should not be one of the conditions of a true reason. This is
the sum and substance of the critical remarks made by the
Buddhists.
A retort to the above objections is as follows:-It has been
stated that when the relation of invariable concomitance holding
between the two positive objects is known to be universal, we
know for certain that the mark in question is not an invariable
concomitant of the object marked since fire, the subject of in-
ference, is perceived as characterized by such property as is
contrary to the property intended to be established as belonging
to it. But his statement is not convincing. It is a truism that an
induction is universal but is not a case of perfect enumeration.
Thus in order to arrive at a generalization we shall not consider
all the individual cases one by one. If we do it, we shall have
to face too insurmountable difficulties. First, we shall not be
able to generalize because we cannot take into consideration all
the particular cases since they are infinite in number. Secondly,
if induction is a mere summation of perceptions then deduction
is superfluous since the conclusion is a known fact. Let us take
a concrete case to bring home the point in question. If all
places which contain smoke and fire are perceived, it is genera-
lized that where there is smoke there is fire. If it is inferred that
the hill is fiery because it is smoky then this inference is truly
superfluous since it simply repeats the story of the previous per-
ception. The hill in question must have been perceived before
as containing smoke and fire since the above generalization is
impossible without such perception.
Thus, we arrive at an inductive trutlı referring to all particular
cases in an abstract manner, e.g., where there is smoke etc.
But we do never refer to all particular cases such as a hill, a
forest, a house etc. in order to arrive at a generalization.Inference-its Definition
This being the method of discovering the universal relation
of concomitance it is not an idle pursuit like the offering of a
love proposal to an impotent person. We find no justification
in leaving aside this method of difference in order to discover
the universal relation of invariable concomitance.
231
When the relation of invariable concomitance is discovered
in an abstract manner and its truth is reaffirmed by a reference
to the subject of inference we call it as antar-vyāpti (really
universal). When we infer that the hill is fiery we discover
that the relation of concomitance holding between smoke and
fire exists in all places such as a forest etc. outside the hill. In
this stage though the relation in question is believed to be uni-
versal yet it is called as tentatively universal (bahir-vyāpti). At
a subsequent period of time when it will be inferred that the
forest is fiery it virtually becomes antar-vyāpti. Let us now dis-
cuss the point in question. We arrive at an induction that what
is a product is not-hot in an abstract way but do not refer to
fire, the subject of inference. Thus, the relation of concomi
tance holding between the above two terms is established. Now,
in the syllogism, "The body of luminous substance (a whole) is
not-hot because it is a product" the atoms which constitute
the body of luminous substance illustrate the contrary example.
No thinker can mention such an absurd reason. It may be
pointed out that the moon, the stars etc. are constituted by
luminous atoms but they are not hot. A thinker may frame a
syllogism of which the product is the middle term and not-hot is
the major term. The major premise is based upon the tentative
induction which must be verified in order to accept as universal
induction. At the time of framing the premise no contrary
example has come to his notice. But no proposition having the
subject of inference as a term should be cited as a contrary
example.
Now, the Buddhists contend that nothing really possesses the
two mutually contrary characteristic features. If the subject of
inference possesses the major term as its attribute then it really
becomes a similar example. If it does not possess it then how is
it that it is not a contrary example. It cannot also be held
either that the subject of inference alternately becomes a simi-
lar example and contrary one or that it is neither a similar232
Nyayamanjari
example nor a contrary one. The import of this contention is
that a neutral subject of inference is an absurdity. But such a
contention is not tenable since it strikes at the very root of in-
ference and does away with it. It is a truism that a thing is not
endowed with the two contrary characters. But it is in the
nature of inference that an object should be exclusively selected
as the subject of inference. If we do not do so then it will not
be possible to find out either a similar example or a contrary
one since they are independent of the subject of inference for
their very existence as possessing unquestionable authority to
decide the fate of the subject of inference i.e., they act as the
unquestionable standard of verification. If the character of a
contrary example is attributed to the actual subject of inference
and the syllogistic process is vitiated thereby then the sound
process of deduction might also be invalidated by such a
contrivance.
Now, the Buddhists may contend that in case of sound in-
ference the subject of inference viz., a hill is not definitely
known as containing the negation of the major term whereas
in the above case the subject of inference viz., a body of lumi-
nous substance is definitely known as containing the negation
of the major term viz., not-hotness (coldness). If this is their
contention then is the hill in question definitely known as con-
taining fire before the actual inference takes place? If they
answer in the affirmative then why is fire inferred at all?
Now, the Buddhists contend that there is neither the positive
judgment that the hill is fiery nor there is the negative judg-
ment that the hill is not fiery but there is the disjunctive
judgment that the hill is either fiery or not-fiery. Hence, the
hill which is the subject of the above disjunctive judgment is a
case of doubtful contrary example The Buddhists may hold
that a reason which belongs to a doubtful contrary example
should be a faulty one like one belonging to a contrary example.
If a reason which belongs to a doubtful contrary example be-
comes a faulty one like a faulty reason belonging to a contrary
example then the very possibility of inference is threatened.
Hence, we should not invalidate a syllogistic process by making
a reference to the subject of inference as a case of contrary
example. But the reason is faulty because it is not invariablyInference-its Definition
233
concomitant of the major term in question (i.c., the relation of
invariable concomitance does not hold between the state of
being product and the state of being not-hot (cold). But it is a
truism what has been again pointed out by you that the reason
does not belong to such a subject of inference as is not con-
tradicted. But we also take a note of this criticism and hold
that the predicate of the above subject of inference is contradict-
ed by perception. We also point out in this connection that
the reign of contradiction does not only extend over the sub-
ject of inference but also over a reason.
There is no such subject of inference as is absolutely indepen-
dent of a reason since it is a reason by means of which some
predicate is asserted of it (the subject of inference). (In other
words, we establish the conclusion that a hill is fiery because it
is smoky. We prove that a hill, the subject of inference, con-
tains fire because it has smoke (the reason).
But when we try to establish something as belonging to
the subject of inference as its attribute and directly perceive
that another attribute which is contrarily or contradictorily
opposed to the above attribute belongs to it, the reason which
belongs to the subject of inference is contradicted, i.e., is con-
nected with the negation of the attribute to be inferred (i.e.,
the major term) since perception contradicts the relation of
invariable concomitance holding the major term and the minor
term.
Thus, it should be admitted that one of the essential condi-
tions of being a true reason is that it should be invariably con
comitant with such a thing to be inferred (i.e., a major term)
as is not contradicted in any locus of their compresence. But
the reason belongs to the subject of inference viz., fire. Thus the
condition of being a faulty reason, viz., its non-presence in the
subject of inference, does not invalidate it.
If you hold that the non-contradictoriness of a reason is not
possible to ascertain then, Oh great logician ! how do you ascer-
tain the contradictory character of the subject of inference ?
If you make sincere attempts to find out contradiction but
fail to do so then you should admit that there is no contradic-
tion. But if you deny the truth of this maxim then all your
practical transactions will be impeded by imaginary doubts.234
Nyāyamanjari
The Buddhists hold that the sound reason has only three
characteristic features. But a reason, thus characterized, may
fall a victim to another defect of being contradicted, viz., it may
be imagined to be concomitant of a major term, the presence of
which in the locus of a reason is contradicted by some other
proof. Therefore, non-contradictoriness should be distinctly in-
cluded in the list of the conditions which are essential for a
sound reason. The Buddhists hold that contradictoriness and
invariable concomitance are mutually incompatible with regard
to a reason which is marked by the three characteristic features
mentioned by them (the Buddhists). This incompatibility is not
universal. In some cases it holds good. In other cases, an
exception to it is noticed. In other words, contradictoriness and
invariable concomitance are compresent in some reasons, marked
by the above three characteristic features. But invariable con-
comitance which belongs to a reason, marked by the five
characteristic features, reaches the ideal state of perfection since
such a reason excludes contradictoriness. In this case, the
hypothesis of incompatibility between invariable concomitance
and contradictoriness is truly sound. In case of a reason, marked
only by the three characteristic features, the hypothesis of
incompatibility is not logically tenable. Thus, it has been stated
that the hypothesis is partially tenable and partially untenable.
Enough of this discussion.
The relation of invariable concomitance based upon the law of identity
and causality as held by the Buddhists
The Buddhists have said that the recollection of niyama (a rule)
is one of the conditions of inference. What is this niyama? It
is the real relation of invariable concomitance holding between
the middle term (the probans) and the major term (the proban-
dum). It is also called an indissoluble connexion between ob-
jects or ideas. It is also designated as their constant comprese-
The Buddhists hold that the laws of identity and causa-
lity constitute the ground of indissoluble connexion between
ideas or objects. The Naiyãyikas demand a further explanation
on this point. They say that the Buddhists should not stop with
this sort of incomplete answer but as logicians should find out
the real ground of invariable concomitance. The Idhists (the
nce.Refutation of the Buddhist hypothesis about invariable concomitance 235
Bhikṣus) have discovered that the relation of invariable con-
comitance is based upon the laws of identity and causality. A
positive object is identical with some object. How can it be
different from that? A šimšapā (an individual belonging to a
species of tree) is a tree. So a šimšapā constitutes the probans
for the probandum that it is a tree. This probans is based upon
identity. This is a tree because this is a simśapā. (This judg-
ment is analytic). Thus the indissoluble connexion between
these two ideas is based upon the law of identity (this law is
really appriori in character as it is not discovered after observ-
ing facts, but by the action of our thought a creation of our
imaginative mind). What is an effect is absolutely dependent
upon its cause for its very existence but is never independent
of it. When an effect is cognized it leads to the inferential
knowledge of its cause. It may be illustrated thus:--Here is fire
because here is smoke. Smoke being an effect of fire smoke,
the effect, is a reason. The indissoluble connexion subsisting
between smoke and fire is based upon the law of causality. (The
judgment based upon the law of causality is empiric). The
Buddhists hold that the Naiyāyikas exhibit an attribute of
escapism when they state the mere rule of invariable concomi-
tance but not the ground of two-fold indissoluble connexion.
The Refutation of the Buddhist Hypothesis
A reply to the above objections is given thus :-We prefer the
crude hypothesis of the rule of invariable concomitance offered by
the persons of obtruse intellect-the hypothesis which has been
stigmatized as the walking on foot to the laws of identity and
causality-the grounds of the knowledge of invariable concomi-
tance as devised by the men of sharp intellect. If the law of
identity is the ground of invariable concomitance, the middle
term becomes identical with the major term. In that case it is
impossible to establish that the middle term is a mark
of the major term since if the middle term is not cognized as a
distinct term, the major term is not known to us. (If we do not
see smoke in a hill, we cannot know that fire exists in that hill.
The conclusion follows from the premises). (In an analytic
judgment are the two terms simultaneously apprehended or not?
If the mark i.e., the middle term, is apprehended then do we236
Nyayamanjari
apprehend the thing marked (i.e., the major term) along with
it or not? If the thing marked and the mark are not simul-
taneously apprehended then how is it that the mark is identical
with the thing marked? If they are simultaneously present to
our consciousness then the thing marked is perceived like the
mark. In that case is it not useless to infer the thing marked?
No, the Buddhists may contend that inference has its justifica-
tion since it is necessary for sublating a contrary character
which may be ascribed to the thing marked. Such a defence
is not tenable since when an object is truly determined there
is no scope of ascribing an opposite character to it. Let us take
a concrete case. If we see the head, hands etc.-the distinct
limbs of an organic whole then we cannot conjecture that the
yonder object is a post. In the above example the limbs, the
head, hands, etc. being distinct from the man who has them,
we may possibly attribute the essential character of a post to a
man since the above limbs are not identical with the whole,
the man. We may assume that as we do not see the whole but
the different parts of it so we may ascribe some contrary
attribute to it. But in the Buddhist example of svabhāva
anumāna the simśapă tree is identical with a tree. Hence,
when we determine a śimśapā tree as a simŝapă tree we can-
not attribute an attribute which is contrary to the essence of a
tree to it. Moreover, in the above case, we determine a śímśapā
tree as a tree. We have definite knowledge of its generic chara-
cter. But we have not as yet identified its species. If we at all
commit a mistake, we may take one particular species for
another i.e., we may mistake a simšapā species for a non-
śimśapā species. But if we have definite knowledge of the
specific character of an individual then we cannot commit a
blunder as to its generic character i.e., if we definitely know an
individual as belonging to the species to śimšapā then we can-
not take it for a non-tree.
If the species of simšapā is perceived by a percipient then is
it not borne out by our common experience that the genus
remains transcendental to his sense-organs ?
Moreover, if the reason is identical with the consequence
then as it is inferred that it is a tree because it is a šimšapā so it
should be inferred that it is a ſimšapā because it is a tree sinceRefutation of the Buddhist hypothesis about invariable concomitance 237
the judgment "a simśapā is a tree" is analytical. Similarly, as the
conclusion that it is non-eternal follows from the premise that it is
an immediate successor of effort and that the premise that it is an
immediate successor follows from the premise that it is non-
eternal. If the identity of reason with the consequence is
accepted, the difference holding between productivity and
successiveness to an effort and that between such successiveness
and non-eternality should die out. This difference is based
upon sound logic. When we infer that this is non-eternal
because this is a product, is a similar example which testifies
to the truth of the induction concerned available? But if we
infer that this is a product because it is non-eternal, a cont-
rary example which invalidates the underlying induction is
available,
Now, the Buddhists may contend that there is a great gulf
fixed between full-fledged relation and invariable concomitance.
A relation belongs to both the terms, i.e., the relata. On the
other hand, the relation of invariable concomitance implies the
dependence of one term upon another. The essence of a
simśapā is an invariable concomitant of the essence of a tree
but the latter is not an invariable concomitant of the former.
Similarly, successiveness to an effort is an invariable concomi-
tant of non-eternality but not the vice-versa. A similar case
may be cited. Smoke is the invariable concomitant of fire but
not the vice-versa. The Naiyāyikas point out in this connec
tion that they completely endorse the view of the Buddhists
but the latter should take note of the significance of their
hypothesis. It amounts to mere concomitance based upon the
empirical law but not to invariable concomitance based upon
the law of identity. In case of identity a šimśapā is never
perceived as a non-šimšapā. Now, if a tree is identical with a
simšapā then whenever a tree is seen it should be seen as a
śimśapā. But when we see a catechu tree we see a tree but not
a simšapā. When we see lightning we know it to be short-
lived, i.e. non-eternal but do not know that its non-eternality
immediately succeeds an effort. How does the relation of
identity hold between the above two pairs ?
Several examples may be cited to demonstrate that the
reason is absent but the consequence is seen to be present. If238
Nyāyamanjari
the one exists without the other, but they are held to be iden-
tical then such a statement is deceitful.
Now, the Buddhists may contend that though a flash of
lightning is non-eternal and a jar is non-eternal yet the non-
eternality of the latter is different from that of the former
since the non-eternality of the latter only follows an effect in
an immediate succession. Such a contention leads to another
conclusion that a property, belonging to an individual substra-
tum, is exclusively private. Thus, there is no common property
which is shared by all. Hence the relation of invariable
concomitance which is asserted to be shared by many indivi-
duals cannot be possible. Therefore, the possibility of inferen-
tial knowledge which is based upon the knowledge of the
relation of invariable concomitance should be ruled out. But
fire, being the cause of smoke, it is reasonable to hold that
smoke is the invariable concomitant of fire but not vice-versa,
since smoke is different from fire. On the other hand, where
the reason is identical with the consequence any one is the
invariable concomitant of the other. The relation of mutual
invariable concomitance does not hold between non-eternality
and productivity. Hence in the above case, the identity of
the reason with the consequence cannot be maintained.
Either the Buddhists should discard the relation of invariable
concomitance based upon the law of identity or they should
justify the following conclusions viz. it is a simśapā because it
is a tree and it is the immediate successor of an effort because
it is non-eternal. Identity and non-identity exclude a middle
term. A new point should be added to the above points of
criticism. In order to illustrate an inference based upon iden-
tity the Buddhists cite the following example, viz., sound s
non-eternal because it is a product. Is it really an analytical
judgment? Let us analyse the concepts "non-eternality" a d
"the character of being a product" and see whether they are
identical. The meaning of the term 'non-eternality' is 'mect-
ing destruction'. The meaning of the term 'the character of
being a product' is 'having a new beginning'. An ob ect
which comes into existence meets its destruction. The ap ea-
rance of an object is not asserted to be its destruction. Tª ere-
fore, how is it that the reason is identical with its conseque ce?Refutation of an inference based upon the law of identity
The Buddhists contend that if the term 'non-eternal' signifies
'destructible' then the conclusion should assume the form that
sound is destructible but not non-eternal. Such a conclusion is
surely false since it is difficult for us to comprehend the con-
clusion that sound is destructible as we do in case of the
conclusion that the hill is fiery.
239
Destruction is negation. It cannot be a property belonging
to a substratum since when we cognize destruction its sub-
stratum, i.e., the object destroyed, is never present to our con-
sciousness.
Moreover, if the word 'anityatvam' (non-eternality) is
grammatically analysed, we see that the nominal suffix 'tva'
has been attached to the word 'anitya'. The suffix 'tva' signi-
fies an abstract quality which is, of course, positive. Thus the
boiled-down meaning of the word 'anityatva' is positive
essence of the non-eternal. Now, if the word 'non-eternal' has
a negative meaning then how is it that it has a positive
essence, because a positive essence is incompatible with the
negative real? Thus, the word 'anityatva' denotes real
existence marked by the two terminations (ends). The word
'krtakatva' (the character of being a product) denotes
existence which belongs to a real object, being brought about
by its cause. Thus, the reason is existence and the conse-
quence is existence. Hence, it is an instance of inference based
upon the law of identity.
The refutation of an example of inference based upon the law of
identity
The contention of the Buddhists is not tenable since the
reason and the consequence are not presented to consciousness
in the form as described by them. If the Buddhists stick to
their contention then the syllogistic form should be like this:
A sound is existent because it has existence. But this form is
conspicuous by its absence. On the other hand, the current
syllogistic form is that sound is non-eternal because it is a
product. The object to be inferred is such existence which
inheres in a real object which is brought about by its cause.
But this thesis is not tenable. Destruction which is one of the240
Nyāyamañjari
two ends by means of which existence is marked is absent at
that time and hence fails to describe existence accurately.
Now, the Buddhists may hold that destruction is one of the
boundary lines of existence, though actually absent, is supplied
by our imagination. If this is their answer then the Naiyāyikas
will also hold that destruction, though actually absent, may
qualify sound, being supplied by our imagination.
As a present predicate is asserted of a subject so a future
predicate may be asserted of a subject in the same manner.
Thus, the judgment "sound is destructible" is possible since
the problem of the relation of an absent predicate to its subject
is solved. Hence, there is no point in subscribing to the con-
jecture that existence is to be inferred. The Buddhists have
taken exception to the attachment of a suffix which denotes an
abstract quality to a negative term. But they have done it
quite unwisely. Those suffixes denote the essence of the mean-
ing of the words which they are attached to (i.e. their essential
property). They are attached to words which denote positive
reals because these reals possess the uncommon property. Simi-
larly, it is a fact that the suffix 'tva' is attached to the word
'abhāva' which denotes a negative real. In other words, a negative
real has also some unique property. Hence, the word 'anityatva'
denotes the abstract property of a destructible object which
may be comprehended. The word 'krtakatva' denotes the
abstract property of an effect which is produced but not exis-
tence (unconditional). But the Buddhists may contend that
it should denote such existence as belongs to an object which
has been brought about by its cause. In that case, the Naiya-
yikas give a retort to them that it will be better if it simply
denotes the abstract property of a product which characterises
it. No better purpose will be served if a different track is
followed.
(The Buddhists try to bring home their thesis that there is
invariable concomitance based upon the law of identity). They
argue that if the appearance and the destruction of an object
are the two unique distinct properties of an object, the subject
of inference and the example cannot have the same reason and
a general proposition cannot be formulated. The peculiar
property which belongs to a jar does not belong to sound andRefutation of an Inference based upon the law of identity
what belongs to sound does not belong to a jar (the same
reason should belong to the subject of inference and to the
example). If it is held that there is only one property which
is commonly shared by all the positive objects, then they will
have to face an absurd conclusion viz, when an object comes
into being all the objects of the universe should come into
being and when an object meets its destruction all the objects
of this world should cease to be. The Buddhists arrive at the
conclusion that existence is a better substitute for appearance
and destruction and it should be resorted to as reason and
consequence. The Buddhist thesis is not sound, Because though
the different subjects have distinct properties yet they are
presented our consciousness as the same.
The reason behind our point of view is that the destruction
of a jar is not the jar itself. If it were identical with the jar
itself then an inference in the above case that sound is non-
eternal because it is created like a jar would have been
impossible, because the same reason does not belong to the
subject of inference and to the example, the reason being
different in each case as it is not other than its substratum.
241
Moreover, a single common property, viz., destruction, does
not belong to all objects of the universe. Therefore, the Nyaya
thesis is not open to the objection that when an object is
destroyed all objects should meet destruction.
Thus, though the attributes of the different objects are
distinct yet they are apprehended by us as the same attribute.
The net result of this apprehension is that there is no hind-
rance to our inference since there is perfect harmony between
the reason belonging to the subject and that belonging to the
example.
Though the attributes are distinct yet they are presented to
our consciousness to be the same. Hence, there is no difficulty
in the formulation of a general proposition i.e., the major
premise based upon induction. Thus the relation of concomi-
tance obtains between the middle and major terms. One does
not require the presence of a public property, shared in
common by many but only similarity, in order to formulate a
general proposition. That is why the author of the Nyaya-
sutra does not make mention of the common attribute but only.242
Nyayamanjari
of the similarity of attributes. The reason proves what is to
be established through its similarity with the example. The
proposition which contains the reason is called 'hetu'. The
example has the characteristics of the subject because of its
similarity with it. The proposition which refers to an example
is called 'udaharaṇa'.
Therefore, the syllogism which contains origin and destruc-
tion as its middle and major terms does not illustrate an
inference based upon the law of identity since the middle term
is distinct from the major term. Thus the refutation of the
Buddhist thesis is thoroughly established. Similarly, an effect
cannot be the reason by means of which an inference is made.
Does the relation of cause and effect take place between the
two momentary objects or between the two series of momentary
objects? When the doctrine of the universal flux will be refuted
we shall point out that the relation of cause and effect does not
take place between the two instantaneous objects. If such a
relation at all takes place between them, it is very difficult to
comprehend because of the subtle character of them. The two
series of smoke and fire have merely imaginary existence and
hence the causal relation does not subsist between them. The
Buddhists hold that the reality of an object consists in its
practical efficiency. If inference is from smoke, the effect to
fire, the cause, smoke, having the characteristic features such
as bad odour, dark colour, ascending the sky, etc. should cons-
titute the reason. Concrete smoke with all the attributes is the
effect of fire. Some of its attributes cannot be taken away by
means of abstraction. It cannot be held that smoke with these
limited characteristic features is not the effect of fire. Smoke
with all its attributes is the effect of fire as it is evident from
the joint method of agreement and difference. Now, if it is
established that smoke with all its attributes is the effect of fire
then the Buddhists may revise their thesis and hold that
smoke, which is not specified by its peculiar attributes but is
marked only by its class-character and is concomitant with
fire, leads to an inference of fire. If this be the case, the
Buddhists vainly make mention of the reason as an effect but
should only speak about its concomitance. The relation of
concomitance is the means of inference.Refutation of an Inference based upon the law of identity
243
Now, the Buddhists contend that the Naiyāyikas have also
admitted the actuality of inference from an effect to its cause.
The type of inference styled seşavat illustrates the above point
of view. Kanada has given a list of real relations as the basis
of inference. He holds that inference is either from effect to
cause, or from cause to effect, or from one term conjoined to
the other correlative term, or from the one form inherent to
the other correlative term, or from the negative term to its
positive correlative term. The Buddhists establish their point
that inference is from effect to cause as they get the support of
Kaņāda.
The Naiyāyikas meet the Buddhist argument and point out
that it is not the intention of Kaņāda to enumerate all the real
relations which constitute a basis of inference but mentions
them by way of illustration to prove his point that the invari
able concomitance between the ground and the consequence
constitutes the sound basis of inference. We infer fire from
smoke and rain-fall from the swelling of the river-current not
because of their causal connexion but because of their invari-
able concomitance. This is the final conclusion of the Nyaya
school.
Now, a question arises, "How is it that the relation of
concomitance subsists between the pair of the two opposite
terms, viz., a positive term and its correlative negative term ?"
A positive term and a negative one are related to each other
as ground and consequence. If we find the presence of one of
them, we infer the absence of the other. Thus the relation of
invariable concomitance subsists between them, i.e., the pair
of the two opposite terms. Kanāda does not exhaustively
enumerate all the relations but he merely illustrates some of
them in his Vaiśesika-sūtra.
There are in this world various other reasons which consti-
tute the real ground of inference. Let us illustrate our point,
citing a few examples. Noting the setting of the sun, the rise
of stars is inferred.
Seeing the full-moon in the sky the swelling of the sea is
inferred. Noting the rise of the star called Agastya some infer
that the birds are resting upon the dry sea-shore, forming a
long line.Nyayamanjari
When the ants proceed in a long line and carry off their
eggs on their mouth the travellers anticipating imminent rain-
fall by inference make haste to repair their thatched cottages.
Thus we see that there are various reasons which constitute
the sound basis for inference but invariable concomitance is not
based upon the laws of identity and causality.
The popular view of invariable concomitance, based upon
the laws of identity and causality, has been neglected by the
philosophers of extensive knowledge. The Buddhists prompted
by sheer puerile obstinacy, are eager to lend their support to it.
It is a logical blunder to hold that the reason is either an
identical term or an effect. In the Buddhist logic, the middle
term and the major term denote the two concepts. The con-
cepts are negative in character as they embody exclusion.
Thus, the ground and the consequence remain confined in the
imaginary world of concepts, i.e., negation. But the invaria-
ble relation of concomitance subsists between the particulars
which are objectively real. And it is held to be an object of
conceptual knowledge in the Buddhist system. How does it
conform to the Buddhist Logic? We have elaborately dis-
cussed this point in the first chapter. There is no special
occasion for dilating on this point. In fine, the major premise
which conditions the conclusion refers to the relation of con-
comitance subsisting between the middle term and the major
term. It does not point to the invariable connection based
upon the laws of identity and causality as the disciples of
Buddha have conjectured.
244
The Buddhists put this question to the Naiyayikas : "On the
dictation of which proof do they (the Naiyãyikas) hold the
indissoluble connection of the Buddhist school amounts to the
invariable concomitance of the Nyâya-school". The Naiya-
yikas also put the same question to the Buddhists : "On the
dictation of which proof do they (the Buddhists) know that
the laws of identity and causality are the source of indissoluble
connection?" (Of course, the answer of both the schools will
be the same, viz., observation). Nothing can be gained by this
unfruitful ramble.
Thus we have explained invariable concomitance. Let us now
see what is suggested by recollection, contained in the phraseRefutation of an Inference based upon the law of identity
the recollection of invariable concomitance'. Our contention
is as follows:
245
Generalisation always precedes the deductive conclusion, i.e.,
inference. It is nothing but the discovery of the universal rela-
tion holding between the middle term and the major term. But
a man living in an isle abounding in coco-nut trees (nãrikela-
dvipa) cannot infer fire from smoke. When he infers fire he
does not observe the relation of invariable concomitance. But
when he observes the relation of invariable concomitance he
does not infer.
Hence, he has observed before the relation of invariable con-
comitance holding between the middle term and the major
term. When he tries to deduce the conclusion he presupposes
the major premise as its antecedent condition. But it flashes
in his mind as a judgment of memory. If the matter is care-
fully scrutinized by us then it is clear that the major premise
which precedes a deduction is a judgment of memory.
Does not the true knowledge of the object to be established
arise in our mind if we see the middle term as an invariable
concomitant of the major term? But we do not always recollect
the major premise.
When we infer something which has been repeatedly inferred
we do not remember that we recollect the major premise as the
condition of inference. Though it does not belong to our con-
scious plane, we must assume that it subconsciously precedes
our conclusion.
Some logicians hold that the recollection of the major pre-
mise, i.e., the invariable concomitance holding between the
middle term and the major term which is recalled in our mind
by the present condition, i.e., the perception of the reason is the
cause of inference. In some cases, the perception of the reason
as belonging to the subject of inference takes place. There
are some other cases where this perception does not take place.
We shall also discuss about the inference of supersensuous
objects such as God, the principle of merit and demerit, sense-
organs, etc, later on. Thus, when the invariable concomitance
holding between the middle term and the major term is remem-
bered in a manner described above, the knowledge of the object246
Nyāyamanjari
to be established by means of the true reason is called an
inference. This is the final conclusion of the Nyaya-school.
An Objection to the Validity of Inference
If inferential knowledge is valid then there is scope for dis-
cussion about its definition. But its validity does not stand
the fire of criticism.
The primary meaning of the word 'pramāṇa' (the source of
valid knowledge) is only accepted-but not its secondary mean-
ing. Hence it is very difficult to find out the meaning of the
word 'anumâna'-the means of inferential knowledge. The
primary meaning of the word 'linga' (mark or reason) is to be
sacrificed. The secondary meaning of it is to be accepted.
It denotes in a secondary sense such a mark or a reason as
belongs to the subject of inference. Such a meaning of the
term is not sound. Suppose, if we try to establish that fire
belongs to some particular place, say, a hill, then the well-known
reason does not belong to it (the subject of inference). Because
specified smoke which plays the part of a reason does not belong
to the minor term. (Smoke the origin of which is linked up
with fire is the true reason). This sort of smoke belongs to
fire but not to the hill. If the hill is to be inferred then the
relation of invariable concomitance does not subsist between
the hill and smoke thus specified. Because we cannot genera.
lize that where there is smoke there is a hill. Again, if it is held
that both the hill and fire are to be inferred then smoke, the
reason, neither belongs to the minor term nor is the invari-
able concomitant of the major term. Because such smoke does
not belong to both the hill and fire and moreover, we cannot
generalize that where there is smoke there are both the hill and
fire. Again, if the hill as containing fire is to be inferred then
the above reason does neither belong to the subject of inference
nor is, invariably, concomitant of the major term. No body
perceives that smoke belongs to the hill which contains fire. No
body generalizes that where there is smoke there is a bill which
contains fire. The conventional meaning of the term 'pakşa'
according to which it denotes the subject of inference having
the object to be established as its attribute is to be abandoned so
that the reason possesses the characteristic of belonging to theAn Objection to the Validity of Inference
subject of inference. The secondary meaning of it is to be
accepted. It signifies, now, only the object to be established. Thus
the secondary meaning represents only a portion of the primary
one. Thus the relation of invariable concomitance is shown to
subsist between pakṣa in the secondary sense and hetu (the
reason). Thus, the definition of anumana (inference) turns out
to have a secondary meaning like the definition of perception
according to which perception is what arises from the sense-
object-contact. Therefore, inference is not a source of valid
knowledge.
247
The other points of criticism are noted below. If a particular
object is to be established then the relation of invariable con-
comitance between it and the reason cannot be established.
(We may infer fire but cannot infer the particular fire which
belongs to the hill in question. If we infer fire in general then
we apprehend what has been already apprehended. It is like
doing what has been done. Moreover, fire, having no peculiar
trait of its own exists nowhere. Hence the talk of inference is
an absurdity.
It is an act of foolishness to pin faith in concomitance as an
invariable relation because though we experience a hundred
instances of concomitance holding between the two terms yet we
notice cases where such concomitance does not take place.
All objects change in character when their time, space and
circumstances alter. Hence, it cannot be held with certainty that
the so-called relation of invariable concomitance remains con-
stant for good.
The capacity of all objects changes as their time, space and
circumstances alter. Hence, it is very difficult to infer an object
on the basis of our previous experience.
Even if we admit that the relation of invariable concomi-
tance exists, it is very difficult to discover it without the shade
of doubt unless and until we apprehend all the objects of the
three worlds. We may entertain a doubt about the origin of
smoke from a cause other than fire so long as we do not perceive
all the particulars of smoke and fire as causally connected.
The persons who like you (the reputed Naiyāyikas) can
directly perceive all the objects of the universe are to be assumed248
Nyayamanjari
as endowed with the divine eye. Do they feel the slightest
necessity of inferring an object?
If the Naiyayikas hold that the relation of invariable con-
comitance is not confined within the realm of particulars but
obtains between the two universals, we, the Cārvākas, take a
strong exception to this view since a universal has no objective
existence in the real universe. (Thus, the possibility of disco-
vering the relation of invariable concomitance by means of the
transcendental contact in the shape of a universal is ruled out).
If it is repeatedly observed that one thing goes along with another
thing then it is not decidedly concluded that the relation of invari-
able concomitance obtains between them. Because in the face of
the repeated observations of concomitance say, a thousand times,
a tentatively accepted probans has every chance of not accom-
panying the expected probandum. A particular character of
property or relation of an object has been repeatedly observed
by you. But when the very same object is observed by you in a
different time and place you see it to be entirely different.
We do not join issue with you if you definitely hold that
smoke accompanies fire. But how do you arrive at the conclu-
sion on the score of repeated observations that smoke does not
exist in the locus where there is no fire?
If we merely observe the concomitance of the two things in a
particular place, we cannot infer the presence of one of them
in another place from the perception of the presence of another.
Because, a probans cannot be the invariable concomitant of a
probandum unless and until it is definitely known that the
probans absents itself from a place where the probandum does
not exist.
If the relation of invariable concomitance is definitely gra-
sped then we admit that the knowledge of that invariable con-
comitance is the invariable condition of inferential knowledge.
But it is also a fact that the relation of invariable concomitance
cannot be ascertained if we are not sure of the fact that a
probans does not belong to a locus where its probandum does
not exist.
If the Naiyãyikas hold that the knowledge of the presence of
a probans in a similar instance and that of its absence in a
contrary instance lend to the unmistakable discovery of theEstablishment of the Validity of Inference
249
relation of invariable concomitance then we point out that
they subscribe to an impracticable hypothesis. We, of course,
approve of the thesis that a probans in order to be an invari-
able concomitant must not belong to a contrary instance. But the
number of contrary instance is innumerable. Let us take a con-
crete case to illustrate the point in question. There are many
places in the universe where fire does not exist. They constitute
the contrary instances where smoke should not exist if it is an
invariable concomitant of fire. It may be possible for a super-
man to behold all these places and thereby to discover the rela-
tion of invariable concomitance obtaining between smoke and
fire. But it is impossible for an ordinary man like us to perceive
all these contrary instances.
In fine, we come to the conclusion that either the relation of
invariable concomitance does not exist or if it exists at all, its
perfect discovery is next to impossible. Hence, the Naiyāyikas
should give up all hopes of establishing the validity of inference.
If the Naiyāyikas are not satisfied, we adduce a further proof
which is sure to invalidate an inference. Let us examine the
syllogistic process itself. Examining it we find that every syllo-
gism is fallacious. The truth of the third premise has not been
established but has been simply assumed. The property of in-
variable concomitance does not belong to the probans.
Therefore, the thoughtful logicians, having failed to be con-
vinced of the validity of inference, have sincerely advised all
persons to relax their confidence in the efficiency of inference.
If a blind man who gropingly proceeds through a hazardous way
depends mainly upon inference then his fall is inevitable.
Moreover, some logicians who are adept in syllogistic reason-
ing deduce a particular conclusion with much care to explain a
fact. Some other better logicians do not share in the view of the
earlier ones but explain the same fact in a different manner.
(Hence, inference is not a reliable instrument of knowledge
since it is not the source of perfect knowledge).
The Establishment of the Validity of Inference
A reply to the above objections runs thus :
What is the exact import of the objections raised by the
Cārvākas? Do they intend to invalidate inference per se, or,250
Nyayamanjari
do they find fault with the several definitions of inference
offered by the different logicians of the Nyaya school? They
cannot confute the validity of inference per se since its validity
has been universally accepted.
A woman, a child, a cow-herd, a cultivator and such other
persons know another object (lying beyond the ken of their
sense-organs) by means of its sure mark with absolute certainty.
If validity is denied to inference then all worldly transactions
cannot be conducted with the mere help of perception. All the
people of the world should remain motionless as if they are
painted in a picture.
The man in the street accepts or rejects perceptible object
when he infers that it is conducive to pleasure or pain from
the mark that it is similar to the object experienced before as
such.
If the objectors hold that the beauty of inference lies in its
inexplicability because neither the validity of inference per se
can be confuted nor it can be defined. This admission amounts
to this that the sole target of objection is the definition of
inference. Such an objection is unsound because of the follow-
ing reasons. The perception of any object does not lead to the
inferential knowledge of any other object. But the knowledge
of some particular object leads to the inferential knowledge of
some other particular object. This is the law which governs
inference.
But if it is held that such knowledge takes place because of
the inner essence of all objects then the real problem is only
avoided but not solved. Our experience teaches that the know-
ledge of the relation of invariable concomitance makes infe-
rential knowledge possible. Thus, on the basis of the knowledge
of an object, the knowledge of some other object takes place.
Hence, we conjecture that there is some relation between the
objects if the knowledge of one of them leads to the knowledge
of the other.
Those who are conversant with this relation have no faith
in the hypothesis that the laws of identity and causality govern
the relation in question. We, the Naiyãyikas, believe that it is
the relation of invariable concomitance which counts. The
relation of invariable concomitance implies that if the probansEstablishment of the Validity of Inference
exists in a locus, the probandum exists there and that if the
probandum does not exist in a locus, the probans does not
exist there.
251
What is the ground of this relation? If it is answered (by
the Buddhists) that the relation of invariable concomitance is
based upon the laws of identity and causality then we point
out that the question is not squarely solved but it persists as it
was before.
Let them (the Buddhists) solve the problem, viz., why does
smoke arise from fire but not from water? The only possible
answer is that smoke and fire are so related because we learn
their relation from experience. If this is the answer then the
relation of invariable concomitance requires no laws besides
experience as its basis. How do we know that the relation of
invariable concomitance obtains between the two objects? The
answer is because experience teaches us that they are so
related. The answer given by the Naiyāyikas is in no way
different from that given by the Buddhists.
The field of reasoning is well-defined. It plays its part well
only within its limited sphere. But we cannot explain why
there are fundamental differences in the inner essence of
objects by means of reasoning. We have got to accept the
data of our knowledge but not to explain them. Reasoning is
not competant enough to do it.
Again, a suggestion may come that an object points to
another object because of its own inner essence but not because
of the relation of invariable concomitance. We point out in
this connection that such a suggestion is not amenable to
reasons because the knowledge of one object does not lead to
that of another if these two objects are not known to be
connected by the tie of invariable concomitance. Hence
inference presupposes the knowledge of the relation of invari-
able concomitance as its necessary condition.
Now, the opponents may raise a further question : viz., why
does the relation of invariable concomitance hold between the
two objects? The enquiry regarding the basis of this relation
will not be reasonable since the declared basis of this relation,
viz., the law of identity and causality has been already discre-
dited by sound logical arguments. Hence, the relation of252
Nyayamanjari
invariable-concomitance will only be elaborately discussed. It
is not fair to hold that inferential knowledge is merely a
judgment of imagination. Because, it has been stated that if an
object is an invariable concomitant of another object then and
then only the knowledge of the former leads to the knowledge
of the latter. If the mere presence of the relation of invariable
concomitance without being cognized had led to the knowledge
of its invariable concomitant then the inhabitants of the island
which bears a significant name 'nārikela' (the island which
abounds in coconut-trees) would have inferred fire merely
seeing smoke but not knowing its invariable relation to fire.
But it is a truism that in such cases inference is absolutely
impossible. Therefore, the Naiyāyikas strongly assert that the
knowledge of the relation of invariable concomitance definitely
conditions inference. It has been stated by the Carvākas to
negate the thesis of Naiyāyikas that it is impossible to establish
the relation of invariable concomitance holding between the
two objects.
In order to counteract the objections raised by the Cārvākas
some logicians hold that the relation of invariable concomi-
tance (holding between the two objects) is grasped by the
inner perception.
The elaboration of their view is as follows:-A man perceives
that smoke and fire co-exist in the same locus. He compre-
hends by means of the method of difference that smoke is not
present in the locus where fire does not exist. Then he
synthesizes the results obtained by the joint method of agree-
ment and difference and frames a judgment by means of the
internal organ that smoke is the invariable concomitant of fire.
Is there any logician who will not subscribe to the thesis
that all the objects of the universe are within the reach of the
internal organ since it is powerful enough to grasp an object
which lies beyond the range of the external sense-organs? But
it should also be noted that in order to comprehend the rela-
tion of invariable concomitance obtaining between smoke and
fire it is not necessary that all the particulars belonging to the
classes of smoke and fire should be perceived. We are to
comprehend this relation as obtained between the two univer-
sals. In this case, we are to know that the relation of invari-Establishment of the Validity of Inference
253
able concomitance obtains between all particulars of smoke
and those of fire taking only note of their class-characters.
The Cārvākas and some other logicians have stated that a
universal is not objectively real. This point of view will be
refuted in the chapter on the meaning of words. Some other
logicians hold that a sort of perception which is as good as
the transcendental perception of the sages is to be postulated in
order to grasp the relation of invariable concomitance. They
state the reason behind the assumption of this distinct kind of
hypothetical perception. The relation of concomitance obtain-
ing between the middle term and the major term may be
determined by means of the universals inhering in them (these
two terms). The relation of concomitance holding between smoke
and fire amounts to that of concomitance subsisting between
the universals of smoke and fire. The positive aspect of the
relation may be grasped by extra-ordinary perception acknow-
ledged by the Naiyãyikas. But the negative aspect of the relation
should also be grasped in order to grasp its invariable character.
Therefore, we should also know that smoke does not exist in
the locus where fire does not exist. The locii of the absence of
fire are innumerable. No universal as non-fireness inheres in
all such locii. Hence they (all locii of the negation of fire) are
beyond the range of mental perception even. The relation of
invariable concomitance holding between smoke and fire cannot
be grasped if we do not perceive that every particular of smoke
in this universe goes along with some particular of fire and no
container of the absence of fire contains smoke. If this relation
is not grasped in this manner, it cannot produce sound
inferential knowledge. It has been proved that inference is a
source of true knowledge. As effect must have its cause. There-
fore, an act of perception which grasps the relation of invari-
able concomitance cannot but be admitted. This perception
should also be admitted to grasp all the particulars concerned.
Though we are not aware of its mode of operation, it is based
upon sound logic. Hence, they hold that this type of percep-
tion has only logical existence.
Some logicians of the Mimãāṁsa school are not convinced of
the justification of the logical existence of the hypothetical
perception described in the preceding para. Thus, they holdNyayamanjari
that a universal judgment that the middle term is the invari-
able concomitant of the major term is framed on the basis of
the repeated observations of the cases of the concomitance of
the middle term and the major term. They further add that the
knowledge of the absence of the middle term on the locus
where the major term does not exist is not necessary for the
framing of the above universal judgment. It has been stated
that the concomitant probans leads to the knowledge of the
probandum though it is not actually experienced that the absence
of the probandum is the invariable concomitant of the absence
of the probans.
254
The purport of the above text is as follows :-
The universal judgment that this object is an invariable con-
comitant of that object, arises from the repeated observations
of the cases of their concomitance. The evidence of the
universal experience is on our side.
The universality of the universal judgment, i.e., the major
premise is like the truth of a general proposition. If the middle
term is found to exist in the contrary example then the univer-
sality of the major premise is counteracted just as a negative
example contradicts the truth of a general proposition. The
universality of the major premise, viz., where there is smoke
there is fire, is not so long counteracted as long as we are not
aware of the fact that smoke exists in a locus which contains
the absence of fire. They hold that if a judgment which counter-
acts the universality of a general proposition does not actually
arise then it is irrational to apprehend the possibility of such a
judgment. If a judgment which counteracts a general propo-
sition does not actually arise in our mind from experience then
one should not indulge in idle conjectures which may be expect-
ed to counteract the universality of it. (The Mîmāṁsakas hold
that a proposition is true unless it is contradicted by a contrary
proposition. Again, a contrary proposition does not arise if the con-
ditions of a proposition are not defective. A jaundiced man percei-
ves that a conchshell is yellow and generalises that all conchshells
are yellow. The general proposition, framed by him, is contra-
dicted. Similarly, if the major premise is based upon non-obser-
vation or mal-observation then it will be surely contradicted.
But if it is based upon sound observation, i.e., repeated obser-Determination of the Negative Counterpart of Concomitance
vations then there is no scope for the appearance of a counter-
acting preposition.
255
The Necessity of the Determination of the Negative Counterpart of
Concomitance
The above hypothesis is not sound. Without the confirma-
tion of the negative hypothetical judgment, viz., if the proban-
dum does not exist there, the relation of concomitance holding
between them is not established to be invariable. This point
has been discussed in the chapter on presumption. The relation
of invariable concomitance is indicative of an object. Hence,
it does not reveal an object by its mere presence but a person
must be aware of the relation in order to infer an object. The
relation of invariable concomitance holding between the two
objects is exactly this that if the concomitant middle term
exists at a spot then the major term does not exist there then
the concomitant middle term also does not exist there. The re-
peated observation is that which cognizes the relation in its
entirety. If such observation grasps only the positive aspect of
the relation then it is only partially comprehended since the
other aspect of the relation, viz., the negative counterpart, re-
mains unrealised.
Some other logicians hold that though it is a truism that all
the locii of the absence of fire are not united by a universal and
that the hypothesis of the transcendental perception is not
worthy of being accepted yet the relation of invariable con-
comitance in its entirety, i.e., in the positive and negative
aspects is comprehended by the internal organ.
As we perceive the co-existence of smoke and fire and frame a
universal judgment "Where there is smoke there is fire", on the
basis of our perception, so we perceive the co-existence of the
absence of fire and that of smoke. We are in a position to frame
a universal negative judgment, viz., where there is no fire there is
no smoke because water and such other objects where fire does not
exist are never perceived to contain smoke. Though it is a fact that
the universals are omnipresent yet it does not mean that all the
universals exist everywhere by means of the relation of infer-
ence. (Let us take a concrete case to illustrate the point in
question. The perception of the relation of agreement that256
Nyayamanjari
where there is smoke there is fire together with the perception the
negation of smoke in a river where fire does not exist stimulates
the imaginative perception to discover correctly the invariable
relation of concomitance holding between smoke and fire.
To discover this relation between them it is unnecessary to
behold all locii of the negation of fire.
As we convey the positive aspect of the relation of universal
concomitance by means of a general proposition because the
relation holds between the two universals. But it is difficult for
us to convey the negative counterpart of the relation of uni-
versal concomitance by means of a general proposition because
the individual negations of the terms entering into the relation
of concomitance rest upon the different loci which have no
common property. But the difficulty is thus solved. The indivi-
dual negations of the terms may be expressed in a universal
negative proposition since a reference to the locus of negation is
not an essential element in the above proposition. When we say
that there is no fire we do not refer to all the individual cases
of fire, existing in different places and negate them. But we
simply hold that there is no such object as is characterized by
the universal of fire-ness. If an object negated is characterized
by a universal then the negation of it is expressed by means of a
universal negative proposition. The determination of universal
concomitance does not involve a necessary reference to all the
individual cases as its condition.
As the relation of concomitance holds between the two posi;
tive objects so it obtains between the corresponding negative
terms. The relation of concomitance obtaining between the
two positive objects is called the positive aspect of the relation
(anvaya). The relation of concomitance holding between the
negative terms corresponding to these positive terms is called
the negative counterpart (vyatireka) of the relation. If the middle
term and the major term are negative then the relation of con-
comitance holding between them constitutes the positive aspect.
But the relation of concomitance holding between the corres-
ponding positive terms is called the negative counterpart.
As the positive aspect of the relation of invariable concomit-
ance holding between the two negative terms is perceived so theFive conditions of sound Reason
negative counterpart of the relation of invariable concomitance
holding between the two negative terms is surely perceived.
257
The concomitant (the reason) and the major term (the con-
sequence) in the relation of concomitance follow a definite
order. But the negations corresponding to the above two terms
are also related to each other by the relation of invariable con-
comitance but their order becomes reverse in the negative
counterpart. In other words, the negation of the concomitance
of the positive aspect becomes the major term in the negative
counterpart; and the negation of the major term of the positive
aspect becomes the concomitant of the negative counterpart.
It should be noted that the same rule applies to the case of
the relation of universal concomitance holding between the two
negative terms. The negative term, corresponding to the posi-
tive term which plays the part of a concomitant in the positive
aspect, becomes the major term. The negative term, corres-
ponding to the positive term, which plays the part of a major
term becomes the middle term in the negative universal propo-
sition. The universal proposition is framed on the basis of the
reference to the above two universals. The negation of smoke
is not grasped if smoke is not characterized only by smoke-ness,
similarly the negation of fire is known. But it is derived from per-
ception. Similarly, a major premise which involves a reference
to the negative terms is also universal because they represent the
positions of the universals. As the transcendental perception of
a sage is not required for the framing of the former proposition
so it is not necessary for the production of the latter one. The
relation of universal concomitance holding between the two
positive objects and between the two negative objects is de-
tected by the internal organ. No need of further discussion.
Therefore, it has been proved that the relation of invariable
concomitance is objectively real and that there is a source of
comprehending it.
The establishment of the five conditions of a sound reason
We cannot infer an object existing in a place unless and
until we perceive that its reason is there though we are definitely
aware of the fact that the relation of universal concomitance258
Nyayamanjari
holds between the reason and the consequence. Hence, the per-
ception of the reason for the second time is required as one of
the conditions of inference. (To find out the relation of univer-
sal concomitance the reason has been firstly perceived), the
belonging of the reason to the subject of inference is called
pakṣadharmată (The minor premise of the western logic is the
pakṣadharmatâ of the Nyaya Logic). (But we must be sure of
the fact that the reason belongs to the subject of inference. This
condition of the reason is directly apprehended by perception).
If it is definitely known that the reason belongs to the subject
of inference and that the relation of invariable concomitance in
both its aspects, positive and negative, obtain between the
reason and the consequence even then the reason is invalidated,
provided that the presence of the consequence in the subject of
inference is disproved either by perception or by verbal testi-
mony or by some counter-argument. Two more conditions
should be fulfilled by the sound reason in addition to the three
conditions, generally accepted by the logicians, viz., the pre-
sence of the reason in the subject of inference, its presence in
the positive examples and its absence from the negative ones.
The presence of the consequence which the reason accompanies
in the subject of inference should neither be contradicted nor
be disputed by a counter-argument, The existence of inference
cannot be disputed because it is based upon universally sound
experience. Similarly, the definition of the proof as framed by
the Naiyāyikas is sound. The Cārvākas have levelled a charge
against it that the definition is not expressive of the object to be
defined. But if they carefully examine it then they themselves
will ascertain that it is faultless. Even if they have a special hat-
red against the definition of inference, they cannot deny exist-
ence to inferential knowledge.
The refutation of the secondary charges against the validity of
inference
We fail to understand the other charges levelled against infe-
rence. It is as follows:The 'pramana' (the source of valid
knowledge) has not been primarily used in the present context.
Hence, it is next to impossible to find out any meaning out
of the word 'anumâna'. The line of defence is this that theA retort to objections to the validity of Inference
259
defect in the use of words subtracts nothing from the nature
of true knowledge, the goal of definition. Even if we admit for
the sake of argument that the words such as paksadharma
etc., have been secondarily used then does it suggest that the
true knowledge itself defined by it has been partially express-
ed? If the definition is newly worded then the purity of know.
ledge will not be affected.
The last charge brought against the validity of inference is
that if a particular is the consequence then no reason is its
concomitant and that if a universal is the consequence then an
old story is only repeated (a known object is established).
This charge is also not very fair. A universal itself is not
inferred. The presence of a universal in the subject of infe-
rence is inferred but not a bare universal. The suffix 'matup',
conveying the sense of belonging to', clearly points to the
Nyaya stand-point.
A retort to Objections
The objectors have described a good number of pitfalls of
inference, viz., changes in circumstances, space and time
which transform an object to a considerable extent. But they
are not really fatal to inference. If the relation of universal
concomitance is truly grasped then there is no chance of
invalidation on the part of an inference. If an act of inference
is contradicted then the person who infers is to blame (but
the critic should not find fault with the process of reasoning).
The objectors have also stated that an inference is easily
invalidated either by a counter-argument or by perception or
by such a reason as is the invariable concomitant with what is
contrarily opposed to the original consequence. This statement
is nothing but the vain wasting of words since if a sound
reason is employed then no such disaster ensues.
If the reason employed in the counter-argument is really
sound then the reason, employed in the first argument does not
prove the consequence. The so-called reason does not deserve
the title 'reason' but is a child of fancy. For this very reason,
it illustrates fallacy. We shall discuss this point later on. If a258
Nyayamanjari
holds between the reason and the consequence. Hence, the per-
ception of the reason for the second time is required as one of
the conditions of inference. (To find out the relation of univer-
sal concomitance the reason has been firstly perceived), the
belonging of the reason to the subject of inference is called
pakṣadharmată (The minor premise of the western logic is the
pakṣadharmată of the Nyâya Logic). (But we must be sure of
the fact that the reason belongs to the subject of inference. This
condition of the reason is directly apprehended by perception).
If it is definitely known that the reason belongs to the subject
of inference and that the relation of invariable concomitance in
both its aspects, positive and negative, obtain between the
reason and the consequence even then the reason is invalidated,
provided that the presence of the consequence in the subject of
inference is disproved either by perception or by verbal testi-
mony or by some counter-argument. Two more conditions
should be fulfilled by the sound reason in addition to the three
conditions, generally accepted by the logicians, viz., the pre-
sence of the reason in the subject of inference, its presence in
the positive examples and its absence from the negative ones.
The presence
of the consequence which the reason accompanies
in the subject of inference should neither be contradicted nor
be disputed by a counter-argument, The existence of inference
cannot be disputed because it is based upon universally sound
experience. Similarly, the definition of the proof as framed by
the Naiyâyikas is sound. The Cārvākas have levelled a charge
against it that the definition is not expressive of the object to be
defined. But if they carefully examine it then they themselves
will ascertain that it is faultless. Even if they have a special hat-
red against the definition of inference, they cannot deny exist-
ence to inferential knowledge.
The refutation of the secondary charges against the validity of
inference
We fail to understand the other charges levelled against infe-
rence. It is as follows:--The 'pramåņa' (the source of valid
knowledge) has not been primarily used in the present context.
Hence, it is next to impossible to find out any meaning out
of the word 'anumâna'. The line of defence is this that theA retort to objections to the validity of Inference
defect in the use of words subtracts nothing from the nature
of true knowledge, the goal of definition. Even if we admit for
the sake of argument that the words such as pakşadharma
etc., have been secondarily used then does it suggest that the
true knowledge itself defined by it has been partially express-
ed? If the definition is newly worded then the purity of know-
ledge will not be affected.
259
The last charge brought against the validity of inference is
that if a particular is the consequence then no reason is its
concomitant and that if a universal is the consequence then an
old story is only repeated (a known object is established).
This charge is also not very fair. A universal itself is not
inferred. The presence of a universal in the subject of infe-
rence is inferred but not a bare universal. The suffix 'matup',
conveying the sense of belonging to', clearly points to the
Nyaya stand-point.
A retort to Objections
The objectors have described a good number of pitfalls of
inference, viz., changes in circumstances, space and time
which transform an object to a considerable extent. But they
are not really fatal to inference. If the relation of universal
concomitance is truly grasped then there is no chance of
invalidation on the part of an inference. If an act of inference
is contradicted then the person who infers is to blame (but
the critic should not find fault with the process of reasoning).
The objectors have also stated that an inference is easily
invalidated either by a counter-argument or by perception or
by such a reason as is the invariable concomitant with what is
contrarily opposed to the original consequence. This statement
is nothing but the vain wasting of words since if a sound
reason is employed then no such disaster ensues.
If the reason employed in the counter-argument is really
sound then the reason, employed in the first argument does not
prove the consequence. The so-called reason does not deserve
the title freason' but is a child of fancy. For this very reason,
it illustrates fallacy. We shall discuss this point later on. If aNyayamanjari
defectless reason is properly employed then it does not dis-
appoint us by its failure to prove the conclusion. On the other
hand it rightly proves the conclusion as it does no disservice to
the cause of the validity of an inference.
If a man reaches his goal by means of sound reasoning then
he can never be compared with a blind man who gropingly
proceeds.
260
If sound logicians take cautious steps to arrive at a conclusion
then the conclusion cannot be retroverted by mere accusation.
Non-acceptation of inference as a source of valid knowledge implies the
stop of all worldly transactions
Those who are more adept in logic hold that inference admits
of two types, viz., utpannapratiti (objects inferred are familiar)
and utpadya-pratiti (objects inferred are unfamiliar). The
inference of God, etc., illustrates the second type.
Whoever does not approve of the common process
of reason-
ing e.g., the inference of fire by means of smoke, the reason,
they freely exercise their power of reasoning and prove the
consequence by means of the reason, without being tutored by
the logical discipline of the Naiyāyikas.
Those who are in the know of the reality of all objects refuse
to believe in the validity of such inference as proves the
existence of the soul, God, the omniscient and the next world.
The unsophisticated persons cannot so long follow such con-
clusions as are drawn by the Tärkikas from their premises as
long as their mind is not polluted by the crooked logicians.
These remarks simply speak of their atheistic turn of mind or
of their ignorance but do not confute the validity of inference.
The process of reasoning is not invalid because the method of
knowing the relation of universal concomitance is complicated.
The said relation is discovered by means of some of the
following sources viz., the verbal testimony, the act of infe-
rence, the indirect method of reductio ad absurdum and percep-
tion. The difference in the nature of the source itself does not
introduce any change into the nature of the relation of univer-
sal concomitance.
When the problem of God will be discussed it will be elabo-The Sutra's definition of Inference
261
rately proved that the evidence of inference bearing upon God
etc., is very strong. No need of a long talk at present.
Subscribe to our thesis that inference is a source of valid
knowledge. Its validity is not discredited by your faultfinding
remarks.
We have already remarked that if the validity of inference is
not acknowledged then all persons will be motionless like the
statues of stone.
The Sutra containing the definition of inference explained
Having established the validity of inference we shall now
resume our duty of defending the terms of the sutra which
defines inference. The word 'anumanam' of the sutra denotes
the object to be defined. The portion 'tat-purvakam' consti-
tutes the definition. 'Tat' is a pronoun. It signifies perception
which follows from the context. The compound word 'tat-
pūrvakam' conveys that which owes its existence to perception.
If the apparent meaning of the word is accepted, the definition
of inference becomes too wide as it comprises 'comparison', 'the
final ascertainment of a thesis' etc., within itself. In order to
make the definition exact by excluding them from the province
of inference the expounding sentence should have the initial
word in the dual number. Thus, the meaning of it will amount
to this that inference is that of which the two acts of perception
are the cause. Are any two perceptions the cause? No, any
two perceptions are not the cause of inference but the two such
acts are to be specified. One of them is that which discovers
the relation of universal concomitance. The second one is the
perception of the presence of the reason in the subject of
inference. The two constitute the cause of inference alone
but not of comparison, etc. The perception of the universal
concomitance is not the immediate cause of inference. It exerts
its influence in and through its memory revived. The perception
of reason in the subject of inference is the direct cause of
inference.
An objection to this sort of interpretation arises in our mind.
Perception which is supplied by the context is a non-specified
one. The pronoun 'tat' refers to it. How does the interpreter
give the twisted meaning of it, viz., the two specific percep-262
Nyayamañjari
tions? A reply to this objection is as follows: The definition
of the reason to be given later on is this that the reason is that
which proves the object to be established through its similarity
with the example. The reason is the instrument of inferential
knowledge. Hence, it is the object of the present definition.
The reason cannot prove the object to be established if its
similarity with the positive example and its dissimilarity with
the negative one are not cognized. Hence, one should depend
upon the source of such knowledge. We are to move in a
vicious circle if we have recourse to some source other than
perception. We have very often drawn the attention of our
critics to this point. Though the context supplies us with
perception in general but not the particular perception which
lies at the root of inference yet the pronoun 'tat' refers here
to the particular perceptions, viz., the perception of the
universal concomitance and the second perception of this
reason.
Now, an exception is taken to this definition. It is pointed
out that it still remains too wide as the previous definition has
been since it applies to some other forms of fallacy such as
'Savyabhicāra', 'Viruddha' etc. This objection does not hold
good since the reason has been qualified by the adjective clause
'which proves the object to be established'. In case of fallacy
the reason does not prove the object to be established. The
true nature of the relation of universal concomitance will be
minutely discussed in its proper place. But the source of the
knowledge of universal concomitance is only stated here. If
perception rightly discovers the relation of universal concomi-
tance then no fallacy of reasoning can ensure since the relation of
invariable concomitance is not taken amiss. If we define the
species of anumana, having repeated all the generic features as
its property then the definition of anumana excludes all falla-
cies since it is a species of pramă (true knowledge). In order to
make this definition exact it is to be shown that it sharply
distinguishes the species of inference from the other species such
as comparison, etc, which are subsumed under the same genus
of prama. The compound word 'tat-pūrvaka' which constitutes
the definition does it nicely. All the species of valid knowledge
share the following characteristics in common. They are asThe Sutra's definition of Inference
follows: "Which arises from the real object', 'which accords
to its object' and 'which is determinate'.
A word and the reason do not function together to produce
inference. Hence, inferential knowledge should not be defined
as avyapadeśya (non-verbalísed) experience. A word and the
reason do not produce knowledge by themselves but their
knowledge produces the desired effect. Two pieces of know-
ledge do not arise simultaneously. Hence, the verbal and the
inferential characters of a piece of knowledge cannot be simul-
taneously recognised.
263
Now, the defect of being too wide may be mended. But how
do you meet the objection that the definition is too narrow
since the definition does not apply to that inference the reason
of which is known by means of the verbal testimony, etc. Some
logicians meet this objection to this effect that perception is
the basic foundation of this knowledge.
Kumärila has stated that when the reason itself, being
inferred, proves the object to be established it is proved by
another fundamental reason that is perceived.
Another alternative view may be suggested here. The hypo-
thesis that inferential knowledge is dependent upon perceptual
knowledge signifies that the latter is generally dependent upon
the former and that there is no hard and fast rule that perception
is the only cause of inference. Hence, the definition is not too
narrow. In order to have the clear understanding of the
compound word 'tat-pärvaka' it should be explained by the
expounding sentence that inferential knowledge is that of
which the other forms of knowledge constitute the condition.
How are the mediate forms of knowledge denoted by the
pronoun tat'? It can only refer to perception since it only
precedes the sutra on inference. The preceding sutra contains
the definition of perception. In order to define it the other
forms of knowledge are distinguished from it. Thus, all the
forms of knowledge do not remain absolutely unknown. Hence,
it will not be out of context if the pronoun 'tat' refers to them.
Some thinkers take an exception to this definition. They ask
whether the pronoun 'tat' signifies the instrument of perception
of the resulting consciousness. If it denotes the instrument of
perceptual knowledge, the compound word 'tatpūrvaka' should266
Nyayamanjari
the reason. Now they should explain the question "How do the
words like pūrvavat, etc., signify the three conditions of the
reason, viz., the presence of the reason in the subject of infe-
rence, etc. ?"
Some logicians hold that the word 'pūrva' denotes the subject
of inference in a particular universe of discourse, viz., three
kinds of controversy with discussion based upon the rules of
logic at the head since it (the subject of inference) receives the
first attention. The word 'pūrvavat' denotes the reason since the
latter belongs to the subject of inference as has been clearly
expressed. The word 'seșa' denotes a similar instance since this
locus is definitely known to contain the object to be inferred.
The word 'seşavat' denotes the reason which belongs to a similar
instance. Thus, it has been suggested that the reason belongs
to the similar instance. Thus the second condition of the reason
has been indicated by the word 'seşavat'. The compound word
'sāmānyatodṛṣṭa' suggests that the reason does not belong to
contrary example. How is this meaning derived from it? The
compound word is sãmânyato-adrs tam since the vowel 'a' has
been inserted into it without any change in its sound. There is
no trace of the reason, not to speak of some form of presence.
Now, the locus of its absence is to be specified. From which
locus is it absent? It belongs to the subject of inference as well
as to the similar example. Only the contrary example remains
to be specified. No trace of the reason is to be found in the
contrary example. Thus the above three words point to the
three conditions of the reason. Anumâna is that knowledge
which depends upon the three conditions of the reason.
Some logicians hold that all the words of the sutra constitute
the definition of anumâna. The sutra, thus interpreted, does
not display the skill of its author in framing a definition.
It has been assumed in this science of logic that five condi-
tions are necessary for a sound reason. If a reason has only
thres conditions then the reason which has been adduced in the
fallacy of Lalatyaya-apadista (the contradictory reason) or of
prakaraņa-sama (counter-argument) should also pass for a
sound one. Hence, only the compound word 'tat-pūrvaka'
serves the purpose of a defectless definition.
The word 'trividha' (three-fold) expresses the division ofMeaning of the word Pūrvavat
267
anumana. The words 'pūrvavat', etc., denote the three kinds
of anumana which has been defined by the compound word
'tat-pūrvaka' and bears also the epithet 'Nyaya'. The nomen-
clature of the divisions clearly points to the three-fold character
of anumana. But why does the author of the Nyaya-sūtra use the
word 'three-fold? Surely, he is not here particular about the
economy of language as he is not elsewhere. He names the
different types of Siddhinta, Śabda and Chala and mentions
their number as well.
The Meaning of the word Purvavat
When an effect is inferred from its cause it illustrates the type
of inference called 'purvavat'. We infer that rain will come
when we behold the cloud gathering in the sky.
Some logicians take an exception to this thesis. They hold
that the term 'pūrva' denotes a cause. The word 'pūrvavat' de-
notes an effect since an effect has a cause. Thus, the primary
meaning of the word 'pūrvavat' is an effect. Thus, the type of
inference which is called 'pūrvavat' is to be illustrated by the
inference of a cause by means of an effect but not by the infe-
rence of an effect by means of a cause. It is impossible to infer an
effect from a cause. First, it is unreasonable to think that an
effect is a subject of inference. Is it existent or not? If it is exis-
tent then what else is to be established? If it is non-existent, it,
being unreal like the sky-flower, cannot be the subject of infe-
rence. Now, the syllogistic argument may be put in the form
that an effect exists because its cause is existent. In this case, the
reason and the consequence are two inco-ordinate objects. It is
as absurd as is the syllogism that sound is non-eternal because
the crow is black. Now, in order to establish the existence of
an effect, if we posit the existence of a positive condition as a
reason then the reason does not belong to the subject of inference.
It is an example of asiddha fallacy (the unreal reason). In
order to prove the above consequence if the presence of its nega-
tive condition, i.e., the presence of the pre-negation of the
effect is adduced then the contradictory negation of the conse
quence is proved by some other source of valid knowledge.
Hence, it is a case of contradictory
reason if the existence of both
conditions, positive and negative, is put forward, then it simpl268
Nyayamanjari
illustrates the fallacy of the fallacious reason (anaikāntika).
How can we establish the existence of an effect?
The existence of the positive condition constitutes the un-
sound reason. The existence of conditions positive and negative
constitutes the unsound reason. The existence of the negative
condition constitutes the contradictory reason. How can the
consequence in question be established ?
Again, to prove the existence of an effect a non-specified
cause cannot serve the purpose of the reason since the relation
of universal concomitance must hold between the reason and
the consequence. A particular effect is generated by a specific
cause. Hence, a non-specified cause is sure to illustrate the in-
sufficient reason. If it is held that the specific cause will be put
forward as the reason then it will be pointed out that even a
wise person fails to find out a specific cause. The following
illustration is sufficient to bring home our point. Sometimes we
notice that massive clouds which are as dark as the leaf of a
lotus-plant and look like moving mountain vanish into
nothingness without shedding a drop of rain.
If it is held that the cause from which the effect follows in
immediate succession constitutes the reason then the very effect
will be perceived when the remembrance of the relation of uni-
versal concomitance takes place. In other words, the inference
of an effect is simply superfluous.
The unholders of the original thesis may contend that the
Buddhists also lend support to their view. They also hold that
an effect is inferred from a cause. The Buddhist text runs to this
effect. The appearance of an effect is inferred from the totality
of all conditions. It has been described as identical with the
conditions since it depends upon nothing else.
The fools have failed to understand the Buddhist text. They
misinterpret the word 'utpâda'. It denotes the capacity for pro-
ducing an effect. Its root-meaning is that by which an effect is
brought into existence. This capacity which belongs to the con-
ditions is here inferred. It is not different from the conditions
themselves. Hence, it is an instance of analytical inference. The
correctness of our interpretation has been borne out by the
portion of the verse 'sa svabhāvo' anuvarnitaḥ.Meaning of the word Pūrvavat
269
Some other logicians (some Mîmāṁsakas) join issue with the
objectors and sharply condemn them. They hold that the objec-
tions have been raised by such persons as are not adept in the
framing of syllogisms: An effect is not here the subject of infe-
rence. Its existence is not the consequence in question. An
inco-ordinate reason is not applicable. But the clouds are the
subject of inference. It is to be established that they contain
rain which will drop in the immediate future. The gathering of
the clouds in the sky and such other features of them constitute
the reason. Hence, the objections mentioned above have no
scope. We may cite an example to confirm our statement. This
smoke is fiery because it has darkish white colour like the smoke
in the kitchen. (The proposition that this smoke is fiery is in
the sense that this smoke co-exists with fire in one and the
same locus). What is established by an act of inference is that
smoke has fire. In a similar manner, we hold that those clouds
will shed rain in the near future because they have assembled
in the sky etc. like the clouds experienced before. Hence, the
clouds which contain the future rain are inferred. Kumārila
Bhaṭṭa says to this effect. The subject of inference containing
the consequence is an inference. The spot which contains fire
is to be inferred in this manner. Some other logicians hold that
the smoke, which is generally adduced as the reason, may also
be the subject of inference.
The word 'purva' truly denotes a cause. The word 'pürvavat'
denotes the property of a cause. Let us take a concrete case.
The cloud is the cause of rain. Its property, viz., the gathering
of the cloud in the sky etc. is signified by the term "pūrvavať".
This property constitutes the reason. Moreover, there is no
linguistic defect in the statement of the proposition. A non-spe-
cified cause has not been stated as the cause of rain. Thus, there
should be no chance of noticing the absence of rain in spite of
the presence of the cloud. The cause has been specified. It is
not at all difficult to find out the specific cause of an effect.
The cloud which rends the cave of a mountain by its thun-
dering looks like a black bee, or a wild buffalo or a black
cobra or a Tamåla tree and the massive body of which becomes
frequently tawny brown being lit up by the constantly flickering270
Nyayamanjari
light of the slender line of lightning never fails to associate it-
self with rain.
If you do not subscribe to this view then it may be pointed
out by way of protest that fire should not be inferred from
smoke, having some specific property. Thus, the vital force of
inference will be destroyed. In other words, if the specific
character of a cause or of an effect cannot be detected then the
very possibility of inference is cut off.
If an effect is held to be inferred from the immediate ante-
cedent cause then it is apprehended that it is sure to be perceiv-
ed earlier. But such a fear is unreasonable. When we actually
infer rain, drops of rain do not fall on our head from the cloud.
At least our experience does not give evidence to such a situa-
tion. Such knowledge is inferential as points to the consequence
which is beyond the range of our sense-organ at the time of in-
ference. We shall cite such examples where rain does not
actually fall but is imminent.
(Let us take another example, make a comparative time
estimate between inference and perception of a future object
which will shortly come into existence and see which of these
two takes place earlier). The object in question is a piece of
cloth which has not been as yet produced. The last thread is
moving for conjunction with the other threads which have
been already conjoined in order to produce the piece of cloth.
There is no obstacle to its production as no movement that
may destroy the last thread is noticed in the fibres of it-
the very constituents of thread. No fear of its non-appear-
ance is entertained. This is the situation when the above piece
of cloth is inferred from the movement of the last thread for
conjunction with the rest. Now, we see that the piece of cloth
is known earlier by means of inference than by means of per-
ception. Let us compare and contrast the two processes of know-
ledge side by side and see the possible length of time to be
taken by each of them for the apprehension of the said object.
That is to put it in one word, let us see the time-limit of infe-
rence. First let us perceive the mental movement and see the
time-limit of inference. First, we perceive the movement of the
last thread for conjunction, then remember the relation of uni-
versal concomitance, then apply this relation to the particular271
Meaning of the word Pürvavat
reason present in the subject of inference and lastly arrive at
the conclusion that the consequence is present in the subject of
inference. Thus, we see that three or four moments are required
from the start to the finish. Secondly, perception cannot also
take place if the object is not present. Let us at first count the
different moments of the operations of the causal factors that
precede the apearance of the piece of cloth to be perceived and
calculate all of them from the same starting point. The first
moment contains the movement of thread. It is followed by
separation. It does away with its previous conjunction. The
new combination of the thread takes place. Then, the piece of
cloth cmerges into existence and it does not possess its colour
and other attributes. These attributes appear in the next
moment. The piece of cloth is the material cause of its attri-
butes. The cause must precede its effect since it is accepted by
all that a cause and its effect cannot be simultaneous. From
the above statement it is clear that when the above piece of
cloth comes into existence it is devoid of colour. It cannot be
perceived at the moment when it is produced. It becomes a
coloured object when its colour appears in the next moment.
When our sense-organ will come into contact with the coloured
object our perception will take place. Thus, we see that a good
number of moments intervenes between the starting point and
the perception of the object in question. Therefore, it is un-
reasonable to hold that there are cases in which the perception
of a future object takes place earlier than its inferential know-
ledge.
The non-appearance of the said effect owing to the absence
of its condition or cause is not possible. The cause has been
qualified by a clause which shows that there is no destructive
movement in the parts of the cause. Hence, no apprehension
arises in our mind that the cause is to meet its destruction be-
fore the production of its effect. Hence, the starting movement
for conjunction is to be necessarily followed by the series of
effects in the proper order. The above mentioned Buddhist text
has been interpreted as an illustration of the inference in
question, being analytical in its character, has been already
refuted. The people infer an effect from the competent cause
but not from capacity. No need of further discussion.272
Seşavat
The Seṣavat type of inference is that by which a cause is
inferred from its effect. Let us take an example viz., we infer
rain in the country over which the river has flown, seeing its
peculiar current. In the above example in accordance with the
strict syllogistic form the contact of the river with the ante-
adjoining-country which has heavy shower of rain is to be in-
ferred. The swelling of the river due to this contact is the
reason. From the abnormal swelling of the river the contact of
the river with such an ante-country is inferred. The river is in
contact with an ante-country (a country over which it has flown)
where a heavy shower of rain has fallen because it has its stream
studded with foams, muddy and very rapid (strong) like a river
seen before in a similar condition.
Nyayamanjari
Or, a particular country may be the subject of inference in-
stead of the river. This country is adjoined to another ante-
country which has heavy shower of rain because it has a river
with swollen stream. If we adoptany one of these two syllogisms
then our reasoning will not be open to the charges of the inco-
ordination between the reason and the consequence etc. It is
merely a verbal statement that a cause is inferred from its effect.
But, in reality, the subject of inference plays the part of the con-
sequence as well as that of the reason as it has different aspects.
Kumārila Bhaṭṭa has clearly stated to this effect. He holds
that the subject of inference is both the consequence and the
reason. It becomes the consequence when it is qualified by some-
thing which has not been established. It also acts as the reason
when it is qualified by something which has been experienced
or determined before. (As a container of an unknown content
it becomes the consequence whereas it is the reason when it
contains the known content.) The swelling of a river is due to
many a condition such as the collapse of embankment, snow-
break etc. Hence, a particular cause cannot be inferred from
an effect. (It is an objection on the ground of the plurality of
causes). The objection is met in the following way.
Who can know that the peculiar swelling of the river-the
swelling which is only due to the heavy rain-fall? The river
abounds in eddies, having its water risen very high. Its water
is very dirty. The stream is studied with setting foams owing toMeaning of the Word Sämänyatodista
the wild dance of waves. If man fails to see the peculiarity of
an effect, he is to blame since there is nothing wrong with the
syllogism, based on the relation of universal concomitance.
Let us take the objections one by one and discuss their
merits. If the current of the river is embanked somewhere then
the waters of the river swell somewhere else. Hence, the swel-
ling of the river is not due only to the heavy shower of rain.
Thus, the reason in question is insufficient.
When the ants come out of their nests and march in a line
and carry off their eggs, we infer rain from the above move-
ment of ants. But if the sticks are thrusted into the nests (holes)
of ants then they come out and march for another shelter.
Hence, we cannot safely infer rain from the movement of ants.
The reason in question is uncertain. But if the sticks are thrust-
ed into the nests (holes) of ants then they come out and
march for another shelter. Hence, we cannot safely infer rain
from the movement of ants. The reason in question is un-
certain.
At the advent of the rainy season we infer rain on hearing
the scream of peacocks. Sometimes such an inference is falsi-
fied. Suppose, somebody exactly imitates the scream of a
peacock. If he infers rain, hearing human cry then his
inference is surely falsified. The embankment of the flowing
river, the molestation of ants' nests (holes) and human cry
similar to the scream of a peacock do not contribute towards the
insufficiency of the reason. On this flimsy ground it is improper
to invalidate an act of inference. On a closer examination it is
not difficult to find out a true reason and distinguish it from a
false one.
Rain-fall is the remote cause of the swelling of a river. At
the outset drops of rain fall on the ground from the cloud. Then
they mingle together and flow into the river.
273
The Meaning of Samanyatodrsta
When we infer the consequence from the reason which is
neither a cause nor an effect this inference is styled as sāmā-
nyatodṛṣṭa. Let us take an example, viz. the taste of a wood-
apple is inferred from its colour and so on. Colour and taste
co-inhere in a wood-apple. They are not causally related to274
Nyāyamañjari
each other. Even from the Buddhist point of view these two
distinct momentary events which are com-present are not
mutually related by the causal nexus. If we infer the taste of the
subject of inference from the colour inhering in it, the objections,
mentioned before, such as the reason not belonging to the
subject of inference etc. are really pointless with regard to the
above inference. But the commentator of the Nyaya-sūtra has
given a different example of this type of inference. It runs
thus The sun has motion because he comes into contact with
the different objects at distant places. This example is not
appropriate. The contact with the different parts of the horizon
or the sky or the space is not perceptible, but that of the sun
with a hill (a perceptible whole) is perceptible. We really
infer a cause from its effect. Therefore, the example in
question is an illustration of the seṣavat type of inference.
Moreover, what is the meaning of such a contact? The sun
does not come into contact with hills etc., situated at distant
places. Moreover, the reaching of a different place means
the contact with a different place. He does never come in
contact with a hill etc. If he does come into contact with any-
thing then he is in contact either with the sky or with the
space. But this contact is imperceptible because it inheres
also in the sky or the space. The perception of conjunction of
the perceptible objects is admitted only. The contact in ques-
tion is imperceptible like that of the air with a huge tree,
or, like that of a foetal child with its mother's womb.
Now, a logician may hold a brief for the commentator to
revise the above syllogism and assert that the reason is the
per-
ception of the sun in a different country but not the contact of
the sun with a different country. The perception in question may
also be traced somehow to the motion of the sun as its remote
cause. The motion of the sun is the direct cause of the contact of
the sun with the country. The perception of the sun at a distant
place is due to his motion. The revised syllogism runs thus: (The
sun is perceived at a distant country i.e., above distant garden
in the evening). The perception of the sun above the garden is
generated by the motion of the sun because it is a perception
at a different place or because it is denoted by the phrase 'the
perception of the sun in a different country' just like the275
Types of Inference
perception of Devadatta in a different country. Even if we
accept this revised syllogism we cannot but hold that the said
perception of the sun is the indirect effect of the motion of the
sun.
Darśanatva is not a universal belonging to all cases of percep-
tion like the universal of gotva (cowness) which inheres in all
cows. But the suffix 'tva' attached to the word 'darśana'
denotes an abstract noun. It denotes the power to produce
'perception'. It is not supersensuous and eternal. It is nothing
but the accessory condition of perception itself.
Hence, it is identical with the contact of the sun with
another country. Such a contact is produced by his motion. In
a similar manner, it may be pointed out that if the reason is
denoted by the word 'darśana' then the type of the inference
will remain the same. The contact with another country, is
possible only through motion. The defenders have only used
another term to denote the reason. But they fail to make any
actual improvement. The perception of the sun at a distant place
is possible if the sun has motion. What is the result of such a
motion? He comes into contact with such a place. The percep-
tion of the distant sun is possible if he is in motion. The word is
really perception. But it simplification is the contact with a distant
place. The attempt at defence by a cover of a word cannot
protect the weak point. The same old reason turns up in spite
of the use of the new term 'darśana'. Hence, the revised
syllogism is nothing but an instance of the Sesavat type of
inference.
In fine, the instance of the samanyatodṛṣṭa type of inference
as cited by the commentator on the Nyâya-sūtra is not sound.
The instance, shown by us, viz., the inference of taste from
colour, is up to the mark. We have shown many instances of
syllogistic arguments in which the reason and the consequence
are not causally connected when we have disputed with the
Buddhists.
Further Types of Inference
Having assigned the above meaning (the sense of having
the suffix 'matup') the tripartite division of inference has beenNyayamanjari
described. But this division has been discarded as a house of
cards by the logicians. The reason establishes the consequence
because the relation of universal concomitance holds between
them, but not because the reason is either the cause or the effect
of the consequence. Therefore, the above three-fold division
has no solid ground to stand upon. The suffix 'matup' is to be
replaced by the suffix 'vati'. The basis of division should be
different. The division has been given in a different manner
and sense. Let us see what is signified by the pūrvavat type of
inference. Whenever we discover the universal relation of con-
comitance holding between the reason and the consequence,
we perceive them thoroughly and distinctly. If we establish the
homogeneous consequence on the perception of the homoge-
neous reason, they are similar to those reasons and consequen-
ces which have been perceived before. Hence, this type of
inference is designated as pūrvavat. Let us take an example to
bring home our point. In a kitchen we find that smoke and fire
co-exist. In a hill we infer fire from smoke. Now a question
arises in our mind. We definitely apprehend all the distinctive
features of an object by means of perception. But we cannot
know the details of an object by means of inference. How is an
act of inference similar to that of perception? Truly so. But the
particular reason which is perceived along with all its details
establishes fire which is similar to the fire as experienced before.
As there is no difference with regard to their distinctive features
so it will not be unreasonable to hold that the act of inference
is similar to that of perception.
The seṣavat type of inference throws light on residue. It is
an indirect proof. In order to explain a fact there are many
possible alternative suggestions. If all the possible rival sugges-
tions are cancelled and other suggestions are considered to be
irrelevant, then the remaining one is definitely known to us to
be the cause.
276
The example of it is as follows: Suppose, we infer fire at a
spot. We have simply a general knowledge of fire. Now we try
to find out its fuel. What is its fuel? Several hypotheses are
suggested to our mind. We entertain a doubt about its fuel. We
think that it may be produced either by the dried-up grass or
by dry leaves or by faggots. When they are eliminated, noTypes of Inference
other hypotheses that fire is produced by an earthen lamp or
by a piece of stone are worthy of being entertained. The con-
clusion that fire is produced by the dried clod of cow-dung is
indirectly arrived at. The indirect proof of the hypothesis that
sound is a quality will also illustrate that type of inference.
There are six broad divisions of Reality in the Vaiśeşika
Bhâsya. Let us settle the question that sound comes under
which division. We have no proof positive to establish our
hypothesis. Sound may be either a substance or a quality or
an action. Let us leave aside the hypothesis that sound is a
quality. And let us try the other two. Sound may be either a
substance or an action. These two possible alternative sugges-
tions are refuted. The other alternative suggestions that sound
is either a universal or the relation of inference or exclusive
particularity are not attended to as they are impossible. Hence,
it is indirectly inferred that sound is a quality. This type of
inference is called as śeşavat because the remaining one is
inferred. (In other words, we have a number of possible hypo-
theses with regard to an object before our mind. We leave one
of them aside. We examine the rest and find them to be inade-
quate. At the same time we do not waste our time over the
scrutiny of absurd hypotheses. Then we hold that the residual
hypothesis is proved.
The Sâmânyatodrsta type of inference is as follows: The
consequence is a super sensuous object. It is not perceived
even when the relation of universal concomitance is discovered.
Moreover, it is to be noted that the relation of universal con-
comitance does not obtain between the reason and the conse-
quence but between the universal of the reason and a universal
which belongs to the consequence. When an imperceptible
object is inferred on the basis of the relation of universal con-
comitance between the two universals it is called the sâmânyato-
dṛṣṭa type of inference. Let us take an example, viz., we infer
the existence of the organ of hearing from the auditory percep-
tion. The sense-organs are supersensuous objects. Hence, they
are never perceived. But we have discovered that the act of
hewing and such other acts depend upon an instrument such as
an axe, etc., as their cause. Thus we infer the instrumental cause
from the act of perception such as hearing, etc.
277278
Nyayamanjari
Some take an exception to this line of interpretation with
the suffix 'vati' attached to the stem 'purva'. They point out
that if we subscribe to this view then there should be only one
type of inference but the three-fold division of inference should
not hold good. The reason which has not been known to be an
invariable concomitant does not prove the consequence. The
individuals, belonging to the classes of the reason and the con-
sequence, are innumerable. Hence, it is different to discover the
positive and negative aspects of the relation of universal con-
comitance obtaining between the reason and the consequence.
Therefore, we should hold that the said relation of universal
concomitance is a generalisation. Such an abstract relation of
universal concomitance is known alike in all the three types of
inference. The so-called three types should merge into one type
which bears the title of 'pūrvavat' since they are all similar to
one another.
Such an objection is not tenable. Though they are similar
from the broader point of view yet there are vivid minor diffe-
rences among them. If you hold that all the said different types
of inference are one because all inferences are grounded upon
the relation of universal concomitance then we admit your
contention to be true. But our point of view is this that though
they are all similar because of the same common property yet
they may be classed under the three different types because of
their other differences. Let us illustrate our point. Smoke and
fire have been perceived before. Now we infer the same fire
from the same smoke. Hence, this type of inference has been
designated as 'pūrvavat'. It signifies that this type of inference
depends upon perception as its cause.
Now, a question arises in our mind that if we infer fire which
has not been perceived from such particular smoke as has not
been seen at the time of the discovery of the relation of uni-
versal concomitance then does this inference depend upon per-
ception as its cause? Who says that it does not belong to the
type of 'pūrvavat ?' If it be so, how do you define 'pūrvavať' as
an inference of the same fire from the same smoke? The
answer is that we do not mean the particular but the universal.
As you take notice only of the universals but not of the
particulars so the pūrvavat type of inference should be identified279
Sesavat and Sämänyatodṛṣta distinguished
with the sâmânyatodrṣṭa type of inference. This objection does
not hold good since the consequence in the samânyatodṛṣṭa type
is only an inference, being imperceptible. In the other type of
inference which is grounded upon the method of residue the
consequence is known only through the process of elimination
of the possible ones. Our previous illustration that this fire is
produced by the dried clod of cow dung or that sound is a
quality points to this direction. In the samanyatodṛṣṭa type of
inference the consequence which is imperceptible by its nature
is inferred. The inference of the auditory organ has been men-
tioned as an example. Therefore, inference admits of three-
fold division because of the possibility of these differences. This
division is also amenable to reasons.
We have no need of placing the different examples before
our readers. The three different types of inference may be
shown to apply to one and the same example. Desire, being an
effect, has a locus to stand upon because it partakes of the
character of an effect like a jar. If a locus is only to be establi-
shed then it is an example of the pūrvavat type. If a distinct
locus is to be established by a process of elimination of the
possible ones such as the body, the sense-organs, etc., then it
illustrates the śeşavat type. As the locus which is to be estab-
lished is a supersensuous object so it is also an example of the
sāmänyatodṛṣṭa type.
The Distinction between the sesavat type and the sāmänyatodṛṣṭa type
In which aspect does Seşavat differ from Sämänyatodṛṣṭa ?
The procedure of Sesavat is one and that of Sämânyatodṛṣṭa
is another. Desire, being an effect, stands upon a locus which
is other than the body, etc., because it partakes of the charac-
ter of an effect and because of the cancellation of the judgment
that the body or any material object is the seat of desire. This
is the mode of operation of Sämänyatodṛṣṭa. Seșavat operates
in this way. The body or the sense-organ or the inner organ is
the possible locus of desire. The possibility of each of them of
being a locus is cancelled. The possibility of being a locus of
desire is not to be extended to time, space etc. Therefore, the
residual substance, viz. the soul is the seat of desire. There is
no hard and fast rule in the Sesavat type of inference that the280
Nyayamanjari
consequence must be a supersensuous object. The fire, kindled
by the dried clods of cowdung is proved by means of it. The
consequence of Sämänyatodṛṣṭa is always a transcendental ob-
ject. Therefore, the threefold division of inference has been
nicely stated.
Some other philosophers (the Mimāṁsakas) on the other
hand hold that Samanyatodṛṣṭa is that type of inference in
which no particular similar to the consequence has been per-
ceived even at the time of the discovery of the relation of uni-
versal concomitance. The illustration of it is the inference of
power of action. An action which belongs to Devadatta re-
mains imperceptible. The judgment that Devadatta moves
refers only to Devadatta since his action is not perceived. The
judgments that Devadatta stands still and that Devadatta moves
refer alike to the same person.
The predicate of the judgment is a compact series of con-
junctions and disjunctions. Hence, this judgment does not
always arise. If an action is a transcendental object then can we
infer it? The answer to this question is as follows. An effect is an
event in time. So, it depends upon its cause for its coming into
being. If the substance-in-itself is its cause then effects will
constantly issue of it since the paramount cause is always there.
But the effect does not always come into being. Hence an ac-
tion which is distinct from the cause is inferred, It should be
noted that power is also thus inferred. An action and power are
intrinsically transcendental. The syllogistic argument which
proves them is a particular type of inference. The person who
goes to infer the consequence has perceived no such particular
before, i.e., its species. It is not an inference of the particular
because it is impossible to discover the relation of universal
concomitance holding between the particulars. The thesis that
all actions are transcendental is not reasonable. All actions are
motion of which upward movement and such other movements
are the species. This movement is referred to by the judgment
"It moves" and so on. This is a perceptual judgment. Hence,
it is not tenable that all actions are an inference. If conjunction
and disjunction would have been referred to by such a judg-
ment then the form of the judgment should have been that it is
united and disunited but not that it moves since the judgmentSesavat and Samanyatodṛsta distinguished
accords with its object. We classify the objects of the universe,
following the difference in the nature of reference of judgments.
Otherwise, the awareness of a jar should have referred to some-
thing else. If the judgment that it moves refers to its conjunc-
tions and disjunctions then an object which stands still should be
referred to by the judgment that it moves since it has every
possibility of containing both conjunction and disjunction.
A stable post on which a hawk sat and from which it flew
away should be referred to by the judgment that the post
moves. Now, the Mīmāṁsakas may contend that the judgment
involving of movement refers to a continuous series of conjunc-
tions and disjunctions but the above judgment does not hold
good. The past and future conjunctions and disjunctions are
included in the series. But they can never be perceived. Hence,
we should take note only of present conjunctions and disjunc-
tions. If Devadatta stands still after having walked some
distance then conjunction and disjunction belong to him. As
such why should not he be referred to by the judgment that
Davadatta moves?
281
The ground is also seen to contain an uninterrupted series of
conjunctions and disjunctions. It should also be referred to by
the judgment that the ground moves like the men moving on
the ground.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend that the predicate
*moves' is asserted only of that person whose action brings
about conjunction and disjunction and that the predicate in
question does not apply to the ground since it does not produce
them (conjunction and disjunction) not action in itself. If
they go so far then it is proper to admit that the above predicate
refers only to an action but not to conjunction and disjunction
since such a reference is established by the joint method of
agreement and difference. If conjunction and disjunction are
referred to by the predicate 'moves' then they have to explain
why they hold that the person moves but not the ground though
both the person and the ground contain alike conjunction and
disjunction. Now, the Mimamsakas may further contend that
the judgment that Devadatta moves is only to be framed but
not the judgment that the ground moves because the action of
Devadatta is only responsible for conjunction and disjunction.282
Nyayamanjari
Such a contention is not tenable. The action being supersensuous,
we fail to know whether the action inheres in Devadatta or in
the ground since it is only inferred from its effect, viz., conjunc-
tion and disjunction. But the effect is shared in common by
both Devadatta and the ground. Now, our experience teaches
that the following judgments under the specified conditions do
not arise in our mind. When Devadatta walks on the ground
we do never judge that the ground moves. When the breeze
constantly blows over the banks of a river and has connection
with and disjunction from the slabs of stone on them we do
never judge that the slabs of stone move. Therefore we arrive
at the conclusion that the verb 'to move' refers only to an
action but not to conjunction and disjunction. When the bird
mounts high towards the sky we perceive that it flies. In the
unsupported sky no conjunction is perceived since such a contact
with the sky belongs to the supersensuous sky as well. It remains
ever imperceptible like the contact of the air with the tree. (If
the two conjoining terms are not perceived then their contact is
not perceived). It may be held that the contact of the bird with
a particular portion of the sky which is marked out by a flood
of light is perceived. But such a defence is not tenable. When
the sky is enveloped by the Tamala dark clouds we perceive in
the dark night that the glow-worm is flying.
In that sky there is neither broad light nor darkness having
parts. There no object with which the contact of the glow-worm
and from which its separation will be perceived. When the
earthquake takes place we experience that the earth is quaking
but neither conjunction nor disjunction is seen. Again, if it takes
place at mid-night of the dark fortnight, no object is seen but
the shaking of the earth is experienced. Hence, the awareness of
movement does not refer to conjunction, etc. but only to action.
Again, if an action is absolutely transcendental, it cannot be
inferred. You may hold that it may be indirectly inferred.
Every effect has a cause. Conjunction and disconjunction are
effects. Therefore, they have a cause. This cause is no other
than an action. Such an inference is not tenable since the
relation of universal concomitance cannot be established. For,
you hold that a substance-in-itself is not the cause of conjunc-
tion, etc., but is the cause when it is qualified by an action. AsSesavat and Sämänyatodṛsta distinguished
an action, being absolutely transcendental, is hard to perceive
so a substance as qualified by an action is imperceptible.
Moreover, it is very difficult to perceive the essence of a cause.
Hence, it is difficult to detect the relation of universal concomi-
tance even in a similar example like a jar, etc. But when we
infer a transcendental object like the soul we face no difficulty
since the object to be inferred has the dependent character.
We all perceive that a jar is dependent upon its cause, i.e.,
parts. Hence, in the similar example, the relation of universal
concomitance is perceived. Therefore, we come to the conclu-
sion that an action is not inferred from its effect. The action
is not also inferred from conjunction. The last effect of an
action is conjunction and the action perishes in the next
moment. Hence, an action which is actually present cannot be
inferred from conjunction, its effect. The predicate 'moves"
refers to a present action. It cannot be inferred from conjun-
tion and disjunction so long as it is present. An action comes
into being in the first moment. It produces in the second
moment disjunction which destroys the earlier contact in the
third moment. In the fourth moment it produces a fresh
subsequent contact with some other object. In the fifth
moment it passes away. The subsequent contact is not per-
ceived when it comes into being since the perception of an
object is causally determined by its object. If it (the subse-
quent conjunction) is the reason of the inference of an action,
the perception of the reason is necessary. When such percep-
tion takes place the action has passed away. Hence, the
action which is actually present cannot be inferred. The
hypothesis that an action is an inference has been refuted in
the general introduction. The hypothesis that supersensuous
power is an inference is also refuted in the light of this criti-
cism. The hypothesis that supersensuous power is objectively
real has also been elaborately refuted in the earlier chapter
(i.e., in the section on presumption).
Hence, the inference of transcendental action and power is
not an instance of the Samanyatodṛṣṭa type of inference. The
illustration of this type has already been given.
We have explained the terms 'pūrvavat' and 'Šesavat' either
by attaching the 'matup' suffix or by attaching the ‘vati' suffix.
28312
Nyayamanjari
perceived as qualified by time. In other words, time is a
predicative predicate in a perceptual judgment. The judg-
ments such as it has been gradually done', 'it has been simul-
taneously done', it has been quickly done, it has been slowly
done', etc. do not refer only to events since the diversity of
judgments presupposes the variety of objects. How is it that
colourless time is perceived? If you raise an objection like this
then how do you yourself explain the perception of colourless
colour? Or, how do you explain that the coloured atoms are
not perceived? Our experience can only give an answer to
these questions. Ask your experience and learn from it what
is perceived and what is not. Simply discover the facts but you
do not try to find out the 'why' of everything. Now, it may be
argued against the perception of time that among the sub-
stances only coloured ones are perceived. The perception of all
substances, is also not determined by it. If it had done so then
atoms would have been perceived. The law should be re-stated
in the following manner that all substances which are per-
ceived are coloured. Praśasta Deva has also said that only three
substances have perceptibility, colour and fluidity. It is not a
divine mandate so that it should not be transgressed. A mere
verbal statement cannot solve the problem, viz., which object
is perceived and which is not since the perceptibility of an
object lies in its being the object of an apprehension, produced
by a sense-organ. If it is perceived, you should not argue
against its perception on the ground that it is colourless. Let
colour belong to the earth, water and light. We have nothing
to object to it since they are experienced as such, i.e., colour-
ed. A man who keeps his eyes shut up cannot have percep-
tual judgments like these that it is quickly done, etc., since
they have a necessary reference to time. Therefore, time is
perceptible.
286
If time is perceived at all, why is not it perceived as a sub-
ject in a perceptual judgment like a jar? Our answer to this
query is that the intrinsic property of time is responsible for it
and time is not to blame on that account.
Time is always the predicate of a coloured object in a perce-
ptual judgment but is never a subject like a stick. (Though a
stick becomes a predicate in a perceptual judgment yet itInference of past, present and future Objects
287
becomes a subject in another judgment. But time becomes never
a subject in a perceptual judgment.) But the sky is never per-
ceived even as a predicate. The sky is imperceptible not
because it has no colour.
If it is held that when the coloured objects such as a stick,
etc., become a predicate they are perceived but the colourless
objects such as time, etc., are never perceived as a predicate.
Such a view is not tenable. The colourless predicates such as
universals, etc., are perceived. The law that the coloured
objects as a predicate are perceived may be restricted only to
the sphere of substances. But we point out that such restriction
is not possible as the reasons have already been stated. When-
ever objects are perceived with eyes whatever comes within
the range of eyes is perceived and it does not matter whether
the object is coloured or not or whether it is a substance
or not. Thus, we also perceive gold to be heavy and hence
gravity belonging to such substances, is perceived. The hypo-
thesis that gravity is only inferred from the falling down of the
substances which it belongs to, is not tenable.
Hence, whatever is perceived with eyes either as a subject
or as a predicate should be included in the list of perceptible
objects.
Therefore, time is a visible object, Space is also a percep-
tible object because of the same reasons though the hypothesis
in vogue holds that it is inferred from the concepts 'near',
*remote', etc.
Time is an Inference
Some other logicians hold that the judgments such as
'Devadatta has a stick'. "The lotus in blue', etc., are different
as their contents are diverse. They also hold that though time
is not perceived yet it is an inference because there are judg-
ments containing such peculiar contents as owe their existence
to time.
None can argue against the existence of time because it is
not perceived as he can neither deny existence to the bottom
of the Earth nor to the other side of the moon since neither of
them is perceived.288
Nyāyamanjari
Though impressions are transcendental yet as accessory con-
ditions they help the sense-organs to produce the recognitive
perception. Similarly, transcendental time produces such per-
ceptual judgments as refer to slowness, swiftness, etc. In
connection with the discussion about the definition of percep-
tion it has been elaborately discussed whether the difference
in the nature of perceptual judgments arises from the diversity
of objects or from the variety of conditions. It is needless to
reiterate the old matter.
We have arrived at the conclusion that determinate percep-
tion is not untrue. Hence the perceptual judgments which
refer to slowness, swiftness, etc., are not imaginary.
If we minutely observe an effect such as a piece of cloth or
a similar object and its coming into being then we come to
know that we cannot perceive all the conditions of it. Though all
the perceptible conditions such as threads, the beams set in a
loom, the shuttle, the weaver, ete., are the same yet we
perceive the effect in a different manner at different times.
Sometimes, we perceive that an effect is swiftly produced.
Sometimes, we also perceive that it is slowly produced. We are
to find out some other cause to explain the difference existing
in these two judgments.
Now, the objector presses his point that the above concepts
are not objectively determined by time but by actions such as
vibration, etc. Some vibrations are swift, some are slow. They
determine judgments such as it is swiftly done', 'It is slowly
done', etc. In other words, the objector explains time in terms
of known objects.
This view is not tenable. How does he explain swiftness or
slowness belonging to vibrations themselves? What will be
the objective ground of these concepts? There are judgments,
viz., ‘This vibration is moving very slowly', 'That vibration is
moving very swiftly', and so on.
Some hold that vibration is surely the sine qua non of these
judgments but it is not the ordinary vibration of Devadatta,
etc., which determines the ideas of succession, simultaneity, etc.
The vibrations of planets, stars, etc., condition them. Thus,
time is nothing but the vibrations of planets, stars, etc.Time as an Inference
The vibrations of planets and other heavenly bodies consti-
tute the basis of conventional time. The time which is
measured by us for our use such as yama (three hours) ahoră-
tra (day and night), prahara (one hour and a half), etc.
There is innate difference in vibrations. Hence, it is not diffi-
cult to explain different times. But if we subscribe to the
hypothesis that time is one, then in order to explain different
times current in the conventional world, one should assume
limiting adjuncts which impose limitation upon time. But if
we do not subscribe to the above hypothesis, we are not to
assume that different conventional times are due to the action
of limiting adjuncts. The different vibrations are not seen. How
will they be measured? The different units such as a 'danda',
'prahara' etc., are the means by which it is indicated. When
time is measured it is expressed by the sentences such as This
much time makes up a danda". This much time constitutes a
muhurta". This much time is taken up by a prahara", etc.
When many acts are performed in a particular moment or
within a prahara we know that they have been simultaneously
done. When they are performed in different moments we
know that they have been successively done. Hence, the objector
comes to the conclusion that the vibrations of planets, etc.,
themselves are time and that they are inferred from the invarí-
able mark, constituted by danda, prahara, etc. The astrono-
mers, who know the secret of time, subscribe to this hypothesis.
This hypothesis is not tenable. When we see the moon and
other luminaries we see their motion and other activities.
289
The sun has slowly gone down. The cold-rayed moon has
swiftly risen. Mars and Venus seem to have ascended simulta-
neously.
Now how are we to account for the term 'slowly' contained
in the sentence. The sun has slowly gone down'? Are we to
infer the vibration of some other planet in order to explain
it? If we do it then we are to face the charge of regressus ad
infinitum. Hence, we arrive at the conclusion that the vibration
of planets is not time and that time is a distinct substance.
Succession, simultaneity and such other terms are used because
they all contain a reference to time.Nyāyamanjarī
Does succession flow from the intrinsic nature of time which
has been assumed by you? If you answer the first question in
the affirmative then you should have held that succession
independently follows from the intrinsic nature of effects such
as a cloth, etc., which are being perceived by us and the
assumption of time is superfluous. If you answer the second
question in the affirmative then the new hypothesis is open to
the fallacy of regressus ad infinitum since each condition, being
dependant, requires the aid of another.
It will be foolish to indulge in such futile argumentation. We
can dispense with objects such as the white colour and so on
if we follow the above procedure. If a quality is white by its
intrinsic nature then let a substance to white be its intrinsic
nature and the hypothesis that a quality is a distinct object
is redundant. If it is held that a quality is white because
of its possession of another quality then the hypothesis is open
to the fallacy of regressus ad infinitum. You should not also hold
that the argument against the distinct reality of time holds good
since a similar argument against the distinct reality of quality
is available. The use of temporal expressions such as succession,
simultaneity, etc., with reference to events in tíme, viz., a cloth,
etc., is due to a distinct cause which is other than the events
themselves. Another cause should not be sought afterwards to
attribute causal efficiency to the above cause. Hence, time is the
cause of the use of temporal expression, viz., simultaneous, etc.
The ideas such as 'far' and 'near' based upon space, are dis-
tinct from those, viz., 'young' and 'old', based upon Time. If
time is not assumed then this distinction cannot be upheld.
Devadatta and other persons who occupy the distant spaces are
known to us as remote objects. They who occupy the near
space are apprehended as near objects. But if the former are
junior in age then they are cognised as young. But on the
other hand, if the latter are senior in age then they are cogni-
zed as old. Hence the temporal ideas such as 'prior' and
'posterior' cannot be explained if Time is not assumed. Hence
Time is thus inferred. Time is one in number like the sky.
It has no intrinsic diversity. Sound is the mark of the sky.
As sound remains always the same and as there is no such mark
as points to the diversity of the sky so the sky is one. Time
290Division of Time
291
is omnipresent in dimension since the use of temporal expres-
sions is everywhere noticed. It is partless since no parts, the
locus of the whole, are observed. As partless it is self-sufficient.
It is a substance because. (it requires no locus to stand upon.).
It is, also, eternal since the conditions of destruction viz, the
separation of parts etc. do never arise.
Three divisions of Time
Time is an individual. It admits of no division. How is
Time divided into three divisions, viz., the present, the past and
the future? As it admits of no division, so how do you hold
that the present, the past and the future objects are inferred?
Our answer to this question is this that time does not really
divide itself into three parts. But though the division of Time is
absent, yet in order to establish the conventional division of Time
some condition is assumed. What is this condition that imposes
apparent division upon Time? We answer that it is an action.
The three divisions of conventional Time, viz., the present,
the past and the future do not represent the real divisions of
an action of the abovementioned condition of Time. If they
(i. e., the present, the past and the future) really had done so,
then an action would be the only ground of all divisions of
Time. What is the necessity of assuming Time ? An action is a
series of operations which extend over a few consecutive
moments in order to bring about a result and is determined by
it i.e., the result. Let us cite an example to illustrate it. The
act of cooking rice is a series of operations such as the placing
of a pot, containing unboiled rice, on the burning oven, boiling
of water, reducing the rigid conjunction of the parts of rice to a
state of loose one and ultimately the softening of the parts of
rice and ending in the operation of elminating the watery
portion. The determinant of an act is its result. It has the
three parts (present, past and future). The act which com-
mences from the placing of a cooking pot on an oven and
ends in taking it down from that is called the act of cook-
ing. As it continues till the emergence of a result, i.c.,
boiled rice so it is called the present action, i.e., an action
covering the present time. The sentence 'He cooks' illustrates
it. The sky which is limited by a jar because of its association292
Nyāyamanjarī
with the latter is called the sky enclosed by a jar. Similarly,
Time which is associated with an action which extends over a
few moments and is characterized by it is called the present
one. A series of actions which are qualified yielded results
still characterizes Time. Such Time is called the past time.
The sentence "He cooked" illustrates it. Time'which is asso-
ciated with such an action is called the past one. An act
which is qualified by such result as will emerge is called the
future action. The sentence "He will cook" illustrates it. Time-
which is conditioned by such an action is thus called the future
one. Hence, the expressions the 'present', the 'past' and the
'future' apply to Time. Some hold that the present time does
not exist. They argue in the following manner : When a leaf
falls down from a tree the two spaces are only perceived, viz.,
the space which has been covered by it and the space which
will be covered by it but the space which it covers at the
present moment is not perceived. This argument is not relevant
since conventional time is not indicated by space. But it is only
indicated by an action. The manner of its indication has been
already described. The use of temporal expressions owes its
origin to the divisions of Time by means of acts. Some
temporal expressions represent the divisions of conventional
time, viz., Kṣaṇa (4 minutes), Lava (16 seconds), Kāṣṭhā (8
seconds), Kalā (4 minutes), Nālikā (24 minutes), Muhūrta (48
minutes), Yama (3 hours), Ahoratra (day and night), Māsa
(a month), Rtu (a season), Ayana (the half-year measured by
the sun's apparent course north to south of the equator) a period
of 6 months measured by the sun's motion either on the north
of the equator, or on the south of it, Samvatsara (a year),
Yuga (quinquennium or a period of twelve years or a period of
a few thousand years), Manvantara (Manu's period) and
Kalpa (a day of Brahman). It is needless any more to argue to
prove the existence of Time.
The ascertainment of various lunar days helps the perfor-
mance of the Vedic rites. Let us cite examples. One should
observe particular Vedic rites on the day of the full-moon and
on the day of the new-moon. Particular Vedic rites are observ-
ed during different seasons. The knowledge of the advent of a
season is gathered from the observation of distinctive phenomena.Determination
of Space
Let us cite examples. A Brahmin should kindle sacrificial
fire in spring, a Kşatriya in summer, a Vaisya in autumn
and a carpenter in the rainy season. But we are in a position to
know the different lunar days and seasons if we only calculate
the lunar motion and that of the sun in conjunction with the
different signs of the zodiac, following the method given in the
science of astronomy. There are also well known popular signs
by means of which the different seasons are detected.
When the cuckoos peck mango blossoms with the edge of
their bills and sing sweet notes we know the advent of spring.
When the creepers on the roadside wither, being dried up in
the scorching rays of the sun and we smell the sweet scent of
the jasmine flowers during our journey on road we know the
approach of summer.
When the hills put on a glossy appearance having clouds
over their peaks and the peacocks indulge in wild dance on
them, stretching out their spotted tail the setting in of the
rainy season is indicated.
293
When the sky as blue as the water of Jamuna is decorated
by the milky way, resembling a pearl necklace it indicates the
advent of autumn.
The breasts of the youthful damsels remaining warm in
spite of their prolonged enjoyment in the long nights welcome
the presence of the dewy season.
The wind, being saturated with frost, blows roughly, opens
the kunda-buds by its contact, speaks of the approach of
winter. Therefore, though Time is one yet becomes many,
being associated with the different actions.
Determination of Space
Space which has been established should also be considered
in the light of arguments similar to those already stated,
The ideas of the East, the West, etc., being different from
those of the objects, located in space, such as the idea of a
tree, etc., lead to the inference of a distinct cause. Though
Space is one because of the same mark yet it admits of tenfold
division.
When the sun circumambulates, the contact of its rays with
the different sides of the table land of the Mount Meru294
Nyayamanjari
serves the purpose of a condition that ideally divides Space
into the East, the West etc., and other directions. The diffe-
rent directions are the East, the South-East, the South, the
South-west, the West, the North-West, the North, the North-
East, the nether direction and the upper direction. As ten
deities preside over these ten directions so Space which is one
admits of ten divisions and these ten spaces acquire fresh desig-
nation after the gods such as Aindri (presided over by Indra),
Agneyi (presided over by Agni (Fire), Yamya (presided over
by Yama (god of death), Näirṛti (presided over by Nirrti,
(the evil spirit), Vāruņī (presided over by Varuṇa). Vāyavya
(presided over by Vâyu), Kauberi (presided over by Kubera),
Aiśānī (presided over by Îśäna), Nägiya (presided over by
Nāga), and Brāhmi (presided over by Brahman).
Another point draws our attention for the clarification of the
ideas of Time and Space. We infer Time and Space either in-
directly from a few judgments or directly from the existent
marks which are perceived. But the very ground of their infer-
ence gives us to understand that they admit of division. How is
it that each of them is one? When we know Time and Space it
is revealed to us that there are times and spaces. But we have
already discussed the matter and pointed out that all the ideas
of Time and Space, being similar in their nature, point to the
hypothesis that each of them is merely one. We also realise
that no times and spaces are absolutely real. What is the east
from one point of view is the south from another point of view.
The country which is to the east of Surāṣṭra is to the south of
Málava. The distinction between 'slow' and 'quick' is not abso-
lutely fixed. The time which is known as the future will be-
come the present and the past. Similarly, what is slow becomes
quick and vice versa. Hence, all differences of space and times
are only relative.
In other works of the allied systems of Nyaya and Vaišeşika
Time and Space have been elaborately discussed. For this reason,
the elaborate treatment of them has been given up. Moreover,
it is well known that in this world the garrulous persons are
despised by all.
The hypothesis that Time exists is proved. It is either perceiv-
ed or inferred. It admits of manifold divisions. But at the sameUpamana (Comparison)
time its manifold divisions are only conditional, i.e., relative.
Hence, Gautama, the author of the Nyaya-sutra, has concluded
that inference reveals the present, the past and the future
objects. This conclusion is sound,
The end of the chapter on Inference.
Upamana (Comparison)
295
In the Nyaya-sutra which treats the classification of Pramāṇa
Upamana has been mentioned after Auumana. Following the
serial order of the Pramāṇas the definition of Upamana is given
here.
Upamana is the knowledge of an object to be ascertained by
means of its similarity to a known object (N.S.I.).
The earlier logicians have described the specific character of
Upamāna thus: An assertion which enlightens the similarity of
an unknown object to a known one and helps to ascertain the
relation of denotation of a word and its meaning is Upamana.
A citizen who has never seen a gavaya (Boselaphus tragoco-
melu) but desires to know it, puts to an expert forester the
question, "What is the form of a gavaya ?" He replies that it is
like a cow. This instructive sentence informs of the similarity of
an unknown object to a known one and thereby communicates
that the term 'gavaya' denotes this unknown object.
f
This instruction, being itself composed by words, is no better
than that of a trustworthy person. Hence, it belongs to the
sphere of verbal knowledge and as such it should not be recog-
nized as a distinct source of knowledge. As it brings about a
distinct result, viz., the ascertainment of the relation holding
between a term and the object denoted by it, so it should be
held as a distinct source of knowledge. If we subscribe to such
a hypothesis then the member of distinct sources of knowledge
should be endless. Though the sentences of the ordinary persons
and the Vedic sentences consisting of injunctions and prohibi-
tions yield numerous distinct results yet they do not transcend
the domain of verbal knowledge.
A reply to this objection from the above standpoint is as
follows: When a person, according to his belief in the truth of
a word or out of his reverence for the utterer of a word, comes
to know independently of any other means of knowledge that
●Nyāyamanjari
the word correctly denoted the object which it stands for, the
word is recognized as the verbal authority since it is the inde-
pendent source of valid knowledge of an object. When a person
advises a person to adopt some other means of knowledge in
order to know the object it is not determined only by the ins-
truction. Words, i.e., the instructions, given by a reliable person,
play here only a secondarly part to enlighten the object in
question. We also see that they (words) play no important
part in a syllogism consisting of propositions, e.g., this hill is
fiery since it is smoky like a kitchen. The person who follows
the trend of the proposition knows that the hill is fiery. But he
comes to the conclusion not because of his implicit faith in the
veracity of the words, uttered by a reliable person without any
reference to the middle term but because of his knowledge of
the sound middle term and the sound premises. If the forester
had not instructed the means of knowing the gavaya, viz., the
similarity of a gavaya to a known cow to a citizen desirous of
knowing a gavaya then his instruction would have been the
verbal authority. But a gavaya is known by means of similarity
referred to by the above instruction. It is surely a distinct proof
though it consists of words. The citizen who sees the animal
does not merely know that it is denoted by the term 'gavaya'
from the instruction of the forester but experiences its similarity
to a familiar cow. Does not the citizen identify the animal by
the instruction of the forester? We do not deny that the instruction
has helped him to identify it. But it is a truism that his instruc-
tion purports to suggest some other means, viz., similarity
which points to its proper identification. The determination of
the animal which does not immediately follow from the hearing
of the instruction is not verbal knowledge but it is such know-
ledge as is obtained by comparison. Though the instruction,
given by the forester, consists of words yet it is reasonable to
hold that it is a distinct proof called comparison. It seems to
us that the lines of the commentary on the Nyâyasūtra in this
context bear evidence to this hypothesis. We do not quote
these lines as they will unnecessarily increase the bulk of this
work.
296
No more elaboration is required.
The contemporary logicians hold that the knower who hasObjections to Upamâna as a Distinct Proof
heard the instruction, given by the forester, directly perceives
that the unknown particular bears a close resemblance to the
known particular. This sensuous perception of resemblance
which is called upamâna generates the knowledge of the relation
between the term and the object denoted by it. Like the per-
ception of smoke it (the knowledge of resemblance) leads to the
identification of an object which has not been sensed though it
contains sensible property. Hence, it is a distinct proof. The
citizen, who has learnt the instruction, rambles in the forest, sees
an animal similar to a cow and then remembers the instruction
of the forester that a gavaya is like a cow. Recollecting it he
comes to know that the term 'gavaya' applies to it, that is,
this is denoted by the term (gavaya). The knowledge of the
relation between the term and the object, denoted by it, pre-
supposes the knowledge of the term and the object denoted by
it. The resultant knowledge that this is designed as a gavaya is
called upamiti. The proximate cause of it is called upamâna.
Perception is not competent to reveal the relation between a
term and the object denoted by it since the figure of a wild
gavaya is only sensed by him for the first time,
We do not even ascertain the relation between a word and
the object denoted by it hearing the instruction given by the
forester since when the forester has given the instruction the
animal 'gavaya' is not perceived. When we know for certain
that this is the word and that this is the object denoted by it we
distinctly know that a definite relation holds between the word
and this object, otherwise, we fail to do it. For this reason,
Kanada has stated that a name cannot be given to an object
unless the latter is perceived, as an effect cannot be produced
unless the material cause is within the reach of our eyes.
A Refutation of the Hypothesis that Comparison is a Distinct Proof
An objector subjects this hypothesis to severe criticism. In
answer to the question of a citizen the forester replies that a
gavaya is like a cow.
The above sentence purports to convey that an animal which
resembles a cow is a gavaya by name. It also throws light on
the relation holding between the term and the object, denoted
by it.
297298
Nyayamanjari
The above relation does not obtain between a word and an
individual since the individuals are innumerable. But it has
been decided that it obtains between a word and a class which
includes all the individuals in itself.
It has been stated that the perception of an object precedes
the assignment of its name and that of the material cause prece-
des the production of its effect. Is it a Vedic injunction? Can
nobody violate it? But the main purport of this statement is
that the knowledge of an object always precedes that of the
signification of a word.
The knowledge of the object may be acquired through per-
ception or through some other source of knowledge. There is no
hard and fast rule that the perception of an object should
always precede the knowledge of an object. The remembrance
of an object also, leads to the knowledge of the signification of
a word.
The animal which has been seen there is called a ruru (a
species of deer). Sometimes, we introduce an imperceptible
object by the mention of its marks and name it. Let us illustrate
this point. You will know the person to be Caitra-the person
whose teeth are long, body is covered with hair, complexion is
dark, stature is short, eyes are large and jaws are flat. Similarly,
it is not impossible to instruct a person that the name 'gavaya'
applies to an animal which bears a close resemblance to a cow.
It may be argued against the thesis mentioned above that if
the object is not perceived, the instruction that a gavaya is like
a cow is not believed to be true. It may be answered that
though the instruction is not accepted to be trustworthy yet the
relation of denotation holding between the word 'gavaya' and
the animal resembling a cow as suggested by the instruction is
not discredited as incorrect. But as long as we do not perceive a
gavaya, curiosity as to its form lingers in our mind and ins-
tantaneously dissolves with the perception of a gavaya.
In fine, the objector holds that the object which is established
either by perception or by verbal authority requires the help of
no other proof for its establishment.
The Establishment of the Thesis that Comparison is a Distinct Proof
The Naiyayikas of established reputation meet that aboveUpamāna as a Distinct Proof established
objection thus:-When we acquire the distinct knowledge of the
relation of denotation from the instruction of the said forester
(such knowledge is distinct from verbal knowledge) because the
object is not perceived at the time of receiving the instruction.
Though from the instruction we know a gavaya to be like a cow
yet we cannot rely upon this knowledge. This piece of know-
ledge by description is not so convincing that all our inquiry
about the known object gets a satisfactory answer.
The knowledge which arises from the instruction, being
heard, does not solve all the rational doubts about its con-
tent. Verbal knowledge carries with it a sense of completion
and depends upon no other proof for the complete expression of
its object. But the knowledge, derived from the instruction is
incomplete and depends upon perception for the right com-
munication of its object.
299
In this case the words of the forester fail to produce such
complete knowledge and hence it is highly probable that they
fail in their task.
If it is held that the relation of denotation obtains between a
word and a universal (a class) then it is also a fact that
a universal is not definitely known unless an individual is
perceived.
When the form of a gavaya is made known to us by the in-
struction of a forester we have no faith in the veracity of this
statement. Hence, the relation of denotation which holds be-
tween a word and the object, denoted by it, as derived from the
said instruction, is not accepted to be correct.
For this very reason it is held that the naming of an object
and its communication are preceded by perception. Sometimes,
perception is not the proximate cause of the knowledge of the
relation of denotation. It produces such knowledge through the
medium of memory. Let us illustrate our point. The relation
of denotation holding between the word 'ruru' and an ex-
perienced deer (belonging to a species of deer) is known by
means of memory. Similarly, the relation of denotation between
Caitra and a particular person is known by means of known
characteristics such as having long teeth, etc. But regarding
the point at issue it is to be noted that though the bare resem-
blance to a cow has been imparted by the above instruction,Nyayamanjari
The above relation does not obtain between a word and an
individual since the individuals are innumerable. But it has
been decided that it obtains between a word and a class which
includes all the individuals in itself.
It has been stated that the perception of an object precedes
the assignment of its name and that of the material cause prece-
des the production of its effect. Is it a Vedic injunction? Can
nobody violate it? But the main purport of this statement is
that the knowledge of an object always precedes that of the
signification of a word.
298
The knowledge of the object may be acquired through per-
ception or through some other source of knowledge. There is no
hard and fast rule that the perception of an object should
always precede the knowledge of an object. The remembrance
of an object also, leads to the knowledge of the signification of
a word.
The animal which has been seen there is called a ruru (a
species of deer). Sometimes, we introduce an imperceptible
object by the mention of its marks and name it. Let us illustrate
this point. You will know the person to be Caitra-the person
whose teeth are long, body is covered with hair, complexion is
dark, stature is short, eyes are large and jaws are flat. Similarly,
it is not impossible to instruct a person that the name 'gavaya'
applies to an animal which bears a close resemblance to a cow.
It may be argued against the thesis mentioned above that if
the object is not perceived, the instruction that a gavaya is like
a cow is not believed to be true. It may be answered that
though the instruction is not accepted to be trustworthy yet the
relation of denotation holding between the word 'gavaya' and
the animal resembling a cow as suggested by the instruction is
not discredited as incorrect. But as long as we do not perceive a
gavaya, curiosity as to its form lingers in our mind and ins-
tantaneously dissolves with the perception of a gavaya.
In fine, the objector holds that the object which is established
either by perception or by verbal authority requires the help of
no other proof for its establishment.
The Establishment of the Thesis that Comparison is a Distinct Proof
The Naiyayikas of established reputation meet that aboveUpamāna as a Distinct Proof established
objection thus :-When we acquire the distinct knowledge of the
relation of denotation from the instruction of the said forester
(such knowledge is distinct from verbal knowledge) because the
object is not perceived at the time of receiving the instruction.
Though from the instruction we know a gavaya to be like a cow
yet we cannot rely upon this knowledge. This piece of know-
ledge by description is not so convincing that all our inquiry
about the known object gets a satisfactory answer.
The knowledge which arises from the instruction, being
heard, does not solve all the rational doubts about its con-
tent. Verbal knowledge carries with it a sense of completion
and depends upon no other proof for the complete expression of
its object. But the knowledge, derived from the instruction is
incomplete and depends upon perception for the right com-
munication of its object.
299
In this case the words of the forester fail to produce such
complete knowledge and hence it is highly probable that they
fail in their task.
If it is held that the relation of denotation obtains between a
word and a universal (a class) then it is also a fact that
a universal is not definitely known unless an individual is
perceived.
When the form of a gavaya is made known to us by the in-
struction of a forester we have no faith in the veracity of this
statement. Hence, the relation of denotation which holds be-
tween a word and the object, denoted by it, as derived from the
said instruction, is not accepted to be correct.
For this very reason it is held that the naming of an object
and its communication are preceded by perception. Sometimes,
perception is not the proximate cause of the knowledge of the
relation of denotation. It produces such knowledge through the
medium of memory. Let us illustrate our point. The relation
of denotation holding between the word 'ruru' and an ex-
perienced deer (belonging to a species of deer) is known by
means of memory, Similarly, the relation of denotation between
Caitra and a particular person is known by means of known
characteristics such as having long teeth, etc. But regarding
the point at issue it is to be noted that though the bare resem-
blance to a cow has been imparted by the above instruction,300
Nyayamanjari
yet the knowledge of a gavaya, arising from it, is not free from
a doubt about its true communication, since the instruction in
question does not exactly throw light on a gavaya but depends
upon some other proof for the perfect illumination of its object.
When a person will see the individual with his eyes and notice that
it is like a cow, his doubt about the truth of the instruction will
be removed. The contention of the objector is not tenable since
the instrument of perceptual knowledge, being the sense-object-
contact, etc., cannot produce the knowledge of the relation of
denotation.
1
You hold that the perception of the animal produces the
apprehension of likeness. We take no exception to it. But the
very apprehension of resemblance is, according to us, a distinct
source of knowledge, called comparison.
As the perception of smoke in a hill leads to the inferential
knowledge of fire which is beyond the range of perception so
the perception of a gavaya resembling a cow in a forest gene-
rates the knowledge of the supersensuous relation of signification
holding between a word and the object denoted by it. This
piece of knowledge is a distinct type of knowledge based upon
comparison. As is case of inference the recollection of the pre-
viously known universal concomitance holding between fire and
smoke is the accessory condition so in the case of knowledge,
based upon comparison, the remembrance of the content of a
previous instruction inparting resemblance plays the part of
an accessory condition. In inference, when we discover the
relation of universal concomitance we do not find that this
relation obtains only between the particular consequence and
the particular reason but between the consequence and the rea-
son in general.
But when we draw a conclusion from a major premise by
means of a minor premise that the middle term belongs to the
minor term (e.g., there is smoke in the hill) we specify the
character of the major term to some extent (e.g., we deduce
such fire as belongs to the hill). Similarly, in case of compa-
rison when we hear the said instruction we have simply a general
idea of an object denoted by a word, e.g., a gavaya. But when
we perceive a particular object, i.c., when we perceive an in-
dividual gavaya, having resemblance to a cow we truly come toUpamana as a Distinct Proof Established
301
know for certain that this is the same object as is denoted by
the word 'gavaya'.
Do not think that this is a piece of inferential knowledge
since knowledge based upon comparison depends upon neither
positive nor negative concomitance.
In fine, we arrive at the conclusion that the judgment that
this is denoted by the word 'gavaya' is derived only from com-
parison but not from any other source of knowledge.
Some logicians may raise various objections against this hypo-
thesis, viz., "Such a judgment does not exist", "Its validity is
doubtful", "It is contradicted", and "It is merely imaginary".
Such objections are not fair. This is a piece of true knowledge
since it satisfies all the tests of truth. The source of it is compa-
rison. As there is nothing wrong about it so it is reasonable to
hold that it is a species of true knowledge. Theauthor of the
Nyaya-sutra points to the same conclusion in his sūtra "Pra-
siddha sādharmyāt-sädhya-sādhanam".( the establishment of the
object of inquiry through resemblance to a well-known object.
The compound word 'prasiddha-sādharmyāt” may be diffe-
rently interpreted. Either it may be an example of Karma-
dhāraya compound or that of Tṛtiya-tatpuruṣa compound or
that of Bahuvrihi compound. If we try to understand the import
of the first one then it signifies the well-known resemblance
of a gavaya.
If we intend to understand the import
of the second one then it conveys the resemblance of a
gavaya to a very familiar object. If we are interested in the
sense of the third one then it represents a gavaya whose resem-
blance to some other object is well-known. Upamâna (compa-
rison) is sādhya-sadhana because of prasiddha-sadharmya
(because of the perception of such resemblance or that of an
object having resemblance to a familiar object). The compound
word 'sadhya-sādhana' requires interpretation. The word
'sādhya' denotes the relation of a word to an object denoted by
it. The word 'sādhana' stands for the act of knowing it. The
compound word 'sādhya-sadhana'represents the knowing of the
relation of a word to the object denoted by it. Or, the word
'sādhya' stands for the knowledge of the relation of denotation
holding between a word and the object meant by it. The word
'sadhana' means generation. Thus, the compound word signifies302
Nyāyamanjari
the generation of the knowledge of the said relation of denota-
tion. The knowledge of the resemblance of an unfamiliar object
to a very familiar object plays the part of an instrument. It is
called Upamāna (comparison). The result which it brings about
is the knowledge of the relation of a word to the object denoted
by it.
1
The author of the Nyāya-sútra states that a piece of valid
knowledge which acts as an instrument is called a proof and
the compound word ‘sādhya-sādhana' is clearly suggestive of this
hypothesis. This convention has been adopted in every case of
a proof. The compound word 'sādhya-sadhana' has been put
in the middle of the sutra with the idea that it will be syntacti-
cally connected with all the preceding and the succeeding
definition of a proof.
The perception of resemblance is comparison (upamāna).
But the nature of resemblance is a controversial matter. The
problem whether or not the resemblance is complete or partial
has not been solved. So a doubt as to the validity of the know-
ledge based upon comparison may occur in our mind. The
author of the Nyaya-sūtra has removed this possible doubt. An
object to which the knowledge of resemblance to another object
is due is called 'similar to that'. Hence the discussion regarding
the character of resemblance is superfluous. As an universal is
the source of the idea of oneness so resemblance is at the root
of the idea of similarity.
Is the definition of Upamana (Comparison) in any way use-
ful to this spiritual science which teaches the doctrine of final
emancipation from all sorrows?
From the authoritative scriptures we learn that the knowledge
of the self together with that of all the accessory details, leads
to final emancipation. The veracity of the scriptures and speech
is established by means of inference. Perception is the source of
induction. Hence, as the three proofs, viz., perception, infe-
rence and verbal authority have a special service to this science
so they should be exclusively discussed. (But Upamāna, having
neither proximate nor remote usefulness, should find no place
in the Nyâya-sutra) The objection is really true to a great
extent. But still comparison is serviceable to the performance
of a Vedic rite which enjoins the killing of a gavaya since aThe Mimamsaka view of Upamana
303
gavaya cannot be killed if one is not acquainted with it. On the
strength of the instruction that the plant of Mudgaparņi is like
the stem of kidney-beans, comparison has special service to
identify the plant of Mudgaparni. In such matters the proof of
comparison has a unique part to play.
The kind-hearted sage Gautama has defined the proof of
comparison in order to render a useful service to all though the
said proof has no bearing upon final emancipation.
If this is the motive of the sage then a lot of other things like
the Vedic rite, the said plant, etc., should also be instructed.
There is no scope for such an objection since the Nyāya-sūtra,
being a science of sources of valid knowledge, teaches only such
proofs as act as an instrument to bring about the knowledge of an
object. The number of proofs is only four neither more nor less.
This point has been established by an argument. The objects
which are suitable to the realization of final emancipation are
exclusively discussed in this work.
The Determination of the Nature of Comparison from the Standpoint
of the Mimāṁsakas
The followers of Jaimini do not subscribe to the above
thesis. They hold that knowledge derived from comparison is
different from that which has been asserted by the Naiyãyikas.
After having heard the instruction of a forester that a gavaya
is like a cow he goes to a forest on some errand and sees a
gavaya. Then he remembers a cow, seen by him, in the city.
Afterwards he knows that a cow is like a gavaya. He derives the
resultant judgment from the perceptual one "A gavaya is like
a cow" called Upamana. It is called Upamiti. This judgment
refers to the unperceived cow as endowed with resemblance to
the gavaya which is being perceived. Or, it refers to the resem-
blance belonging to such a cow. Therefore, it (Upamiti) is gene-
rated by the perceptual judgment that a gavaya is like a cow
since it refers to a cow which is beyond the range of perception.
No instruction is heard to inform us of the content of this judg-
ment and hence it is not a piece of verbal knowledge.
It is not also a judgment of memory, since it refers to such an
object as has not been experienced before. We have not experi-
enced before that a cow is like a gavaya. Though we admit that an304
Nyāyamanjari
object is similar to another if they possess in common many
elements, yet an object is known to be similar to another when
the other correlative term is presented to our consciousness.
The judgement is not arrived at by an act of inference, since it
occurs in our mind independently of an induction or of a deduc-
tion. Moreover, the resemblance which belongs to a gavaya
does not constitute the reason since it does not belong to the sub-
ject of inference. The resemblance which belongs to a cow
does not constitute the reason since it does not belong to the
subject of inference. Moreover, the resemblance which belongs
to a cow does not constitute the reason in question since it is
not an established fact but is an element in the initial proposi-
tion to be established. The limbs of a city-cow such as horse,
etc., do not constitute reason since they remain beyond the
range of vision of a person staying in the forest and the reason
which is not perceived cannot serve the purpose. Any limb of
the gavaya does not serve the purpose of a reason since it does
not belong to a cow, the subject of inference, like the resem-
blance belonging to it. Thus the Mimāṁsakas put their con-
clusion in a nut-shell. It is as follows:
The judgment that a city-cow which is not perceived is similar
to a gavaya occurring in the mind of a knower who resides, at
the time of the judgment, in a forest, is Upamiti. It is a class
by itself and is distinct from the other species of knowledge
such as perception, etc.
The Refutation of the Mimāṁsaka Hypothesis Concerning the Nature
of Comparison.
The hypothesis of the Mīmāṁsakas is not sound since it is not
based upon experience. The judgment that an unfamiliar
gavaya is like a very familiar cow is experienced by us but not
its simple conversion (i.c., a cow is like a gavaya).
A citizen who has not heard the instruction that a cow is like
a gavaya rambling in a forest sees an unseen animal resembl-
ing a cow. Seeing it he judges and states that it is an indefinite
animal which is similar to a cow. But he does neither judge nor
state that a cow is like this. No body does so. Hence the judg.
ment that a cow is like a gavaya is not true since such a judg-
ment is an after-thought, carefully constructed but not natural.The Mimamsaka view of Upamana Refuted
It is useless to find out its exact
instrument. Let us
assume, for the sake of argument that the judgment that a
cow is like a gavaya is possible. But it is a judgment of
memory. So, it cannot be a class by itself. As such no distinct
instrument is required to produce it. Thus, upamäna is not a
distinct proof,
305
The Mimamsakas join issue with the Naiyãyikas and hold
that it is a truism that an individual cow is remembered by law
of similarity when a gavaya is seen. But the cow is never remem-
bered as similar to a gavaya since its similarity to a gavaya
which is being perceived now has not been experienced before.
Hence, the judgment that a cow is like a gavaya is not that of
memory. The Naiyãyikas take an exception to this solution and
point out that the defensible argument of the Mîmāmsakas does
not hold water since the similarity of a gavaya as belonging to
a cow has been experienced before.
The Mimamsakaś retort that the critical remarks, offered by
the Naiyāyikas, seem to them to be very strange since a person
who has not seen a gavaya at an early date has experienced its
similarity as belonging to a cow.
The Naiyāyikas reply that such a defence is untenable since
the person has experienced its similarity as belonging to a cow
without knowing distinctly gavaya,
The Mimamsakas review the argument of the Naiyãyikas and
hold that the suggestion of the Naiyãyikas that something has
been experienced but all the properties have not been distinctly
grasped appears to them to be more unintelligible. The Naiya-
yikas hold that some particulars have been experienced but not
distinctly. It is a truism that such an experience is an absur-
dity. A reply to this review has been given by the Naiyáyikas.
They hold that their thesis is not that they are not able to account
for it. The explanation given by the Naiyāyikas is as follows.
When a citizen sees a gavaya in a forest, he does neither re-
collect an elephant nor a camel nor a horse but remembers an
individual of a distinct class. The memory of a distinct object is
not revived without having the sufficient reason, On the strength
of this established law the Naiyāyikas hold that the individual
which has been perceived as similar to this gavaya by a person,
is recalled only in his memory whenever a gavaya is perceived306
Nyayamanjari
but nobody else can remember it. Though nobody can defini-
tely place the awareness of the judgment that a cow is like a
gavaya in the history of his experiences yet the existence of such
an experience is to be necessarily assumed since the relation of
universal concomitance, holding between an individual cow
which has been repeatedly seen and a gavaya as united by the
relation of similarity, is remembered. It is absolutely impossible
on the part of a villager to frame the judgment, based upon
his experience, that a cow is like a gavaya if he has no previous
experience of a gavaya. Hence it is reasonable to hold that
similarity to a gavaya is experienced when a gavaya is not
distinctly cognized. Therefore the thesis of the Naiyāyikas is not
unintelligible. But it is a truism that at that stage of knowledge
the judgment that a cow is like a gavaya is not framed on the
basis of previous experience.
Very well, let the thesis of the Naiyāyikas be rational. But it
should answer a question of the Mimāṁsakas. How can a villa-
ger know that a cow is similar to a gavaya if he has no definite
knowledge of a gavaya, the other correlative of the relation of
similarity? The reply, given by the Naiyāyikas to this ques-
tion is as follows. If the Mimāṁsakas raise this question, they
simply contradict their previous statement.
They (the Mimāṁsakas) hold that similarity, like a universal
resides wholly in each of its many locii. Hence, if the other
correlative of the relation of similarity is not cognized, simila-
rity is perceived. Again, what is similarity according to them?
They say that the common possession of many limbs is called
similarity. These limbs can be perceived even by a villager if
he has never perceived a gavaya.
If the Mimāṁsakas hold that the villager does not know that
cow is like a gavaya even if he perceives those limbs which are
shared in common by the two similar objects (a cow and a
gavaya). They now discard the above definition of similarity
that similarity is the common possession of many limbs. The re-
vised definition of similarity as offered by them is that simila-
rity is the unique source of the awareness of similarity. The
former definition of similarity is too narrow to be applied to
the picture of a cow, etc. This definition also suffers from the
defect of being very wide since it applies also to an animalThe Mimāṁsaka view of Upamāna Refuted
which is dissimilar to a gavaya. A dissimilar animal also possess-
es some of the same limbs such as hoofs, etc., as a cow possess-
es. Now, the Mimāṁsakas may hold that they do not know the
exact number that constitutes the number 'many' which is
required for the idea of similarity. But they may hold that the
number of common limbs should be such as produces the idea
of similarity. But such a defence is not satisfactory. It really
repeats the revised definition of similarity stated above that
similarity is that which generates the idea of similarity.
Hence, the implicit awareness of similarity is logically possible
even when a gavaya has not been perceived at all. Therefore,
the judgment that a cow is like a gavaya is that of memory.
The Mimamsakas may justify their position in the following
manner. The Naiyãyikas hold that when the instruction of a
forester is received the relation of denotation holding between
the term 'gavaya' and the object 'gavaya' is not grasped with-
out the shade of a doubt. But with the perception of the similarity
ofa cow belonging to a gavaya (i.e. comparison) it is rightly and
distinctly grasped. Similarly, the said similarity of a gavaya is
vaguely experienced at the initial stage when a gavaya, the
correlative, remains unknown. But it becomes clear and distinct
when the similarity of a cow belonging to a gavaya is perceived
(i.e., when comparison reveals the said similarity). This is the
sum and substance of the contention.
The above contention is not tenable since the very percep-
tion of a gavaya contributes towards the vividness of the know-
ledge that a gavaya is like a cow whereas comparison does not
do it. The Naiyāyikas will simply pay the Mimāṁsakas back in
their own coins-the coins which they have paid to the Naiya-
yikas. The coin is in the shape of sentence which runs thus:---
Comparison cannot exclusively claim as its own an object
which has not been grasped by some other proof. The so-called
exclusive object is supplied by perception.
307
The Mimamsakas raise another question, "How does this
perception of a knower, staying in a forest contribute towards
the vividness of the knowledge that a cow in a village is like a
gavaya ?" The Naiyãyikas .reply "we are not to blame for our
observation since it is a fact that the very perception of a308
Nyāyamanjarī
gavaya is followed by the vivid memory that a cow is like a
gavaya".
That Mīmāṁsakas advance a further argument in support of
the view that comparison is a distinct source of valid knowledge.
They argue that as perception lays hold only of a near object,
so the judgment that a cow is like a gavaya is not perceptual
since the cow resembling a gavaya, remains beyond the range
of our vision.
The Naiyâyikas meet this argument in the following manner.
They hold that the judgment that a cow is like a gavaya
merely acts as a memento since it bears the stamp of likeness on
the face of it. If this knowledge pertains to memory, it cannot
be a piece of valid knowledge since the Mimāṁsakas hold that
novelty is the only criterion of valid knowledge. (If it is not a
piece of valid knowledge, there is no ground for advocating in
favour of comparison as a separate source of valid knowledge).
Even if it is admitted that it does not pertain to memory, it
may be inferential since it is deduced. Hence, no other distinct
source of knowledge should be assumed. The syllogism which
proves the point of the Naiyāyikas is as follows. The cow which
is being remembered is like this (a gavaya in front of the know-
er) because the first one possesses many common limbs that is,
many limbs belong equally to the individuals of the both species.
(The cow which is being remembered is the subject of inference.
The consequence to be established is 'is like this'. The reason
is the possession of many common limbs. The example in
this inference is the second individual of the gavaya class). If
the second individual does not come near at hand, more
general major premise is to be found out. This major premise
requires reference to (no positive) examples. Where there is the
possession of many common limbs there is resemblance like the
above two. The reason is not doubtful since the limbs which
belong equally to the individuals of the two species have been
specified. Moreover the reason is not unproven like the conse-
quence since it has been admitted that there is a sharp distinc-
tion between the possession of common limbs and resemblance.
An inexperienced lad, a resident of the cocoanut island (an
island where cows and gavayas are not found) does not have
the judgment that the cow, seen in a village, is like this gavayaThe Mimamsaka view of Upamāna Refuted
(which is being perceived now in the forest). On the strength
of the absence of experience of the said boy it is to be admitted
that the judgment that a cow is like a gavaya is only deduced
from a major premise which is arrived at by induction and that
such a judgment cannot take place independently of induction.
Hence, the judgment in question is not produced by comparison
because it is either inferential or recollective or impossible, on
account of the reason stated above. Now the Naiyayikas put a
question to the Mimamsakas, "Does comparison render any uni-
que service ?" It amounts to this: "Does it stand the pragma-
tic test of a proof?" Kumārila himself has admitted that when
a definition has been given even with the slightest intention of
examining it, an eye has been kept on its usefulness so that
nothing has been superfluously stated.
309
Now the Mimāṁsakas say that they have proved the efficacy
of comparison. The detailed procedure of performing a Vedic
rite in honour of the sun-god by offering an oblation of milk
boiled rice is learnt from its resemblance to a sacrifice which is
performed in honour of the god of fire. With regard to the
Vedic rite in honour of the god of fire the injunction is self-
sufficient and complete since there is ample provision for the
details of unknown subsidiary actions such as the placing of
rightly prepared cakes on eight earthern pot-sherds etc. But the
injunction, "one who is desirous of acquiring the lustre of the
holy study should offer an oblation of milk-boiled rice to the
sun god", enjoins only the principal action and the article of
offering but does not give information about the performance
of the subsidiary actions. The main action cannot be performed
if the minor ones, the means to an end, are not prescribed.
Now, questions arise in our mind "How shall we find out the
subsidiary rites? Which will be the rites?" Now, we see that
there is similarity between corn and barley, boiled in milk and
puroḍāśa (a cake prepared from cereal) since both of them are
prepared from cereals. Moreover, the respective deities of
these two rites resemble each other as they have lustre. Owing
to this similarity, comparison throws light on the nature of
subsidiary rites so that these rites in honour of the god of
fire can be applied to the rite in honour of the sungod. More-
over, there is another point which is worth-noting that if aNyayamanjari
substance which has been enjoined as a means is not available
then its substitute will suffice to complete the action. Suppose,
barely has been enjoined to prepare a particular food to be
offered. If barley is not available we take wild rice as a substi-
tute for barley on the strength of comparison.
The Vedic sentences which reveal the rites to be performed in
honour of the sungod and the god of fire point to their simila-
rity on the basis of comparison but not on the basis of percep-
tion and inference. Hence, they prove the efficacy of compari-
son. If comparison had no part to play then how can the injun-
ction concerning the rite in honour of the sungod refer to the
injunction regarding the rite in honour of the god of fire ?
Therefore we, the Mîmāṁsakas, hold that comparison renders a
special service in such cases.
310
Kumārila also points out another utility of comparison. If
barley is somehow defective then wild rice acts in its place as
its substitute in a Vedic rite. This is the desired goal of the
definition of comparison. He also adds that when the points of
resemblance are not too many, the resulting judgment is that
one is partially like another and when the points of similarity
are too many the resulting judgment is that one is closely alike
another.
The statement of the Mimāņsakas Involves Inner contradiction
A defect in the above solution has been pointed out by the
Naiyāyikas. The subsequent remarks of the Mīmāṁsakas do not
tally with the true character of comparison as depicted by them.
They have taught that comparison reveals that a familiar object
is like an unfamiliar one. They have held that comparison re-
veals that a well-known cow is like a gavaya which is not seen
before and hence it remains entirely new and unfamiliar. Hav-
ing said all these they cite such examples as run counter to their
thesis. (In other words, the examples go in favour of the Nyaya
conclusion). Consequently, comparison produces the judgment
that an unfamiliar rite in honour of the sungod is like a rite in
honour of the god of fire. The second rite is familiar because
the details of its subsidiary actions are given. The first rite
may be compared to a gavaya. The second one may be com
pared to a cow. The above judgment corresponds to the judg-Mimāṁsaka View Contradictory
311
ment that a gavaya is like a cow. If the Mimamsakas were not
off their guard then they would have shown that the rite which
is complete in its minor details is like the rite of which details
are missing. But it is strange enough that they have proved
the reverse.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend that the solar rite which
is in need of minor details reminds one of the rite, observed in
honour of the god of fire. Hence, the first one approaches the
second one for the minor details.
The Naiyāyikas join issue with the Mimāṁsakas and hold that
even if the above explanation is taken for granted then the
object which is required is settled by memory alone. In that
case, is there any necessity of assuming comparison as a distinct
proof? If the Mimâmsakas hold that as the rite, observed in
honour of the god of fire, is remembered so its minor details are
borrowed. They also add that the object which is remembered
flashes in our mind along with such extra objects as memory
cannot supply. Hence, a distinct type of knowledge based upon
comparison has been admitted. The Naiyāyikas point out that
they cannot argue in this strain. The reason of controverting it
has been already mentioned. (Memory is not valid knowledge
since it simply reveals known object. If comparison revives
memory only, it is not an instrument of sound knowledge).
Hence, there is no need of keeping the discussion up any more.
The Naiyāyikas advance an additional point that the
object which is revealed by knowledge, based upon comparison,
cannot play the role of the scriptures. It can neither induce a
person to do something nor dissuade him from doing an action.
Hence, a person who requires definite knowledge by means of
comparison cannot apply the minor details of the rite in honour
of the god of fire to the solar rite on the basis of the above
knowledge since his knowledge has no force of injunction.
If the Mimamsakas stick to their hypothesis then no substi-
tute can be taken in. The Mimāṁsakas, if they are sincere to
their conclusion, cannot hold that wild rice is like barely but
that barely is like wild rice. But the judgment that barley is
like wild rice serves no useful purpose. (The net result of this
discussion is that barely is the substitute for wild rice but not
the converted proposition).Nyāyamanjari
substance which has been enjoined as a means is not available
then its substitute will suffice to complete the action. Suppose,
barely has been enjoined to prepare a particular food to be
offered. If barley is not available we take wild rice as a substi-
tute for barley on the strength of comparison.
The Vedic sentences which reveal the rites to be performed in
honour of the sungod and the god of fire point to their simila-
rity on the basis of comparison but not on the basis of percep-
tion and inference. Hence, they prove the efficacy of compari-
son. If comparison had no part to play then how can the injun-
ction concerning the rite in honour of the sungod refer to the
injunction regarding the rite in honour of the god of fire?
Therefore we, the Mimāṁsakas, hold that comparison renders a
special service in such cases.
310
Kumārila also points out another utility of comparison. If
barley is somehow defective then wild rice acts in its place as
its substitute in a Vedic rite. This is the desired goal of the
definition of comparison. He also adds that when the points of
resemblance are not too many, the resulting judgment is that
one is partially like another and when the points of similarity
are too many the resulting judgment is that one is closely alike
another.
The statement of the Mimamsakas Involves Inner contradiction
A defect in the above solution has been pointed out by the
Naiyāyikas. The subsequent remarks of the Mīmāṁsakas do not
tally with the true character of comparison as depicted by them.
They have taught that comparison reveals that a familiar object
is like an unfamiliar one. They have held that comparison re-
veals that a well-known cow is like a gavaya which is not seen
before and hence it remains entirely new and unfamiliar. Hav-
ing said all these they cite such examples as run counter to their
thesis. (In other words, the examples go in favour of the Nyaya
conclusion). Consequently, comparison produces the judgment
that an unfamiliar rite in honour of the sungod is like a rite in
honour of the god of fire. The second rite is familiar because
the details of its subsidiary actions are given. The first rite
may be compared to a gavaya. The second one may be com
pared to a cow. The above judgment corresponds to the judg-Mimāṁsaka View Contradictory
ment that a gavaya is like a cow. If the Mimāṁsakas were not
off their guard then they would have shown that the rite which
is complete in its minor details is like the rite of which details
are missing. But it is strange enough that they have proved
the reverse.
311
Now, the Mīmāṁsakas may contend that the solar rite which
is in need of minor details reminds one of the rite, observed in
honour of the god of fire. Hence, the first one approaches the
second one for the minor details.
The Naiyāyikas join issue with the Mīmāmsakas and hold that
even if the above explanation is taken for granted then the
object which is required is settled by memory alone. In that
case, is there any necessity of assuming comparison as a distinct
proof? If the Mîmāmsakas hold that as the rite, observed in
honour of the god of fire, is remembered so its minor details are
borrowed. They also add that the object which is remembered
flashes in our mind along with such extra objects as memory
cannot supply. Hence, a distinct type of knowledge based upon
comparison has been admitted. The Naiyāyikas point out that
they cannot argue in this strain. The reason of controverting it
has been already mentioned. (Memory is not valid knowledge
since it simply reveals known object. If comparison revives
memory only, it is not an instrument of sound knowledge).
Hence, there is no need of keeping the discussion up any more.
The Naiyãyikas advance an additional point that the
object which is revealed by knowledge, based upon comparison,
cannot play the role of the scriptures. It can neither induce a
person to do something nor dissuade him from doing an action.
Hence, a person who requires definite knowledge by means of
comparison cannot apply the minor details of the rite in honour
of the god of fire to the solar rite on the basis of the above
knowledge since his knowledge has no force of injunction.
If the Mimamsakas stick to their hypothesis then no substi-
tute can be taken in. The Mīmāṁsakas, if they are sincere to
their conclusion, cannot hold that wild rice is like barely but
that barely is like wild rice. But the judgment that barley is
like wild rice serves no useful purpose. (The net result of this
discussion is that barely is the substitute for wild rice but not
the converted proposition).Nyāyamanjari
The killing of a gavaya is a means to some sacrifice. But
comparison as defined by you does not help to know a gavaya
and to select a substitute. Therefore all intelligent persons
should accept the definition of comparison as offered by the
greatest of all sages (i.e. Akşapāda).
The end of the second Ähnika (Chapter).
ÄHNIKA III
312
Sabda (Verbal Authority)
The sutra which deals with the classification of proof men-
tions verbal authority next to comparison. Hence, the author
of the Nyâya-sûtra proposes to define verbal authority just
after the definition of comparison.
The sutra which embodies the definition of sabda runs thus
"Aptopadeśaḥ śabdaḥ”. (A reliable assertion is fabda). If the
definition is merely "upadeśaḥ śabdaḥ" (an assertion is sabdaḥ)
then only the two synonyms are put together to frame the
definition with the result that it becomes too wide as it applies
also to a word which does not produce true knowledge. In
order to make definition complete, we are to borrow a few
words from the sutra which constitutes the definition of percep-
tion and to construe them with the word 'upadeśa' (all asser-
tions) in the sutra in question: the word 'jñāna’ ‘artha’ ‘vyava-
sãyátmaka' and 'avyabhicari' are to be borrowed. The word
'jñāna' (consciousness) represents the result of an assertion.
The word 'artha' reveals the nature of the resulting conscious-
ness and the adjective 'vyavasāyāatmaka' (determinate) expresses
its form. A doubt is eliminated thereby. The adjective 'avya-
bhicãri (non-erroneous) excludes an error. The complete
definition of sabda signifies that an assertion which is productive
of such knowledge as is neither memory nor doubt nor an error
is a means of verbal knowledge. Thus, an assertion, which is
qualified by such adjectives as are taken from the sūtra on per-
ception, constitutes the reliable source of verbal knowledge.
Some other logicians hold that the adjective 'apta' (reliable)
has been given to convey the exact character of the definition
in question. In the sûtra "the sense-organs such as nose, tongue,
skin, eyes and cars spring from clements" the word 'bhūta' has313
Verbal Authority
a definite purpose to serve and its utility will be shown later
on. Similarly, the adjective 'apta' 'has been used to refute
the hypothesis that rumour is a distinct source of knowledge
and has the object in view to establish that 'rumour' (aitihya)
is distinct from sabda.
Some other logicians hold that the word 'upadeśa' (asser-
tion) constitutes the exact definition of sabda pramāṇa (the
means of verbal knowledge). The adjective 'apta' has been
used to indicate the correctness of the assertion. Some adjectives
should not be unnecessarily borrowed from the definition of
pratyakṣa (perception), and construed with the definition in
question since there is scope for defining a species only when
the genus has been defined. When the definition of pramāṇa
i.e., the means of true knowledge, has excluded such instruments
of knowledge as produce memory, etc., the definition of sabda
should be such as exclusively contains the differentia from all
other species subsumed under the same genus. The word {upa-
deśa' (assertion), though it is a synonym of śabda, is competent
enough to discharge the above function like the word 'buddhi'
in another sutra. Hence, there is no need of taking the trouble
of borrowing adjectives from another sutra.
Another logician holds that one should neither take the
trouble of referring to the distinguishing features of pramāṇa,
the genus of all proofs nor borrow adjectives from some other
sūtra to fill up the gap in the definition of sabda and that the
complete definition of sabda is the assertion of a reliable person.
Such an assertion as is either insignificant or, calls up memory,
or, leads to a doubt, or, carries no true information is to be
excluded. If we take notice of the etymological meaning of the
word 'upadeśa' (an assertion) then we make out the truth that
the very word 'upadeśa' excludes such assertions as are either
insignificant or produce a doubt, etc.
The deceptive sentences of a vagabond knave illustrate false
assertions since they are a source of error. The definition is
too wide as it is also applicable to them. In order to mend the
defect in the above definition, the adjective 'apta' (reliable) is
to be given. If a rumour is a source of true knowledge, it is not
distinct from a sound inference. In fine, it is to be noted that
the wording of the sutra which constitutes the definition of314
Nyayamañjart
śabda pramāņa should be rigidly adhered to and not a singlè·
word from a previous sütra should be borrowed in order to
frame the definition in question.
L
Let the definition be so framed. But, let us examine the
etymological meaning of the word 'upadeśa'. An upadeśa is
that by which something is communicated (upadiśyate). But
the meaning is not clear. It is that by which the knowledge of
something is conveyed (abhidhiyate). Still, the meaning is not
very clear. The act of abhidhana denotes the act of cognizing.
The boiled down meaning of the verb, together with the suffix.
attached to it, amounts to this that the instrument which pro-
duces knowledge is an upadeśa. In that case, the term, 'upa-
deśa' should also denote eyes and other sense-organs which
produce consciousness. Now, the upholder of the above view
may contend that the word 'upadeśa' does not denote conscio-
usness in general but some specific form of it. He suggests that
specific consciousness is that which resembles its cause (the
instrument). (Thus, he tries to tide over the difficulty since
perception does not resemble the sense-organ which produces it.
If we accept this interpretation the reflection of a leg by
means of which the leg is inferred should be upadeśa. A word
which is sound in essence should be non-upadeśa since the
consciousness which is produced by a word does not resemble
its cause. Moreover, if consciousness signifies only the awareness
of sound, the auditory sense-organ becomes the only source of
such awareness. In that case, the word 'upadeśa' should deno-
te only the auditory sense-organ. The awareness of sound
should not be confused with the understanding of the meaning
of a word. A sound by itself cannot produce such understanding
Hence, a word, when it is taken as a mere sound, cannot be
denoted by the term 'upadeśa'. Thus, we see that it is next to
impossible to find out the specific character of the act of con-
veying the knowledge of something (abhidhãna kriyā). There-
fore, we cannot define 'upadeśa' as an instrument of such an act.
An answer to these prima facie objections is as follows:-
The abhidhāna kriyā denotes the apprehension of the mean-
ing of an audible object through its instrumentality. It is the
conventional meaning of the act. An object the knowledge ofVerbal Authority
which is produced by a word which consists of a number of
alphabets (sounds) is held to be denotative. A number of audi-
ble alphabets (sounds) makes us apprehend a thing-a thing
signified by it. Hence, a word is a collection of such sounds.
But what is not audible is not a word such as a sphota (a sub-
the entity which is assumed for the communication of the mean-
ing of a word). What is audible is a word. As alphabets are
audible so they constitute a word. But if it is held that a word
is that which conveys the knowledge of someother object then a
mark such as smoke, etc., should have been a word. A word,
the relation of denotation of which remains unknown. is not
really a word since such a word cannot convey the sense. An
objection arises in our mind. Every event of consciousness re-
presents the knowing of something. As there is no distinct form
of consciousness which is signified by the verb "to denote" so
every
form of consciousness is meant by it. In that case, as a
word is not the only source of such consciousness so the above
definition suffers from the defect of being too wide.
A reply to this objection is as follows. It is a truism that to
be aware of an object is to know it. An awareness which is
produced by the sense-organ such as the eyes as its special
cause is called perception. The knowledge of an object which is
produced neither by a sense-organ nor by a word is the infe-
rential judgment. The knowledge of an object, produced by an
audible word, is verbal knowledge. To be perceived, to be
inferred and to be denoted are not synonymous with one another.
A word which produces this distinct form of consciousness is
called an upadesa. But if this very word indicates the intention
of a speaker then it is treated as a mark but not as an upadeśa.
No more? Let us put a stop to this discussion.
Vätsyāyana, the commentator on the Nyaya-sūtras, has ex-
plained the term 'apta'. The person who has the intuitive
knowledge of merit and intends to communicate correctly the
result of his experience and who is a competent teacher is called
an apta. There is no hard and fast rule that the subject-matter
of his teaching is to be intuited since an inferred matter may
also be taught. Such an indirect knowledge does not cancel his
qualification as a teacher. If he intends to impart his ex-
perience to somebody then it does not mean that he is parti-
315Nyayamanjari
ally disposed towards him. The title 'teacher' applied to a man,
indicates that he is efficient in the art of teaching. If a person
who does neither take an interest in anything nor shrink from
it, is deaf and dumb then what shall he do, being incapable of
imparting his lessons. A person may be a capable preacher and
seer of merit. But if he is partial to somebody, he holds his
tongue and does not like to utter a single word. A seer-teacher
should not be interested also in the subject-matter which he
intends to teach. Such a person is rarely seen. The status of
being an apta should neither be monopolised by a sage nor by
an Aryan. The definition of an apta should be elastic that it
may be either applied to a sage or to an Aryan or to a mleccha
(a non-Aryan). If this be the case, there will be no paucity of an
apta in the society.
Some hold that the essence of an apta lies in the freedom
from such defects as are error, inadvertence, etc., and a man,
having no such defects, is an apta. It must be also admitted by
them that a teacher should not have imperfect knowledge of the
subject-matter which he undertakes to teach. If we do not
subscribe to this view then the title of apta which is in vogue
would be denied to all.
316
Or, the aim of this system of logic is to establish the validity
of the Vedas. God, the author of the Vedas, is only apta. The
definition of an āpta, taken in its literal sense, is applicable to
Him alone since he has really intuited merit. (He has the direct
awareness of merit.) It is fair to hold that the intention of
disseminating valuable ideas has actuated him to compose the
Vedas since it will be proved later on that he is compassionate.
He is also a competent teacher since it will be proved that all
the sources of knowledge with the Vedas at the top have been
composed by him. Let us stop here with regard to the definition
of an āpta. And let us now discuss why Sabda has been singled
out to be defined as a distinct source of knowledge.
The Buddhists contend: We discern no distinction between
verbal knowledge and inferential judgment. Therefore the
definition of inference is to be applied to śabda. Hence a
distinct definition of sabda should be sought for. The following
arguments strengthen our contention. Both inferential judgment
and verbal knowledge have no immediate object to reveal. AsVerbal Authority
317
both of them depend upon some relation to enlighten an object
they indicate only the general feature of an object. If the relation
is not discovered, both of them fail to bring about their intended
result. As the particulars are innumerable so it is very difficult
to discover their relation. As we infer fire, perceiving smoke so
we make out the meaning of a word, hearing it. As there is
positive and negative relation between a reason and a con-
sequence so there is positive and negative relation between a
word and the object meant by it. If a word is employed to con-
vey the knowledge of an object then it denotes the object.
As in the inference of fire smoke plays the part of the subject of
inference so a word becomes the subject of inference since the
the object, denoted by it, belongs to it. In the former example
smokeness is the reason. In the latter case the universal, belong-
ing to the word, will discharge the function of a reason. As the
conditions and objects of verbal knowledge and inferential judg-
ment are similar, so verbal knowledge is identical with the infer-
ential judgment. Hence, we should not differentiate one from
another in view of minor differences.
(Some of these differences are as follows). These impressions,
Jeft by the previous experience of alphabets, are the accessory
condition of verbal knowledge. Moreover, the truth of the verbal
knowledge is ascertained when we learn that the sentence,
the source of the said knowledge, has been uttered by a trustworthy
person. Again, we are also to read the intention of the speaker
of the sentence in order to make out its exact sense. These are
the distinctive processes which invariably precede a piece of
verbal knowledge unlike an inferential judgment. On the score
of these peculiar conditions we cannot hold that sabda is a dis-
tinct type of proof. As the knowledge of the definite relation
between the reason and the consequence is the special feature
of an inferential judgement so is not the verbal knowledge deter-
mined by the knowledge of the relation between a word and the
object denoted? It may be argued that as a sentence has a direc-
tive force so inference being not distinct from śabda should
enjoin us to take a course of action. Such an argument is not
tenable since though the reason in the shape of the waving of
the hand etc. is the cause of inferential knowledge yet it possess-
es a driving force.318
Nyayamanjari
In case of an inference when a very familiar object is to be
established no reference to an example is required as no major
premise is presented to conciousness in case of verbal knowledge
when a very familíar object is communicated by a word. No
reference to an example is necessary. But in both the cases a
reference to an example is a necessity when unfamiliar subject is
touched upon. As reference is an incentive to the unfolding of
creative imagination so in some cases the coinage of new words
such as 'aśva' etc. illustrates the work of creative imagination.
As a defective reason, being adduced does not help us to know
an object correctly so when a word, having multiple senses, is
applied, it does not convey a definite sense.
Moreover, when verbal knowledge is produced by a sentence,
it does not carry along with itself the conviction that it is correct.
But we do not know it to be true unless and until we ascertain
that the sentence has been uttered by an apta (a trustworthy
person).
Therefore, the learned scholars hold that verbal knowledge is
inferential because it is known to be valid if it is in agreement
with the unquestionably true of a trustworthy person.
Moreover, a word can only help us to infer the intention of a
speaker aright but not an external object because there is no
absolute certainty of the faithful representation of an external
object by it. We correctly infer that the speaker intends to com-
municate such and such object because he utters such and
such words like me. A word serves the purpose of a true reason
if the consequence is the intention of a speaker.
Distinction Between Sabda and Inference
A reply to the above objections is as follows:
Sabda admits of the two kinds viz., a word and a sentence.
But a sentence reveals its meaning without depending upon the
knowledge of the relation between a sentence and its meaning.
We have learnt from experience that those who are conversant
with words and their meaning make out the general sense of
the entire verse, newly composed, whenever they listen to it.
But an inference necessarily presupposes the knowledge of the
relation between the reason and the consequence. How can we
imagine that śabda bears a very close resemblance to an in-Verbal Authority and Inference distinguished
ference? But though a word depends upon the knowledge of
significance in order to communicate its meaning yet it differs
from inference since the conditions of these two types of know-
ledge and their contents are different. The object which is
denoted by a word is different from that which is established
by inference. The Word 'fiery' conveys only the locus of fire and
this point will be proved later on. But the proposition that the
hill is fiery signifies the conclusion of an inferential process.
The very conclusion constitutes the subject-matter of an
inference. The inferential process results in establishing the
conclusion that the hill is fiery. We come to know that there
is fire or that the hill is the locus of fire. It has been stated in
the second chapter of this work that the consequence of an in-
ference is the subject of inference (i.e. minor term) as predicated
by the major term.
319
It is not possible to contend that there are words which
express the sense of a sentence? The words such as 'gomân'
(a man who is possessed of cows), aupagavaḥ (a man who is a
son of upagu) and kumbhakära (a man who makes pots) illus-
trate the above point. It may be admitted that there is much truth
in this contention. Still, they do not produce such knowledge as
is absolutely complete in itself. Take the word 'gomän'. It
does not satisfy our inquisitive mind. We still hold enquiry
viz, who is gomän? (A sentence is complete in itself. It has
syntactical relation with no word which is not included in it.
But it expresses a complete idea. It is the unit of our thought.
A word implies syntactical relation with some other words
which are not its constituent in order to express a complete idea.
Hence, under no circumstances, a word can rise to the status
of a sentence.)
(An objector may contend that the knowledge of the meaning
of a word may not be inferential but the knowledge of the
meaning of a sentence is surely inferential. Jayanta proves the
hollowness of such a contention).
is
Moreover, the conclusion which drawn from the
premises is a judgment. As it is a judgment. So it has a
subject and a predicate. The subject of the judgment is
cognised at first and the awareness of the predicate succeeds it.320
Nyayaman jari
The resulting judgment of an inferential process is that the hill
is fiery. The hill, the subject of this judgment, is known at
first and the predicate, fire, is known afterwards. But the
verbal knowledge which arises from a sentence is also a judg-
ment. The predicate of it is known at first and the knowledge
of the subject and that of the predicate in a verbal judgment
take place on a reverse order. Thus, the contents of verbal and
inferential judgments are different. Hence, śabda is not
included in inference.
Now it may be contended that as the subject of inference, as
qualified by the consquence, is established in an inference so let
a word, as qualified by the object, denoted by it, be established
in a verbal judgment. Such a contention is not tenable. A word
is the cause par excellence of the verbal knowledge. If it is
assumed that verbal knowledge is inferential then a word, being
the cause par excellence of it, is the reason. In that case, the
reason cannot be the subject of inference.
Now, the objector may defend himself against the review, citing
example from the works of the critics. Kumărila establishes fire
by means of a peculiar syllogistic argument. It is this that
smoke is fiery because it has smokeness like smoke in a
kitchen. Some logicians hold that the place which contains
fire is the consequence. Some other logicians hold that smoke
is the consquence. Similarly, the meaning of a word is inferred.
The syllogistic process is as follows. The word 'cow' contains
the object denoted by it because it has cowness, i. e. the
universal, which belongs to the word 'cow'. This is the defence
of the objector in a nut-shell.
Such a defence is hardly tenable, The objector intends to
establish a consquence, assuming a word as the subject of in-
ference. Let the character of this consequence be determined
at the out-set. Do you establish that the word is qualified by
the object denoted by it or that the word has the power of con.
veying its meaning or that the word is qualified by the
- knowledge of its meaning? It is possible to prove the first
alternative. There is no bar to hold that the hill contains fire.
But we cannot hold in a similar manner that a word contains
the object signified by it. It may be argued "As an object is
conveyed by a word, so a word, having denoted it, contains itVerbal Authority and Inference distinguished
321
by means of the relation of denotation." Such a defence is not
tenable. An object is not denoted by a word as long as we do not
know that it is presented to our consciousness by the word itself.
If the object is not denoted then it cannot stand upon the word
as its locus. When the knowledge of an object is produced by a
word, the object only stands upon a word as denoted by it.
In that case is there any necessity of assuming that the object is
located upon a word? If it is held that an object finds its locus
in a word because it is denoted by the latter. In this way the
object which is located upon a word is made known as such.
The object, the knowledge of which is produced by a word, is
denoted only by it. Such an argument is an instance of circular
reasoning. Therefore it cannot be established that a word is
qualified by an object to be denoted by it. The second alter-
native that a word is qualified by a power of conveying a sense
cannot be established. Nobody employs a word to this effect. A
person does neither utter a word nor listen to it to determine its
power of expression. Everybody either listens to a word to learn.
its meaning correctly or utters a word to communicate his
knowledge of an object to others. A word-in-itself is not to be
assured as the subject of inference. A word, as qualified by a
predicate mentioned above, is not also to be assumed as the
subject of inference. But the upholder of the view that sabda
is not other than an inference may plead his case in a slightly
different manner. He urges that even though it is admitted
that the above two alternatives are not tenable yet
there is no bar to hold that a word, as qualified by the know-
ledge of an object, is the subject of inference. Such a defence
does not hold water. A word as qualified by the knowledge of
an object, cannot be the subject of inference because there is
a great controversy over the issue whether or not the knowledge
of an object is an established fact when the word is merely heard
and the conclusion of the said inference is not drawn.
When the word is only heard the knowledge of an object
being conspicuous by its absence, how is it possible that a word
is qualified by the knowledge of an object? It may be held
that the knowledge of an object is possible even before the
drawing of the conclusion of the said inference and that the
word as qualified by the knowledge of an object may be taken322
Nyayamañjari
for granted. Such a hypothesis does not stand to reason. If the
knowledge of an object is available before the operation of the
inferential process then is not the syllogistic process redundant ?
The opponent stands his ground and holds that such a criti-
cism is applicable to all accepted types of inference e. g. the
inference of fire. (He means to say that such a criticism does
not affect our point of view). Such a defence is not tenable.
Smoke does not produce fire but merely indicates it. But in
the present case a word produces the knowledge of an object.
Hence, there is scope for controversy over the matter whether
or not the knowledge of an object is an accomplished fact when
the word is only heard. But in the case of a regular inference,
there is no room for the said controversy. Therefore the above
three alternatives which have been suggested to prove that a
word is the subject of inference do not hold good. In fine, a
word cannot be the subject of inference.
Moreover, if the word 'cow' is the subject of inference, the
reason in the shape of cowness (the universal) belonging to
all words 'cow' is to be cognized to the subject of inference.
Then, the relation of invariable concomitance holding between
the reason and the consequence is to be remembered. Then,
the reason must be cognized as qualified by the relation of
concomitance. Then, the object which is denoted by the word
is inferred. As it takes a long interval of time to complete the
inferential process so the word 'cow' the essence of which is
sound the subject of inference passes away by this
time. Sound is not a durable object like a hill but it lasts
only for two time-atoms (the time-atom stands for the minutest
unit of time). An unsophisticated person does not know that
the word has the object (i. e. the word is intimately related to
the object). But he realizes that there is no perceptible rela-
tion between the word and the object. Hence, by no means the
word can constitute the subject of inference. As there is no
possibility of establishing the subject of inference as qualified by
an object upon it so there is a gulf of difference between verbal
knowledge and inferential knowledge so far as the objects of
knowledge revealed by them are concerned.
The conditions that determine inferential knowledge and
those that determine verbal knowledge are not the same.Verbal Authority and Inference Distinguished
323
Inferential knowledge depends upon five conditions such as the
belonging of the reason to the subject of inference etc. The
conditions of it have been stated before. But the verbal know-
ledge does not require them for its coming into existence. If it
be so then as the word cannot be the subject of inference so the
universal of cowness that belongs to the word cannot constitute
the reason. The object, denoted by the word 'cow' cannot be
the subject of inference because whenever the word 'cow' is
uttered the dilemma whether the object 'cow', denoted by the
word 'cow', is presented to our consciousness or not goes to
controvert the above assumption. We cannot also hold that
the object 'cow' being qualified by the word 'cow' is to be esta-
blished since the word 'cow' does not belong to the object 'cow'
by means of the relation of denotation. An assumption of loca-
tion in such cases is open to the charge of involving a circular
reasoning. If we hold that the object, denoted by a word, is an
inference then the knowledge of the object takes place only
when the five antecedent conditions are fulfilled such as the
presence of the reason in the subject of inference etc. But if
the object is not known before then the five conditions which
determine its knowledge are not available. Therefore, the
hypothesis that the object which is said to be denoted by a
word is an inference does not stand the test of reasoning.
Moreover, if it is urged that as a word qualifies an object so
the former belongs to the latter then the object should be trea-
ted as the subject of inference as qualified by the word, be-
longing to it. But a man in the street who is innocent of the
relation of causality between smoke and fire sees with his own
eyes that smoke belongs to the subject of inference. Similarly, a
person who is ignorant of the relation of denotation should have
known that a word belongs to the denoted object. But it is a
truism that such an ignorant person does not do it. Therefore,
a word cannot belong to an object. Again, it is not possible to
demonstrate that wherever there is a word there is an object
and wherever there is not object, there is no word since the
application of the joint method of agreement and difference
presupposes space and time but in no space and in no time
they are related. An object does not exist in that part of space
where a word belongs. The Mîmâmsakas hold that a wordNyayamanjarī
which is heard is uttered by the mouth and resides there whereas
the object is cognized on the ground. But the Naiyāyikas hold
that a word is heard in the sky, confined within the ear-hole. Let
this new point be ignored. When a word exists the object
denoted by it does not necessarily exist. Now, it may be argued
that though when the word 'Yudhişthira' is pronounced, the ob-
ject, meant by it, does not exist yet the very word is inseparably
connected with the meaning of it. Now, a question may be put
to the opponents of the Nyāya-school. It is as follows:-"When
does a word relate itself with the object denoted by it? Does
it do so before the knowledge of the object or afterwards?" If
they answer the first alternative in the affirmative then it may
be pointed out that such a relation is not possible since the
object, being not present before our mind, is as good as a non-
entity. Again, if they answer the second alternative in the
affirmative then it may be pointed out that if the knowledge
of the object is acquired from the word without knowing the
relation of denotation then there is no possibility of grasping the
relation in every case. Therefore, such a relation of denotation
is insignificant. Again, if, it is held that the knowledge of the
object presupposes the knowledge of the relation of denotation
and the knowledge of the latter presupposes that of the former
then it is a case of circular reasoning. The absurdity of the
application of the negative method to the relation is also evident
from the trend of the above argument.
324
When an experienced person asks another experienced
person to do something he utters two sentences. In one sentence
a particular word finds a place. In the other sentence it is
conspicuous by its absence. An inexperienced learner who
listens to these two sentences notes the presence of a particular
word in one of the two sentences and its absence from the other
one. He watches the movement of the junior person. By the
joint method of agreement and difference he makes out the
meaning of the words contained in the sentences. Thus, we see
that the joint method of agreement and difference helps us to
determine the relation of denotation of a word. Hence, the
above joint method, being applied, has a special service to
ascertain the relation of denotation. Kumärila has stated that
if a word is related to an object then that object is only denotedVerbal Authority and Inference Distinguished
325
by that word. The contention of Kumârila is true. But it will
also be pointed out in this connection that the knowledge of an
object arises from a word because of the convention. The joint
method of agreement and difference establishes the connection
of a word with a particular object because of a convention.
Moreover, in order to find out the relation between a word and
an object as fixed by a convention by means of the joint method of
agreement and difference, we shall proceed from the side of a word
(i.e., we are to depend much more upon a word). By the joint
method of agreement and difference we discover the relation of
concomitance holding between smoke and fire. We infer fire
from smoke. But we do not likewise know an object if we
merely hear a word.
Moreover, when we infer fire from smoke we do not know
definitely that they co-exist in the above locus. But when we
know an object to be here from a word we know the object to
be here even before the communication of this information by
the word. Let us illustrate the point. When a boy who is igno-
rant of a word and of its meaning sees an object he understands
that it is denoted by this word from the action of an experi-
enced person who has carried out the explicit order of another
experienced person.
When a convention is set forth to the effect that this parti-
cular object should be denoted by this particular word, the rela-
tion of denotation is undoubtedly different from that of concomi-
tance. This relation is the invariable condition of the verbal know-
ledge of an object denoted by a word. In fine, it is to be noted
that the relation of universal concomitance obtains only between
the reason and the consequence but the relation of denotation is
distinct from it and is merely one of the accessory conditions of
verbal knowledge. Thus, the verbal knowledge is distinct
from the inferential one like perception since the conditions
which determine these two types of knowledge are separate and
the objects referred to by them are not one and the same. Some
logicians hold that sabda is a distinct source of valid knowledge
because one is to remember the order of succession of the
letter that constitutes a word in order to know the object denoted
by it. The critics have subjected this hypothesis to a severeNyāyamanjari
criticism and remarks that the distinctive character of sabda
cannot rest upon this inadequate ground. We are not in the
least inclined to hold brief for the same hypothesis since it is
absolutely unsound. The critics have shown that sabda is
included in inference because śabda and the utterance of a
reliable person deserve the same treatment as they closely
resemble each other. Such a critical remark is too fair since the
results, arrived at by them, are different. A sentence which is
uttered by a reliable person does not produce knowledge because
it has been uttered by a reliable person. But the knowledge,
produced by such a sentence, is asserted to be true because it
has been spoken of by a trustworthy person.
Kumarila also endorses the above conclusion. The knowledge
produced by a word, reveals an object. The reason that the
sentence has been asserted by a trustworthy person points to
the consequence that the knowledge, produced by such a
sentence, is true. Thus, the consequence is different from the
object of the verbal knowledge. An object, denoted by a
word, is known prior to the ascertainment of the truth of such
knowledge. The object of knowledge is surely distinct from the
truth of its knowledge. Thus sabda is distinct from inference.
We, at first, know the meaning of a sentence and then
infer that it is true because it has been uttered by a trustworthy
person. If this is the case then how will sabda be included in
inference?
326
When we hear a sentence which is uttered either by a trust-
worthy person or by a non-trustworthy person it uniformly
communicates its sense. A, reason which fulfills the three
specific conditions leads to the inferential knowledge but does
not produce verbal knowledge.
It is unfair to hold that if the validity of verbal knowledge is
not established then such knowledge merely refers to an
imaginary object since it is universally experienced that words
produce the knowledge of objects.
Thus we refute the hypothesis that words convey only the
intention of a speaker. The intention of a speaker is not denoted
by a word but an object is denoted only by it. A word serves
the purpose of a reason from which the intention of the speaker
is inferred or guessed. We infer the existence of the sky from aSabda a source of Valid Knowledge
word which as a sound is its effect. But any and every word
being denotative does not denote the sky. When a word is
uttered it first communicates its meaning but it may afterwards
point to the intention of its speaker. Under these circumstances
it is to be admitted that when an intention arises in the mind of
a person it has no connection with a word which denotes it
since no word is uttered at that stage. If the object as denoted
by a word remains unknown at the time of the appearance of
an intention then it cannot be held that an intention is quali-
fied by the meaning of a word. (The drift of this argument is
that an intention is never denoted by a word at the initial
stage of its appearance).
327
A Critical Review of the Hypothesis that sabda is a Source of Valid
Knowledge.
If it is established that sabda is a sourse of valid knowledge
then we should discuss either sabda is a distinct proof or it is
included in one of the recognized proofs.
A proof is that which produces true knowledge. But words,
being a product of imagination, do not produce the true
knowledge of the real objects. The meaning of the word may
be, somehow, made out but it can be identified neither with a
universal, nor with a particular, nor with a concrete universal.
There is no eternal relation of denotation holding between a
word and an object. If it exists at all then how can such a
relation as obtaining between a word and a transcendental
object be comprehended? The meaning of a Vedic sentence in
the subjunctive mood cannot be grasped. It is held that the
mental activity which causes the action, denoted by the given
verb to be done, and the command denoted by the injunction
stand to each other, as a noun relates itself with its adjective,
by means of the relation of identity or some other relation. We
cannot follow that either words or their meanings or sentences
which are held to communicate the interrelated meanings of
words or the subtle power of a word which is supposed to
reveal its meaning cannot produce the knowledge of a real
object.
It is not reasonable to hold that when the knowledge of an
object is produced by a sentence the validity of it is assured ifNyayamanjari
the sentence is known as being uttered by a reliable person or as
being eternal.
Even if it is admitted that the words are eternal then it is to
be established that either the Vedic sentences are composed by
an author or they are eternal. If it is held that they are com-
posed by an author it is impossible to find out the author.
Even if it is assumed that they are composed by a single au-
thor then it is difficult to comprehend that he has no enemy and
is one, omniscient and compassionate.
328
There are many agamas (scriptures) which involve contradi-
ctions. Now it is difficult for us to ascertain that which books of
them have been composed by God and which ones have not
been composed by Him.
There are many defects which are noticed in the Vedas
which are assumed to be the work of God. They are as follows
viz. (1) contradiction, (2) repetition of the same idea, (3) non-
obtainment of the result assured by the Vedas and (4) the ari-
sing of the contrary result.
If God were the author of the Vedas then the Artha-vāda
section of the Vedas (the section which contains recommen-
dation, praise, condemnation, a reference to history etc.) would
not have involved material contradiction, mutual contradic-
tions and references of ephemeral objects.
The Vedas inform us of the eternal objects and instruct us
to do some actions by which some results are accomplished. Now,
a doubt arises in our mind viz., either do the Vedas initiate us
into eternal objects or do they teach us to do some actions or
do they intend to do the both? In fine, the authority of the
Vedas cannot be rationally established. You may admit the
authority of the Vedas because either they furnish you with the
means to your livelihood or they command your unconditional
reverence.
The Justification of The Authority of Speech
The review of the above criticism is as follows. All the defects,
pointed above, will be remedied in the proper order. Hence the
objector should not live in the fool's paradise that his criti-
cisms are unanswerable. Oh long lived one, you should know
that the truth of the Vedas stands well-established.Authority of Speech Justified
329
Now, how can the objection that a word does not relate
itself with a real object be answered? It has been asserted that
words do not produce the Knowledge of the real external obje-
-cts. The words are produced by such imagination as holds out
false hopes that they are related to the real objects. They, by
their own nature, produce such imaginative judgments as do
not refer to the real external objects. Let us cite an example
to illustrate our point, a sentence like a hundred elephants simul-
taneously stand on the finger-end' is a classical one.
words, by their very nature, are somehow related to the objects.
Here
It may be argued against the conclusion that the sources of
perception such as eyes etc. also produce illusory experience. A
bundle of hairs is mistaken for a peacock-tail. In every such case
the sense-organs
do not come in contact with the real objects in
order to produce knowledge. Such an argument does not hold
good since only the diseased sense-organs e. g., suffering from
the detachment of retina, produce illusion. But they do never by
their intrinsic nature produce illusion. Regarding the false
verbal knowledge, it may be stated that such knowledge is only
due to the defect in the speaker and that a word is not its
source. Such an argument is not tenable. If a man who has
defects, is dumb then he who cannot utter a word cannot
produce illusion in others. If a defectless person utters the
sentence that there stand a hundred elephants on the tip of a
finger then the sentence is sure to produce illusion. Hence, the
conclusion does not follow from the above observation that it
is in the nature of words to produce illusion but the defect in the
speaker does not produce illusion. Moreover, whenever a true
judgment exerts its counter-acting influence the sense-organs
such as eyes etc. desist from producing illusory judgments. If we
know that the yonder object is not silver then the object cannot
produce the illusory experience that it is silver (i. e. we see the
-object with our eyes and do not mistake it for silver). But if we
truly know a hundred times the knowledge arising from the
sentence that there stand a hundred elephants on the tip of a
finger to be incorrect and to be cancelled by a true judgment
even then the sentence that there stand a hundred elephants on
the tip of a finger again produces a false imaginary judgment.
As words are the creature of imagination so they produce330
Nyayamanjari
illusion in the face of a real counteracting contradictory
judgment. This is what is called the dissociation of words with
the real objects. It has been stated in the Buddhist logic thus :
"Imagination begets words and words beget imagination and
they are inseparably connected with each other. So the dis-
cordance of words with the real objects constantly follows from
the very nature of words. This is the sum and substance of the
argument of the Buddhist logicians against the validity of
verbal knowledge.
A reply to this objection is as follows. The contender might
have subscribed to the hypothesis of the objector if no sentence
had produced the true knowledge of a real object. So far as.
we understand the nature of a word we know for certain that
there is a perfect agreement between a word and a real object
denoted by it. If the sentence that there are fruits on the banks.
of a river is uttered by a trustworthy person then it produces a
true judgment in the mind of a listener and there is no material
contradiction of it. A person who hearing this sentence moves.
for the fruits gets them. Now, the objector may contend that
a false judgment, in some cases, leads to a successful result. He
cites an example to corroborate his statement. A man who
mistakes the ray of a gem for a gem proceeds to obtain it and
gets hold of it. Similarly, the false judgment, arising from the
above sentence, is crowned with success. Thus, a false judgment
does not stand on the way of obtaining a good result. Such a
contention is not tenable. This matter will be thoroughly
discussed later on.
Now, let us see whether or not the sentence that there stand
a hundred elephants uttered by a trustworthy person, produces.
a true judgment. Such a conjecture is absurd since a good man,
possessed of excellent merits, is not so fickle as to utter such a
sentence.
A trust-worthy person advises people not to utter an incoherent
sentence like the sentence that a hundred herds of elephants
stand on the finger-tip. Even if it is admitted that such a person
utters an incoherent sentence like the above one then he does.
so with the intention of denying something and uses it as a
mere symbol of contradiction. The sentence consists of empty
words and its literal meaning is not insisted upon. If theAuthority of Speech justified
331
sentence in question would have been used by him to convey a
meaning then he had not prohibited people to use it. Thus the
sentence which is uttered by a reliable person does never
produce a false judgment. Hence, the hypothesis that a sentence
does never represent the real objects is not tenable. Whenever
a sentence misrepresents a fact or an object the speaker, i.e., the
author of the sentence, is to blame.
*
Now, a fresh doubt about the negative relation between a
sentence and the knowledge of an object arises in our mind. It
is stated thus :-Either an erroneous judgment does not take
place if a sentence does not precede it, or, it does not arise if
the speaker has no defect in him. No such doubt arises in our
mind.
A knave who does not utter a word deceives others, having
recourse to the other methods such as a gesture, etc.
A man
It may be argued that in the above case words are inferred
from such gestures and it is the inferred words which produce
illusory knowledge. But such an argument does not hold good
since it does not bear out the evidence of experience.
who listens to the sentence that there are fruits on the banks of
a river goes there but becomes disappointed as his experience
contradicts the truth of the above sentence. Then he heaps
contumely on the person but not on the words with the remarks,
"I have been deceived by the wicked fellow: Fie upon him".
If he is crowned with success then he praises the speaker of
the sentence with the remark "He is a great man as he is a
sooth-sayer." Thus we see by the method of agreement and
difference that the defect in the speaker is causally connected
with the falsehood of the judgment conveyed by his sentence.
If a reliable person keeps silence then there is no scope of
finding him. In that case no false knowledge arises as there is
no knowledge. If an unreliable person advises something, a
person who listens to it has illusory experience. Hence any and
every word is not the source of illusion.
speaker condition an illusion ?
How do the defects in a
Because a person who has either merits or defects does simply
utter a word. When a word is uttered it does so to convey its
sense without giving us an opportunity of knowing the defects
or otherwise in the person. An illusion which is produced in aNyayamanjari
listener is only due to the word of a speaker. A word assumes
no corrupt form to produce it. The Naiyãyikas are really glad
at this suggestion. The implication of this suggestion is that if
the speaker is a meritorious person then the sentence "There
are fruits on the banks of a river," uttered by him, produces
true knowledge and that his words are capable of producing it.
It follows from the above hypothesis that a person plays only
the part of a speaker, and that a word presupposes no relation
with the object to be denoted by it. But it is not reasonable to
hold that a word expresses its meaning, being independent of
its relation with the object. On the contrary it is reasonable to
hold that it is the essence of a word that it reveals an object
like a lamp. It should also be noted that correct or incorrect
representation of an object does not constitute the essence of a
word. A lamp reveals an object but it does not imply that a
lamp always correctly reveals an object since the illusory percep-
tion of an object is also produced by a lamp-light. Words are also
different from a lamp in some respects. A lamp reveals an
object independently of any conventional rule. But words
depend upon
the relation of denotation in order to reveal an
object. The truth or otherwise of words which communicate the
knowledge of an object respectively depends upon the per-
fection or defect of the speaker. When the sentences such as the
sentence "There are a hundred elephants on the finger-tip" are
repeatedly uttered, they produce illusory knowledge in the
mind of a listener since words which misrepresent facts possess
the common character of revealing an object. Words are not
to blame for this.
332
If a speaker repeatedly utters a sentence without considering
whether or not the meanings of the component words are well-
connected then he is only to blame for his inadvertence but not
his words.
Some earlier logicians have held that the truth of the pre-
vious perception of the speaker-the perception which is at the
root of the above verbal statement is negated but not the
syntactical relation of the words in the sentence "There are a
hundred elephants, etc." A person communicates his direct
knowledge through the medium of words to the other persons.
If his basic perceptual knowledge is illusory then the verbalValidity of Verbal Knowledge
333
knowledge which is communicated by him is wrong. But if the
basic perception is correct then the verbal knowledge is also
right. If a person without perceiving an object instructs others
then his power of judgment is not surely up to the mark, i.e.
defective. Thus the truth or untruth of verbal knowledge
respectively depends upon the perfection or upon the imperfec-
tion of a person, Le., the speaker. Sabara Śvamin has also
subscribed to this view. He holds that verbal knowledge is, in
some cases, true and it also turns out to be false, in some other
cases.
The invalidity of verbal knowledge is due to the shortcomings
of the speaker. It is not true to hold that words, by themselves,
are never related to the real objects. The Buddhists have tried
to prove by means of destructive criticism that words remain
always unrelated to the real objects because existence has been
denied to universals and such other objects which are denoted
by words. Their negative thesis will be refuted later on.
An Introduction to the Discussion about the Intrinsic or Extrinsic
Validity of all forms of valid knowledge
When a question regarding the validity of verbal knowledge
is raised the followers of Jaimini hold that verbal knowledge is
valid.
Let us, at the outset, discuss whether all knowledge is valid
or not. Let us also decide whether knowledge carries along with
itself the stamp of validity on the face of it or not. If it does
not carry along with itself the stamp of validity on the face of
it then does it derive it from an external source and do we know
it from some source ?
Why do you introduce a broader issue, viz., the problem of
the validity of all knowledge, leaving aside the point at issue, viz.
the validity of verbal knowledge. It is a fruism that the problem
of the validity of verbal knowledge has not been singled out to
be treated separately. But we have taken up the broader issue
in order to solve the problem under discussion because the key
to the solution of both problems is one and the some.
As the validity of all other forms of knowledge is either in-
trinsic or extrinsic so that of verbal knowledge will also obey
the same rule. It is not reasonable to hold that verbal know-334
Nyayamanjari
ledge, being a class by itself, its validity has a unique character.
Thus the question of validity or invalidity of all forms of know-
ledge should be uniformly treated.
(1) Do we recognize a piece of knowledge to be either true
or untrue when we are aware of it ? (2) Or, do we know it to be
so after testing it by some external standard? (3) Or, do we know
a piece of knowledge to be untrue whenever we are aware of it?
Or do we know it to be true only when it is tested by an exter-
nal standard? (4) Or, do we know a piece of knowledge to be
true without testing it? Or, do we know it to be untrue only
after testing it by an external standard?
(We shall also remember in this connection that the problem
ofvalidity or invalidity has another distinct aspect which invites
our attention: (1) Do the conditions which produce a piece
of knowledge contribute towards its validity? (2) Or, does
a piece of valid knowledge require an extra factor for its
coming into being? (3) Does a piece of erroneous knowledge
require an extra factor for its coming into being ? (4) Or, do
the conditions which produce a piece of such knowledge deter-
mine its invalidity ?)
The Mimamsakas hold that the Validity of a Piece of knowledge is
Intrinsic.
The hypothesis that the validity as well as the invalidity of a
piece of knowledge is intrinsic is not reasonable since when a
person may move to get hold of an object, seeing it to be such
and such he may be unsuccessful. Thus the truth of his know-
ledge is contradicted. If a piece of knowledge carries with it-
self sense that it is either true or untrue then does the mistake
of the mother-of-pearl for silver carry with itself the sense that
it is true or untrue ?
If a piece of knowledge carries with itself the belief that it
is instrinsically true then how is it that it is discordant with
its object? Again, if it carries with itself the belief that it is not
true then how is it that a person moves to bring the object
referred to ?
This criticism refutes the third alternative hypothesis accor-
ding to which the invalidity of a piece of knowledge is intrinsic
and owes its existence to no additional factor but on the con-Mimāṁsaka View of Valid Knowledge
335
trary, the validity of a piece of knowledge is extrinsic but it owes
its existence to an extraneous factor. If the invalidity of a
piece of knowledge had been grasped along with the awareness
of itself then there would have been no movement in response
to it. Again, the invalidity of a piece of knowledge could not
have come into being if it were not generated by a special
condition. It presupposes a distinct factor for its appearance.
It owes its existence to such deficiency as assembles together
with the condition of knowledge. Again, we know a piece of
knowledge to be false when we definitely know that it is contra-
dicted by its contradictory judgment. Hence, a piece of false
knowledge does not arise independently of special factor and a
piece of knowledge is not known as false whenever we are aware
of it. Some (Buddhists) hold that the invalidity of a piece of
knowledge is the negation of validity. They also hold that it is
unreal as it is negation and that it does not owe its existence to
an additional condition such as deficiency or some other factor.
The hypothesis is not reasonable since untrue knowledge
admits of two kinds, viz. (1) illusion and (2) doubt and hence
it is not unreal. Thus, the untruth or invalidity of a piece of
untrue knowledge, being its abstract property, cannot be unreal.
Moreover, the validity of a piece of knowledge does not owe its
existence to a distinct factor. And the view that a piece of
knowledge is known to be true afterwards when it is verified
(i.e. when it is submitted to a real test and that validity "owes
its existence to a distinct factor will be elaborately discussed in
the following paragraphs of this section. Thus, second part of the
hypothesis that (a) the invalidity of a piece of knowledge is
extrinsic and that (b) the validity of a piece of knowledge is
extrinsic will also be refuted.
It has been stated that a piece of knowledge is true if it
reveals an object in its 'true character. The truth of a piece of
knowledge is its non-discrepancy with the object referred to by
it. Now, if the said truth depends upon a distinct factor for its
appearance and if it is cognized to be such only in relation to
something other than itself then it is called as extraneously
determined and known. But with regard to these two aspects
it is absolutely independent of any outside influence. Now, if it
is held that the validity of a piece of knowledge is extrinsicNyayamanjari
then three questions arise in our mind, viz. "What is the ex-
traneous factor that brings it about ?" "What is the extra object
by the aid of which the true knowledge requires to discharge its
normal function?" And "What is the standard by which the
truth of a piece of knowledge is tested ?" If it is admitted that
the validity of a piece of knowledge owes its existence to an
extraneous factor then what is this extraneous factor? Is it
nothing but the essence of the conditions that produce it? Or
is it simply a qualitative improvement of the same conditions
responsible for a piece of valid knowledge? If the assemblage
of the conditions of a piece of knowledge and that of valid
knowledge are basically the same, then the Naiyayikas simply
try to establish the established hypothesis. If the conditions are
absent then a piece of knowledge which is an effect cannot come
into being. In that case, there is no piece of knowledge which
as an effect cannot come into being. In that case, there is no
piece of knowledge the validity or the invalidity of which will
be discussed. It is also very difficult to establish the hypothesis
that the validity of a piece of knowledge depends upon a special
factor which is distinct from the conditions, though all the
conditions of a piece of knowledge and those of the so-called
qualitative improvement of the same conditions is unreal like
the sky-lotus, since its existence has not been proved. Hence,
such an improvement, being a mere conjecture, cannot be
the reliable condition of validity.
336
Let us take an example of true perception. The truth of
perception does not depend upon the special quality of a
sense-organ. It is hard to establish that such a special quality
of the sense-organ is grasped by perception. The truth of perce-
ption is determined by a special quality that qualifies a sense-
organ. All sense-organs, as the eyes, etc., are imperceptible.
Hence, how can the quality be perceived since it belongs to a
sense-organ, a transcendental object? It is not an inference
since the relation of concomitance holding between it and its
mark cannot be detected. Hence we arrive at the conclusion
that a piece of valid knowledge is pro luce.l only by the defect-
less conditions.
If there had been a third type of judgment which is neither
true nor fake then the three different sets of conditions wouldThe Mimāṁsaka view of the Validity of Knowledge
have been necessarily assumed to explain the three different
types of effects : In that case we are to hold that a true judg-
ment is produced by a cause, possessed of a good quality, that
an illusory judgement is produced by a defective cause and that
a neutral judgment is produced by a cause as it is, i.e. by a
cause which has neither a good quality nor a defect. But a third
type of judgment is conspicuous by its absence. It is a truism
that there are only two types of judgments, viz., true and false.
Of these two types the false one is known to be produced only
by the defective cause. It has been experienced that a jar which
is produced by defective conditions has a distorted form.
Similarly, the moon which has been perceived with normal
eyes is one but when she perceived with diseased eyes she is
known to be two.
337
It has been established that an illusory judgment is produced
by the defective cause and that the third type of judgment
which is neither true nor false is conspicuous by its absence.
Hence, we arrive at the conclusion that the true judgment is
produced by its normal cause, having no other qualification.
There is no need of assuming the hypothesis that an additional
good quality of the cause besides its normal property is necessary
for the appearance of a true judgment. The assemblage of con-
ditions (viz. the presence of the reason in the subject of infe-
rence, the knowledge of the relation of invariable concomitance
holding between the reason and the consequence, etc.) which
determines an inference is also known to contribute towards its
truth when the conditions of an effect which have neither
defects nor new good qualities (i.e, when they remain normal),
assemble, they do not surely remain indifferent to produce
their effects. Why should we assume that the conditions of
consciousness require the assistance of a new good quality to
produce a true judgment? For this reason, the hypothesis that
the conditions have an extra excellence is to be discarded. The
absence of any disease of the eyes such as glaucoma, jaundice,
etc. has been expressed in a manner so that an impression is
produced in our mind that the eyes have acquired a new virtue,
viz., transparency. But it should be noted that the transparent
eyes are nothing but normal ones, having no new excellence.
When we apply ointments or collyrium lines to our eyes we do338
Nyayamanjari
it with the intention of curing our eyes of their disease but not
under the impression that a new good quality will emerge. In
other words this device restores the eyes to their normal
conditions.
Hence, the true knowledge is produced by the normal condi-
tions. The false knowledge is produced by an excess of defects
which interfere with their normal function. Therefore, the
falsehood of knowledge depends upon an additional condition
for its coming into being. Again, the falsity of knowledge, is
determined, by an additional condition since the conditions of
a true judgment cannot produce its opposite judgment.
The truth of a piece of knowledge does not depend upon a
new good quality of its conditions for its coming into being. A
piece of knowledge does not depend upon an extra-condition,
viz., a new good quality to do its normal function. The illu-
mination of an object by a sense-organ is due to its normal
function for which it is indebted only to its conditions. The
true knowledge simply reveals its object. The movement of the
knower for the object revealed is due to his desire for the same.
It intervenes between the knowledge of an object and the
movement of the knower for it.
When a true judgment comes into existence it does not
depend upon a new quality as its source. It does also independ-
ently play its part. It derives its nature of illuminating an
object only from its own cause. The function of a true judgment
is only to reveal an object. The movement on the part of a
a knower for the revealed object is due to his choice and final
resolution in favour of the same object.
When an apprehension comes into being it is not endowed
with the character of illuminating an object. But it, being
produced, reveals an object. Still, it does not depend upon
something ab extra in order to reveal its object.
Some logicians have expressed the same idea in other words.
A jar derives its existence from a lump of earth, a stick, a wheel
a piece of thread, etc. but it depends upon none when it
discharges its function of carrying water, i. e. it independent-
ly carries water.
Or (the mimärsakas clarify their position)The Mimāṁsaka view of the Validity of Knowledge
Ajar cannot independently carry water. It requires the
services of a carrier to do so. But a true judgment requires
the aid of nothing outside itself in order to reveal an object
(It may be argued against the hypothesis that an act of aware-
ness, being self-conscious, reveals its own object. The drift of
this argument is that an awareness depends upon its own nature
for the illumination of an object. The Mimämisakas anticipate
this argument and try to render it pointless in the following
manner). An act of awareness being self-conscious, does not
reveal its object. As the sense-organs such as the eyes, etc.
without being conscious of their own existence reveal objects.
But why an awareness should be self-conscious in order to its
own object?
339
Sabara, in his commentary on the Mimāṁsā-sūtras, has said
to this effect. 'No body is aware of his awareness if the object is
not cognized. When an object is cognized the knower infers that
he has the awareness of an object because the object has been
cognized'. Hence, a true judgment does not require the aid of
its own awareness in order to discharge its own function, viz.,
in order to illuminate an object. Again a true judgment does
not require the aid of an extra factor in order to apprehend its
own essential attribute, viz., validity, since there is nothing else
to be depended upon. Let us examine the rival hypotheses
which explain the determination of the validity of a judgment.
Does the determination of validity presuppose the knowledge
of a new quality which occasionally springs up and qualifies
the cause of the judgment to which the validity in question is
supposed to belong? Or, does it presuppose the knowledge of the
absence of a contradictory (preventive) judgment? Or, does it
presuppose the consilience of the judgment with another true
judgment? The first hypothesis that the determination of the
validity of a true judgment presupposes the knowledge of a new
quality of the cause of the judgment and that the validity in
question is supposed to belong to the cause is not tenable since
the presence of such a quality in the cause of the judgment will
be immediately refuted in the following paragraph.
The new quality which is asserted to belong to the cause of
a true judgment cannot be sensed since the quality which belongs
to the super-sensuous cause is itself imperceptible.Nyayamanjari
The upholders of the first hypothesis may contend that the
said quality of the cause may be inferred from the successful
action which signifies the actual attaitnment of the object
referred to by the Judgment. But such a success cannot be
achived if a person does not move. The movement of a person
cannot take place if he does not determine the validity of this
judgment, the main spring of his movement. If a person moves
in response to a judgment without determining its validity then
the determination of the validity of the judgment at a subsquent
period is fruitless. Again, if it is held that the determination
of the validity of the said judgment precedes his movement then
such a statement is a glaring instance of circular reasoning.
When a person moves he knows that his action is successful.
When he knows that his action has turned out to be successful
he comes to know that the cause of his judgment has the specifi-
ed quality. When he knows that the cause has such and such
quality he determines that the judgment is true. And when he
arrives at such a determination he moves for the object.
Moreover, if we know for certain that a contradictory
judgment which prevents the appearance of its opposite
is absent then it does not follow that the opposite judgment is
340
true.
Is such knowledge of the absence of a contradictory judgment
confined only to the present time? Or does it cover all times?
If it is limited only to the present time then it is not capable of
leading to the determination of the validity of the judgment in
question. The knowledge of spurious cowries may not be
contradicted for some time. But it is a fact that such knowledge
is contradicted after some time. A person who is less than an
omniscient being cannot comprehend that a judgment is absolu-
tely free from all contradictions in all times.
Now, let us examine the second hypothesis regarding the test
of the truth of a judgment. If it is held that consilience constitutes
the standard by which the truth of a judgment is determined
then what does consilience signify? Does it mean that a
judgment is consilient with another if they both refer to one and
the same object? Or, does it mean that a judgment is consilient
with another judgment which refers to a distinct? Or does it
mean that a judgment is consilient with another judgmentThe Mimamsaka view of the Validity of Knowledge
which refers to the utility of the object of the first one as its
object? We draw the attention of those logicians who are in
favour of the first meaning of the term 'consilience' and put
this question to them "wherein lies the distinction between the
prior and the posterior judgments so that the prior one is
recognized as true if it thoroughly agrees with the posterior one".
Moreover, if they hold that the truth will be asserted of the
prior judgment on their consilience with a posterior judgment
then they will not be able even after hundreds of years, to find
out the final posterier judgment. If they go on examining a
lot of judgment without accepting them as true but arbitrarily
select one to be intrinsically true then why do they cherish hatr-
ed against the first one? (In other words, they cannot determine
the truth of a judgment if they do not hold that judgment
which constitutes the truth of a judgment if they do not hold
that judgment which constitutes the standard of truth is in-
trinsicilly true. If they are compelled to hold that one judg-
ment is, at least, intrinsicallly true then why should not they
hold that the other judgments are also intrinsically true?)
It has been stated by Kumārila :
341
"If a judgment is to be at all accepted as intrinsically valid
then why do you murmur at the acceptance of the intrinsic
validity of the initial judgment ?
It may be held that a judgment is true if it is consilient with
another judgment. Such a view is not tenable since our experi-
ence does not bear it out. The knowledge of a post is never in
agreement with that of a jar. It may be said that the validity
of the initial impellent judgment is ascertained when there is
consilience between the knowledge of the object referred to by
the judgment and that of the effect of the said object. Such a
view is not tenable. If the validity of the second knowledge is
not determined then how can the validity of the initial judgment
be ascertained? Moreover, wherein lies the distinction bet-
ween the knowledge of an object and that of its effect? For
which reason should the first knowledge depend upon the
second one for the determination of its validity ? It may be said
in its favour that the practical efficiency constitutes the diffe-
rentía of the second one. Let this point of view be substatiated.
When water is absent we mistake at the outset the rays of the342
Nyāyamanjari
sun for water. How can one place his reliance upon the validity
of a judgment of the first type? But when one actually plunges
in water, drinks it and bathes in it he experiences the practical
utility of water. Such an experience is never contradicted.
Hence, it guarantees the truth of the knowledge of water. This
hypothesis is not sound. The sight of water and the experience
of drinking and bathing falsify the above hypothesis. Moreover,
when one sees a youthful damsel in a dream and embraces her
he ejaculates semen without the actual contact with a real lady.
Thus the above hypothesis is open to serious inconsistency.
The upholder of the above hypothesis may contend that the
above emission of semen is not due to the embrace of a lady.
But it owes its existence to the excessive sexual excitement or to
the derangement of bile. Hence, there is no contradiction in
the above hypothesis. Such a defence is not reasonable. Such
an emission is causally connected with the dalliance with a
damsel. This causal connection is determined by the joint
method of agreement and difference.
Hence the hypothesis of consilience between the knowledge
of an object and that of its result does not guarantee the truth of
the knowledge of the object, since, the true knowledge of the
practical utility of an object takes place even when the object is
absent.
If a person does not move in response to his initial judgment
then it is impossible on his part to acquire the knowledge of
the utility of the object. Now, it should be admitted that he
moves when the validity of the initial judgment is ascertained.
In order to determine the validity of the judgment in question
it should be recognized before that some special good quality
of the instrumental cause of the judgment is responsible for it
(the judgment in question). Thus, the tree of this hyp hesis
will ultimately have to face the havoc done by a see-saw in the
shape of reasoning in a vicious circle as it has been indicated
before. In other words, the movement of a person helps one to
acquire the definite knowledge of the truth of the impelling
judgment, its truth leads up to the determination of the special
good quality of its cause, the recognition of such good quality
helps the ascertainment of the truth of the judgment and such
determination of truth impels one to move. Therefore it is a343
The Mimamsaka view of the Validity of Knowledge
clear instance of reasoning in a vicious circle. If a person moves
without knowing for certain that the knowledge of object to-
wards which he moves is true then the subsequent determina-
tion of the truth of the impellent judgment though possible, is
futile. According to the Hindu custom one should shave when
the star is auspicious. But if he shaves and then enquires
whether the star is auspicious then such investigation is surely
profitless. Similarly, post movement enquiry about the truth of
a judgment is absolutely fruitless.
An answer to the above objection is as follows. There are
two types of movement, viz. (1) original movement and (2)
imitative movement. An illustration of the first type is as
follows. In order to test the condition of seeds some seeds of
śāli paddy, etc., are sown in a flat cup containing very soft mud
which has been properly watered. The cultivators observe the
clever art of properly germinating the seeds. Then they unhesi-
tatingly sow the same seeds in the paddy field. Their activities
illustrate the second type. Now, let us come to our original
point. When a wise man examines a judgment and makes it out
to be true he moves for the object referred to by the judgment.
This is an example of the first type of movement. When his
movement is fruitful the wise knower accepts the knowledge of
the practical utility of the object to be true. If a judgment refer-
ring to the same object arises in his mind at a later period, he
will move with perfect ease for the object, having no shade of
doubt. Therefore, the examination of the truth of a judgment
after movement is not absolutely fruitless. This is what we have
got to say.
A review of the above argument is as follows. The example,
cited above, is not convincing. We shall firstly be sure of the
fact that the seeds that are before us and those which have
germinated are homogeneous. On the definite understanding of
the homogeneity of these seeds the peasants unhesitatingly pro-
ceed to sow them. As all acts of consciousness have the same
character but no individualistic distinction so the distinction of
an act is to be indirectly known in and through either its effect
and cause.
Can we infer that this act of knowledge is true because it is
produced by such and such cause ? No, we cannot do it because344
Nyayamanjari
the cause is beyond the reach of sense-organ at that time. We
cannot also infer the truth of a judgment from the effect since
it has been stated that in order to do so we are required to
move at first. If our voluntary movement does not presuppose
the determination of the truth of the impellent judgment then is
not the quest after truth later on superfluous ? Thus, the above
argument against the charge of futility is not adequate. Hence,
the truth of a judgment cannot be inferred by means of the
pragmatic method. One may hold that the truth of a judgment
is determined if its cause is known to be defectless endowed
with good quality. Then he surely imitates a person who, after
having concluded the nuptial ceremony, enquires whether the
time of the said ceremony is auspicious.
Those who hold that the truth of a judgment is extrinsic
argue this. They describe a well-known incident. In a certain
season abounding in full-blown flowers the bees suck the honey
of flowers and hum very sweetly. A person conceals his body
there behind the thick bower of creepers and plays on the
lute. He who hears the music but does not see the player of the
lute doubts whether the musical notes are the humming of bees.
This very doubt prompts him to proceed towards the sound.
When the player on the lute is seen the cause of the sound is
definitely known. The doubt of the listener is solved. Then the
listener is able to know which of the two alternatives of the
above doubt is true. This is the finding out of the truth of a
judgment by means of the determination of the exact cause.
If a man does not move for the object, he cannot realise the
competency of the cause. Moreover, if he moves without as-
certaining the truth of the impellent judgment then it is super-
fluous on his part to determine the truth of the said judgment.
Again, if the upholders of the extrinsic validity of a judgment
hold that movement presupposes the determination of the truth
of the impellent judgment then they will surely face the fallacy
of mutual dependence. The determination of the truth of the
judgment is the prerequisite condition of movement and such
movement leads up to the determination of the truth of the
said judgment.
Thus we arrive at the conclusion that the hypothesis of the
extrinsic validity of a judgment cannot avoid the following345
Intrinsic nature of Falsehood of a judgment refuted
charges, viz., reasoning in a vicious circle, mutual dependence,
regressus ad infinitum, superfluity, etc. Therefore, the determina-
tion of the truth of a judgment is self-evident. Therefore, we
(the Mīmāmsakas) arrive at the three conclusions, viz. (1) 'The
truth of a judgment does not depend upon an additional factor
for its coming into being' (2) 'A true judgment discharges its
function independently of an additional factor'. and (3) 'The
determination of the truth of a judgment presupposes no act of
knowledge other than itself'. The final great conclusions which
these three conclusions point to the conclusion that the truth
of a judgment is self-evident since it is absolutely free from the
three conditions that determine the extrinsic character of the
truth of a judgment.
Kumarila says:
"The truths of all true judgments are innate in them since if
the truth of a judgment is not its inherent property then it
cannot be imparted to it by an influence ab extra”.
The Refutation of the Hypothesis that the Falsehood of a Judgment
is Intrinsic
The falsehood of a judgment owes its existence to a defect
belonging to a cause. A judgment is known to be untrue only
with reference to a contradictory judgment. Hence the untruth
of a judgment is an extrinsic property. Hence the first three
hypotheses being not amenable to reason the fourth hypothesis
is the best of all. The hypothesis amounts to this that the
truth of a judgment is intrinsic and its falsehood is extrinsic.
When a judgment arises in our mind we are not in a position
to determine whether it is true or it is untrue. Hence, this
oscillating state of the mind gives rise to a doubt.
The nature of a true judgment is the revelation of an object.
This is the common property of the true and the false judg-
ments It is well-known that the awareness of the common chara-
cter of these two kinds of judgment is a source of doubt.
We cannot know that a judgment is either true or otherwise
extrinsic
unless and until it is consilient with or contradicted by another
judgment. Hence, both truth and falsehood are
properties.Intrinsic nature of Falsehood of a judgment refuted
347
us take an example : We have jaundiced eyes. But we do not
know them to be such. We see a conch-shell. We judge that this
is yellow. But when we learn that our eyes are jaundiced we
come to know that the predicate 'yellow' is wrong. The aware-
ness of the defect in the eyes, i.e. jaundice, falsifies the judgment
that this is yellow. The predicate 'yellow' owes its existence to
jaundice, but not to the cause. It is in the nature of defect to
produce such false knowledge. The two contrary predicates are
predicated of the same subject. The cause produces the real
one. The defect is responsible for its contrary one. Thus, the
possibility of the opposite predicate is due to the defect in the
cause.) The Mimãmsakas put forward such an example as is
found in the Vedic literature. It has been enjoined in the Vedas
that water should be sprinkled from a Camasa (a spoon used
for sprinkling water) in a Darśa-Paurnamasa sacrifices (Vedic
rites observed in new moon and full moon). A Camasa is a
means to the performance of Darša and Paurṇamāsa sacrifices
because it is one of its necessary implements. But it has also
been enjoined that a person who is desirous of gaining cattle
should give water to a cow, carrying it with a pot used in con-
nection with milking. In the second injunction an emphasis has
been laid on an animal which is the desideration of the per-
former. The above-mentioned pot is an essential implement in
the second rite. It serves well the purpose of giving water to a
COW. But in connection with the performance of this rite a
Camasa has no utility. (A Camasa and a milk-pot may be used
alike in the second rite. The purpose of giving water to a cow
may be served by both of them. The use of milk-pot has been
prescribed by the Vedas. Hence, though there is no opposition
between a Camasa and a milk-pot yet the use of a Camasa has
been cancelled by the Vedic injunction.) Similarly, though the
knowledge, produced by a defective sense-organ, is due to the
defect yet the truth of the knowledge in the second example is
cancelled because it has been generated by the unauthorised or
unvedic cause.
Kumärila, the author of Sloka-vārttika, has endorsed the
same view and clarified the Mîmāṁsā point of view. He holds
that though the judgment, produced by a defective cause, and
a true judgment, produced by the same cause, only devoid of theNyayamanjari
would have never been baffled. But it is a fact that we are
deceived. Hence, we think that we transact our normal busi-
ness even when the truth of the impelling judgment is believed
to be highly probable but is not definitely ascertained.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas contend that though the impellent
judgment amounts to be a doubt yet it is not experienced to be
such. No body experiences an object and expresses his judgment
in the form indicative of a doubt. When we perceive silver do
we say "This is silver or not ?" But we communicate our per-
ceptual judgment by means of the proposition that this is
silver. An ordinary person who is under the sway of a doubt
does not proceed to have the object which is doubted. But when
he is sure of the object he moves for it. Why do you ascribe the
character of a doubt to a judgment which is not experienced to
be so?
354
The Naiyãyikas join issue with the Mīmāmsakas and establish
their point by the following argument. It is a fact that the
judgment in question refers to a single object and that there is no
oscillation between two alternatives. But still it does not fur-
nish the knower with a means to determine the true nature of
the object. Hence, it, by force of logic, represents to it as a
doubt. A doubt, also, assumes the form of a judgment. For
example, when the ascetics, having no fixed abode, see a well
from a distance they think that there is water in the well.
Though the prior judgment that this is silver refers to a single
object yet it is virtually nothing but a doubt. Again if its truth
is ascertained then how can it be contradicted sometimes after?
On the other hand, if it is known to be untrue then how can it
impel a person to move ?
As we can know it neither as true nor as untrue so it should
be a doubt. Why are you (the Mimāṁsakas) angry upon us
(the Naiyāyikas)?
It is a truism that though this event of consciousness is not
experienced as a doubt yet it is logically established that it is a
doubt. Even if we move for our accustomed objects, a true
judgment does not guide us. We infer that this is a doubt from
a major premise obtained by an induction.
(All movements are preceded by a doubt)
This is a movement.Intrinsic nature of the truth of Valid Knowledge
355
Therefore, this movement is also preceded by a doubt. The
conditions of a judgment are absent whereas the conditions of a
doubt are present. Let us illustrate our point. The object which
is sensed is the common property of true and false judgments
like height, etc. (common to a man and a post). We are not at
that time aware of any specific property of the said object
which invariably produces a true judgment. In the absence of
such a specific property the awareness of the common property
revives our acquired impressions and brings about the remem-
brance of both the predicates of a judgment, viz., true and un-
true, as these two features have been alternately experienced by
us. So, we hold that there is an assemblage of the conditions of
a doubt. Why should not a doubt be produced by them?
The Mimamsakas may meet this argument in the following
manner. The act of consciousness in question is a true judgment
because whenever it appears in the mind of a knower the in-
variable mark of its truth is revealed to him but on the appear-
ance of a false judgment no such mark is noticed.
The Naiyayikas examine this contention in the following
manner. Oh Sir! kindly define the distinct feature of the
said mark since we ourselves cannot make it out, being shallow
minds. If the vividness of an awareness constitutes the distinc-
tion then a false judgment that this is silver, having a reference
to the mother-of-pearl, has the same vividness since such a
judgment does not contain the impurity of indefiniteness. Again
if you hold that the absence of the misapprehension of untruth
constitutes its distinction then we also point out that such a
distinction also belongs to a false judgment that this is silver,
referring to the mother-of-pearl. When such a judgment (this is
silver) arises in our mind we do not suspect it to be untrue as we
do on hearing the sentence that there are a hundred elephants
on the tip of a finger. Moreover, if you hold that an apprehen-
sion is vivid because it is other than a doubt then we shall also
mention that the misapprehension of silver is also vivid since
there is no oscillation between two incompatible predicates in it.
Now you may hold that a judgment has a distinctive mark of
truth in the shape of having no contradictory judgment to
cancel its truth. But we are obliged to put a question to you
for our information. Can you name a situation when contradic356
Nyayamanjari
tion does not arise at all? The non-appearance of contradiction
is an absurdity. We are sure of the fact that contradiction arises
to invalidate a judgment at all stages. If we reflect long on this
special feature, we cannot define it. Last of all, you may hold
that the distinctive mark of truth is constituted by the accord-
ance of a judgment with its object. Then we simply reiterate
our old criticism that such a distinctive feature is not grasped
by us when the judgment makes its appearance. Another point
in the above criticism is that even if such a distinctive feature is
admitted to be grasped then how does a person move for an
object on the basis of a judgment which lacks such a distinc-
tion? The last point in the criticism is that even if a person
grasps the above distinctive mark of his impellent judgment,
why is he deceived on moving for the object? The impellent
judgment may be in the form that this is a post but not a man.
Even such a judgment is proved to be untrue when it is verified
by an actual movement.
The common people transact all their ordinary business on
the basis of their doubtful knowledge. No other alternative
is left to them as they carry on their daily business on
the basis of their problematical knowledge. (Jayanta suggests
here the foundation of the logic of chance. Knowledge is ex-
perimental in its character. Its guidance is not infalliable. More
or less we always take a leap in the dark).
(The concluding paragraph of Jayanta's critical remarks is as
follows). We are not bent upon proving the thesis that a judg-
ment, on its appearance, partakes of the character of a doubt.
But what we mean to say is that when a judgment comes into
being it is not known to be true. We shall call a judgment as
one of doubt if it remains indefinite as to the nature of its truth.
(In other words, the thesis that the truth of a judgment is self-
evident does not stand to reason. If it does not carry the assu-
rance of its own truth along with itself then it is not certainly
true. Thus, it involves an element of uncertainty. As it is doubt-
ful to some extent so it comes within the province of a doubt in
the wide sense). It has been proved that the truth of a judg
ment on its coming into being cannot be grasped. The truth of
a judgment can neither be directly apprehended nor be in-The Mīmāṁsaka view about the truth of a judgment refuted
directly known by inference. Hence, the thesis that a judgment
cognizes its own truth is hard to establish.
357
The Refutation of the thesis that the conditions of a Judgment produce
Its own Truth.
The Mimāṁsakas put forward another thesis that the truth
of a judgment owes its existence to no extra factor. Such a
thesis is not tenable. Every effect has a cause responsible for its
existence. But the truth of a judgment is also an effect. The
said truth is a real entity but not an abstraction, manufactured
by imagination. But it is not eternal but an event in time.
Hence, it is an effect. As it is an effect, it does not owe its
existence to itself. (The primary meaning of the Sanskrit
sentence "Prămāṇyasya svata utpattiḥ" is that the truth of a
judgment originates from itself.) Hence, the above thesis in
question is absurd so far as it is taken in its primary sense.
Now, the Mîmāṁsakas may revise their thesis and hold that
the truth of a judgment does not depend upon an extra special
quality of its cause apart from the conditions of its existence.
They also hold that they do not subscribe to the view that the
said truth being not an effect an extra quality of the cause is
not responsible for its existence. Such a thesis is not also sound.
A good effect cannot come into being if its cause does not
possess an excellent property. As effect is either good or bad.
Of these two the good one is produced by a qualified cause but
the bad one is generated by a defective cause.
A cause which is neither qualified nor defective does not
exist. Therefore a neutral effect i.e., an effect, which is neither
good nor bad is impossible.
A cause, productive of a true judgment, produces its own
effect, being assisted by an extra good quality belonging to
it because it has causal property. In this syllogism, the cause
of a true judgment, is the subject of inference. The production
of its effect with the assistance of an extra good quality is the
consequence. The causal property of the cause constitutes the
reason. The cause of a false judgment is cited as its positive
example. Or, another syllogistic argument may be put forward to
prove the Nyáya thesis. A true judgment is produced by a
cause which receives the assistance of an extra good quality358
Nyayamanjari
over and above its natural property in order to produce it
because it partakes of the character of an effect like a false judg-
ment. Jayanta means to say that a true judgment is not
generated by the bare cause of consciousness. As a false judg-
ment is produced by the cause of consciousness in co-operation
with some defect belonging to it so a true judgment should be
the joint product of the same cause and some good quality
belonging to it. As a defect is not a natural property of the
cause so the good quality.
We learn from the medical science the excellent qualities of
the sense-organs. The physicians prescribe medicine for the
normal persons not to repair their diseased organ but to im-
part fresh vigour to them, i.e., to introduce a qualitative change
into them. On the application of these medicines the sense-
organs acquire a state of health much superior to that of their
normal life. The people call this excellent state of health as
free from defect. It is not a state of health, negatively determined,
e.g., free from disease but positively qualified. No more dispu-
tation. Hence, the thesis of the Mimāṁsakas that a true judg-
ment does not depend upon as extra good quality of its cause
for its coming into being, is not amenable to reason.
The third point in the thesis, put forward by the Mimāṁsa-
kas, is that the instrument of a true judgment depends upon
nothing else to discharge its own function. Let us analyse this
statement in order to make out the correct meaning of the term
'pramāṇa' which has been predicated above. Does it denote
the assemblage of all conditions that are responsible for a true
judgment? Or, does it denote only the cause which is included
in the totality of conditions? Or, does it denote the resulting
consciousness, i.e., a true judgment? It is a truism that the
collection of conditions independently produces its effect. This
admission does not mean that the collocation is conscious of
its own power. It depends on some other factor not included
in itself for the knowledge of its causal efficiency. But the
cause which is included in the collocation of conditions abso-
lutely depends on the other co-operators in order to bring about
its effect. A true judgment, being itself an effect cannot condi-
tion itself. True knowledge, being only an effect, has nothing
to do. Hence, the question of dependence or of independenceThe Mimāṁsaka view about the truth of a judgment refuted
does not attract our reflective mind. But when the true know-
ledge implies a person to move it is definitely dependent upon
his will. This is merely a brief criticism of the above thesis.
The Mimärsakas have also held that the truth of a judgment
is self-evident. A judgment independently determines its own
truth. It depends upon no factor to do so. There are only two
alternate courses open to us. Either the truth of a judgment is
not at all determined or the truth of a judgment is determined
only through the agency of some factor. No body can hold
that the truth of a judgment is determined and such determina-
tion automatically takes place. With regard to this point we
have already said that when the initial impellent judgment
arises in our mind we do not definitely know that it is true. A
true apprehension of blue is not so aware of its own truth as it
is aware of the blue object. After a lapse of time the truth of
it is rightly determined. Hence there is no chance of the
automatic determination of the truth. It is ascertained to be
true because it leads to a successful movement.
A judgment has a very short span of life. (It lasts only two
ksaņas, i.e., minutest units of time). If we fail to determine its
validity during its existence, how will it be possible for us to do
the same later on? It ceases to exist at that time. Hence, the
truth of it cannot be determined. (This is, of course, the possible
objection from the Mimāṁsaka point of view), Jayanta meets
this objection thus. He holds that this is a childish objection.
The Mimāṁsakas hold that the false judgment is transitory like
the true one but its falsehood is extrinsically determined. A
judgment is determined to be false only when the truth of its
contradictory one is known as true at a later period. At that
time the false judgment does not exist. How can the falsehood
of a judgment be determined? The Mîmamsakas may contend
that though the judgment is dead and gone yet it may be re-
called in memory and thus be judge. Or, they may hold that a
judgment may be relevently passed upon the several conditions
that produce the judgement in question in the following manner
that they are the source of a false judgment. This road is uni-
formly open to the Naiyãyikas to defend the thesis of extrinsic
validity.
Jayanta meets other objections raised by the Mimâmsakas.
359360
Nyāyamanjari
They take an exception to the thesis of extrinsic validity on the
ground that if the truth of a judgment is determined later on
then such determination is either open to the fallacy of mutual
dependence of it is futile like the quest for a particular star
after the shaving of head (like the placing of the cart before
the horse). With regard to these objections the Naiyāyikas have
got something to say. They classify the objects to be known
under two broad classes, viz., transcendental and secular.
Regarding the transcendental objects they are of opinion that
when they are definitely known to be true the people move for
their attainment. The fallacies of mutual dependence, vicious
circle, etc., do not affect their thesis. But with regard to the
ordinary objects of every day experience a person moves for
their attainment when he does not determine the truth of the
impellent judgment but thinks that the truth of it is highly
probable. Again, he turns away from an object when he thinks
that the falsehood of the impellent judgment is highly probable.
The popular experience establishes the judiciousness of the
Nyaya thesis. We have said this before. But the movement for
an ordinary object does not presuppose the determination of the `
truth of the impellent judgment. Hence the Nyaya thesis is not
open to the fallacy of mutual dependence. But the Naiyāyikas
admit that the ascertainment of the truth of an impellent judgment
after the successful movement is futile. But still such an ascertain-
ment is purposeful to some extent. When a trustworthy person
gives us an advice about an ordinary object we act up to his advice
and move for it. We getting hold of the object, learn that the
utterance of a reliable person is invariably true. Such a know-
ledge helps us in an indirect manner to determine the truth of
the Vedas, the source of verbal knowledge, viz., other scriptures,
etc. the source which deals with the transcendental objects.
Though the determination of the truth of a judgment referring
to an ordinary object is futile so far as its own object is concern-
ed yet it has some worth, having an important part to play.
Therefore, the Nyâya thesis is immune from all blemishes. Now,
another question is raised. What is the meaning of the com-
pound word 'pravṛtti-sāmarthya'? Because the Naiyāyikas hold
that the determination of the truth of a judgment depends upon
it (pravṛtti-samarthya). The old teachers of the Nyaya schoolThe Mīmāṁsaka view about the truth of a judgment refuted
explain it in the following two ways :-(1) Pravṛtti-samarthya
is the confirmation of the knowledge of an object in its experi-
enced order after its pragmatic test. (2) Or, the discovery of
the unique property of an object is pravṛtti-samarthya. These
two meanings do not come to us to be highly satisfactory. But
the commentator on the Nyaya-sutras explains it thus: The
term 'pravṛtti' generally denotes movement. But the deeper
meaning of it is the putting of the knowledge to a practical test.
Samarthya means the experience of the actual result, i.e., the
experience of the practical efficiency of the said object. In
other words, if a judgment is put to the pragmatic test and
satisfies the knower then it is true. The truth of a judgment
is determined by the adoption of the pragmatic method.
Wherein lies the distinction of the knowledge of the practical
efficiency of an object from a judgment referring to the object?
If there is no distinction between them as instances of know-
ledge then the truth of the former, being extrinsic, requires the
services of another knowledge for its determination. The third
one requires the services of a fourth one and so on ad infinitum.
Hence, the Nyaya thesis is open to the fallacy of regressus
ad infinitum. This point has been discussed before. Such a
charge has not been appropriately brought against the Naiya-
yikas since the human behaviour feels no
urge to sub-
mit the truth of the knowledge of the practical efficiency of
an object to a scrutiny. The truth of an impellent judg-
ment is not to be tested in order to set him to doing. We
move for an object and obtain it. Now, if it satisfies all our
practical needs that are expected of it then there is no point in
examining the truth of the experience of the effects of an object.
Why does the fallacy of regressus ad infinitum vitiate the Nyâya
thesis? We do not raise the problem whether the knowledge of
the effects of an object is valid or not because we never enter-
tain a doubt about its validity. Let us take an example to clari-
fy our point. We see water and judge that this is water. This
judgment prompts us to move. But we also know that a similar
judgment takes place even when we mistake the rays of the
sun for water. Hence when a judgment that this is water arises
in our mind a doubt about its validity naturally dawns in our
mind. But a man is aware of the effects and uses of water only
361362
Nyayamanjari
when he gets down into it. Hence such knowledge is always
true. Therefore the truth of it is never questioned. As there is
no doubt about its validity so no argumentation is required to
establish its truth since a doubt is the mother of argumentation.
Or, as we experience the specific forms of the practical effi-
ciency of water so we determine the truth of the knowledge of
them.
What is the exact nature of the specific form? The acts of
cleansing the impurities of a body, sipping, bathing, offering
libations to gods and departed ancestors, washing the clothes,
removing fatigue and heat and indulging in sports like swimm-
ing etc. and various other practical uses of water constitute the
said specific nature which points to the truth of the experience
of the practical efficiency of water. If a man has an illusory
experience of water and proceeds to have it then he cannot
perform all these acts by means of the water referred to by the
false judgment. Now, it may be argued that all these acts are
also performed by imaginary water in a dream. A fitting reply
to this argument is that everybody is directly aware of the
vivid distinction between waking consciousness and dream
consciousness. Therefore, the argument of the opponent is not
sound. When we are not under the sway of slumber, we all
know that we remain awake and do not sleep. Thus, we all ex-
perience the distinction between waking and sleeping states.
In our waking state no object other than real water is noticed
to accomplish all those effects i.e. objects. Therefore, the very
experience of the specific acts of water assures us of the truth of
such an experience. Or, examining the nature of the cause of
our experience we shall be in a position to determine the truth
of the knowledge of the effects of an object, i.e. its practical
efficiency. Śabara has also stated that if the conditions of an
apprehension are thoroughly and carefully examined and no
defect is found out then they are taken to be defectless since
there is no proof to substantiate their defect. We, the Naiyâyi-
kas, also subscribe to this view. An object to be apprehended
has no defects such as unsteadiness, the similarity of an object
to another object, the source of mistake etc., light has no defect
such as dimness etc., the knower has no defect such as distur-
bance from hunger, thirst etc., and the eyes have no defect suchThe Mimamsaka view about the truth of a judgment refuted
as the detachment of the retina, etc, the weakness of lens etc. The
Mimamsakas themselves also admit that the knowledge of an
object which is derived from that of its effect and from the ins-
truction of a reliable person is true. Therefore, we have the
definite knowledge that the awareness of the practical efficiency
of an object is true because it is produced by the defectless
conditions.
363
The Mimāṁsakas come forward and review the hypothesis of
the Naiyāyikas. They put to the Naiyãyikas the following ques-
tion: (if this is your final view) why do not you scrutinize the
conditions of the initial judgment which sets up motion? Why
do you examine only the conditions of the knowledge of practi-
cal efficiency. The Naiyãyikas give a fitting reply to them.
They say, "Oh dear friends ! you do not think that the condi-
tions of the initial impellent judgment have not been examined
through an inadvertence. If they are examined then is the
hypothesis of intrinsic validity established ? Does such an exa-
mination refute the hypothesis of extrinsic validity, proposed by
us? But when an impellent judgment arises in the mind of a
person he becomes very much anxious to get at the fruit of his
knowledge but exhibits no such eagerness for scrutinizing the
conditions of his judgment. That is why the conditions of the
knowledge of practical efficiency are thus examined. Thus, the
truth of the initial judgment is established by means of the
knowledge of the effect of its object. Is there any man who,
leaving aside the proximate means, has recourse to the remote
one?"
No body doubts the truth of the knowledge of the practical
efficiency of an object but on the contrary, every body knows
it to be true because a doubt obeys a universal law in order
to come into being. A doubt does never arise in the mind of
a person if he has no previous knowledge of the two predicates
of a disjunctive judgment. Let us take an example of a doubt
"This is either a man or a post". A man who is ignorant of
the fact that height is the common property shared by both
the man and the post does not doubt the yonder object to be
either a man or a post. Similarly, a person should know that
the consciousness of height is the common property of the true
and false judgments. Otherwise, he cannot doubt that it isNyayamanjari
either true or false. Whenever we have the knowledge of
practical efficiency during our waking state we see that there is
a perfect accordance of this piece of knowledge with its object.
As there is no previous experience of discordance between the
above piece of knowledge and its object so it is known only to
be true. The present means of the determination of its truth
will do the same function in future. Hence, the truth of the
knowledge of practical efficiency will always be uniformly
determined. Even when the truth of the knowledge of
practical efficiency is not determined, the truth of the impell-
ent judgment is determined on the basis of the former
knowledge. But the truth of judgment is never self-evident. When
a judgment comes into being nobody can recognize it to be either
true or false because it bears no distinctive mark. And in the
knowledge of practical efficiency no distinctive mark is noticed.
Therefore, it should also be treated as an ordinary judgment.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may raise further objections to the
thesis of the Naiyāyikas. Should the knowledge itself of the
distinctive mark of an object be proved to be valid? Or, does
the truth of such knowledge remain unascertained? If we
answer the first question in the affirmative, the fallacy of
regressus ad infinitum invalidates our assumption. If we answer
the second question in the affirmative then we simply contra-
dict our own statement and come to our wit's end. But all
these arguments are merely samples of irrelevant talk because
they are directly contradicted by our experience. We do not
like to enjoy the devilish delight arising from the refutation of
all these arguments. Thus we reiterate our conclusion that the
knowledge of the practical efficiency of an object assures us
of the truth of the impellent judgment. It has been stated in
the Nyāya-bhāṣya that a man moves for an object when he
rightly cognizes it and if his movement is crowned with success
then his knowledge is proved to be true because of its accord-
ance with its object. (At the outset the judgment, being not
clouded by a doubt, is assumed as true and later on it is proved
to be true). Similarly, the falsehood of a judgment is extrin-
sically determined. Hence, both the truth and the falsehood
of judgments are extrinsically determined. We think that this
hypothesis is better than the previous one.
364The Mimamsaka view about the truth of a judgment refuted
A philosopher who is proud of his learning (Akalanka Bhaṭṭa,
the Jaina Philosopher, has been referred to) holds that the
truth of the knowledge of an object that has been frequently
obtained when the knower has moved for it is self-evident and
the truth of the knowledge of an object which has not been
frequently obtained by the knower moving for it is extrinsically
determined.
But he holds that when an object has been
frequently moved for and obtained the knowledge of such an
object it is intrinsically true. He really does not follow what he
preaches though his attention has been invited to his statement.
Repetition literally means the doing of an act again and again.
When it applies to the obtaining of an object it has a secondary
sense. It signifies the frequent movement towards an object.
When we very often perceive our body or the walls of our house or
a post erected in our house, we have an opportunity of verifying
our perception a thousand times by an actual movement. Thus,
the truth of such perceptions has been established by the
successful movement. The truth of such perceptions is not
self-evident. The repetition which applies to the obtaining of
an object can have no other sense. Hence, the statement of
the above philosopher is an absurdity. Therefore, the validity
of knowledge is extrinsically determined.
365
Some philosophers hold that the examination of the truth
of knowledge cannot be logically held. Is its truth determined
by a valid proof or by an invalid one? If it is done by a valid
proof will the proof itself be examined or not? It is next to
impossible to examine a proof. Hence a proof escapes an
examination, and you hold that the truth of the resulting
knowledge is to be tested by the untested proof. But it will
be still better to hold that there is no need of verifying the
resulting consciousness but our movement for all practical
purposes will directly ensure from the proof because the former
alternative suggestion is open to the fallacy of regressus ad
infinitum. The hypothesis that the truth of a judgment is
self-evident has been already discarded. A man moves for
a secular object without examining the truth of the impellent
judgment. But when he runs after a transcendental object he
critically examines the truth of his impellent judgment before-366
Nyayamanjari
hand. In other words, he must be sure of the truth of impellent
judgment in the later case at the outset.
In fine, the truth of the Sastras which deal with the means
to the transcendental ends should be critically examined. We
have arrived at the conclusion that the truth of such Sastras is
extrinsically but not intrinsically determined. There is no need
of discussing the bad hypotheses which rest upon logic chopping
and afflict our mind.
In order to refute the Doctrine of the extrinsic truth of a judgement
the Hypothesis or non-Discrimination is substituted for the hypothesis
of Misapprehension
The very learned section of the Mimamsakas (i.e. the
Prābhākaras) hold that it has been nicely done that the ill-
trained Mīmāṁsakas have been defeated by the
wicked
logicians like the kāśa flowers, blown away by the gust of the
wind at a great distance during the autumnal season. They
do not know how to defend themselves as they subscribe to
the hypothesis of misapprehension, i.e. in a judgment of
illusion an absent predicate is asserted of the subject but at the
same time they maintain that the truth of a judgment is
self-evident.
How can we appreciate their skill in a logical approach?
If the hypothesis of misapprehension is admitted then it is easy
to come across such judgments as are contradicted. In that
case it becomes truly unavoidable to call in question even the
truth of such a judgment as has not been contradicted since all
the judgments both contradictory and contradicted are alike
because of their common property. If the truth of a judgment
is doubtful then its verification by means of consilience etc.,
necessarily follows in the wake. Therefore, the conclusion
that the truth of a judgment is extrinsically determined becomes
inevitable.
The hypothesis of misapprehension is refuted because no judgment is
contradicted
If no judgment is contradicted in the world then no knower
should rationally doubt the truth of a judgment since it has no
similarity to something which produces illusion. If no doubtHypothesis of misapprehension refuted
367
as to the truth of a judgment arises in his mind then why
should he look forward to some other judgment for its verifica-
tion? The truth of a judgment becomes automatically self-
evident.
Why is it that there is no such judgment as is contradicted?
We all experience that there is a large number of instances
of illusory judgments which are contradicted, for example, we
mistake the mother-of-pearl for silver. The Mimamsakas say
"You are inexperienced in the science of logic since the judg-
ments, cited by you, are incapable of being contradicted. Do
you really understand the very meaning of your statement
when you hold that, viz., a preceding judgment, is contradicted
by a succeeding one? But we do not follow the meaning of
the term 'contradiction'. If contradiction signifies destruction
then it does not hold between the so-called pair of opposite
judgments since every judgment is subject to destruction. In
that case each judgment which is destroyed by its immediate
successor should be contradictorily opposed to the latter since
the relation of the destroyer and the destroyed holds between
them according to the universal rule, applied to all judgments.
If contradiction denotes the non-coexistence of the two judg-
ments in the same locus at the same time then such an absurd
conclusion will inevitably follow. It is a fact that the judgments
which are never contradicted do not co-exist in the same
locus at the same time.
Now, the Naiyāyikas may revise that hypothesis and hold
that contradiction is the wiping out of the impression pro-
duced by the contradicted judgment. Such a hypothesis is also
untenable. Because we know that even an impression, produced
by a true judgment, is wiped away. Sometimes, an impression,
produced by a contradicted judgment of illusion survives
the counteracting force of a contradictory judgment, but does
not fade away since the object referred to by a contradicted
judgment, happens to be remembered after a lapse of time.
Now, the Naiyāyikas may hold that contradiction is such as
takes away the object referred to by a judgment. In other
words, contradiction takes place when it suggests that the
contradicted judgment has not revealed an object which
should have been revealed. It is impossible to apply such
3368
Nyāyamanjari
meaning to contradiction. When an object has been revealed,
it is beyond the power of a contradictory judgment to declare
it as unrevealed. A contradictory judgment does not appear
in our mind in a manner so that the object which has been
known may become unknown at the very moment.
Now, the Naiyāyikas may hold that a contradictory judg-
ment is one which points to the negation of such an object as
is referred to by a preceding judgment. Does the contradi-
ctory judgment refer to the negation of an object as co-exis-
tent with the object negated or as subsequent to it? It may
be held that the contradictory judgment refers to the subs-
quent negation of an object and contradicts a preceding
judgment which refers to the object negated. In that case,
contradiction would take place between two such judgments
as are free from contradiction. A jar existed at a spot. It
has been destroyed at present by the stroke of mace. The
judgment which refers to the negation of the jar, thus des-
troyed, would contradict the judgment which refers to the
jar, as occupying a spot before its destruction. In that case
the so-called contradictory and contradicted judgments will
simultaneously arise in our mind. The implication of the
negative one is that this is not a jar. The implication of
both is that this is a jar and this is not a jar. Thus, this
should be both positive and negative at the same time. In
that case, which one would contradict and which one would
be contradicted.
Now, contradiction may mean the annulment of the resul-
ting form of a judgment. Such an annulment is not possible.
As the resulting form of a judgment has come into being so
it cannot be bodily removed from the field of consciousness.
A contradictory judgment does never imply that the result
which has come into being has not come into being.
Now, contradiction may be defined as the suspension of
some particular remote consequence of a judgment of per-
ception or some other form of knowledge viz. the resolution
of avoiding or accepting the object referred to by the judg-
ment. Such a definition is of no service since the above
resolution is not a consequence of a judgment which is accep-
ted to be truc.Hypothesis of Misapprehension refuted
369
The volitional reaction which results in the actual rejection
or acceptance of an object depends only upon the will of a
person. If the volitional turn of mind is set at naught then
the judgment which is at the root of it should not be con-
tradicted.
The sum and substance of the above discussion is that
there is no such thing as contradiction. There are also other
reasons which point to the same conclusion. Does contradiction
hold between two judgments having the same content or
having the different contents? The relation of contradiction
does not hold between two such judgments as have the same
content since we have no experience of contradiction in a
series of judgments pointing to the same object. The relation
of contradiction does not hold between two such acts of
knowledge as refer to the different objects since the knowledge
of a post is never contradicted by the knowledge of a jar. If
a subsequent act of knowledge points to an object which is
other than that which is referred to by its antecedent judg-
ment then does it mean that the latter is contradicted by the
former?
I
Moreover, when the truth is assured of the preceding
judgment it stands on a firm footing. But when a new judg-
ment arises in our mind at a subsequent period it remains
weak since its truth has not been established. If some exper-
ience is at all contradicted then the weak one should be
reasonably contradicted by the strong one. In other words,
the latter judgment should be contradicted by the former one.
The Mīmāṁsakas mean to say that the former positive one
should have contradicted the weak one i. e. the negative one
since it has no firm footing in our mind. In other words, the
truth of the former has been accepted as true and for this very
reason it is stronger than the latter one. The former judg-
ment should never be contradicted. But we have no such
experience of contradiction. Hence, there is no such piece of
knowledge as is contradicted. Hence, we are not entitled to
entertain a doubt as to the truth of any judgment on the
ground of its similarity to a contradicted judgment. As we
cannot doubt the truth of a judgment so there is no need of
applying the pragmatic test to a judgment for the determi-,370
Nyayamanjari
nation of its truth. Hence, the hypothesis that the truth of a
judgment is extrinsic does not hold good.
The hypothesis that illusion consists in misapprehension is refuted
because it is baseless
Now, existence has been denied to contradiction. Should
the illusory judgments such as 'This is silver' (the mother-of-
pearl is mistaken for silver etc.) pass on as uncontradicted
judgments? (This question has been put by the Naiyāyikas
to the Mimāṁsakas of the Prabhakara school). A reply to this
question is as follows: Oh dullards! those judgments are not
illusory because no cause whatsoever it may be, can be found
out to explain their origination. A sense-organ cannot produce
such judgments. If it had produced them then they would
have constantly emanated from it. Even a defective cause
cannot produce them. Such a cause exhausts all its poten-
tialities to give birth to its own effects, fixed up by Nature.
Hence, a heterogeneous effect will not be produced by it since
it acquires no special efficiency by dint of its possession of
defect to do so. The defective paddy of the fäli species would
never have the efficiency of producing the Barley plant. There-
fore, the so-called judgments of illusion are not really cases of
misapprehension since no cause which will impart to them the
character of mis-reading has been discovered.
The Naiyãyikas put a question to the Mimamsakas. Is the
knowledge of the mother-of-pearl as silver true? The Prabhā-
karas give a reply to this question. They say "Oh fool!
"This is silver' is not a single act of knowledge viz., an act of
perception or an act of memory. This represents the percep-
tion of the shining object before us. The predicate silver repres
sents the memory of silver experienced before. The knower
has the impression of the experience of silver. When the
shining object, the substantive of the above judgment is
perceived, the impression of silver is excited by the law of
similarity and the memory of silver is revived. A man who has
never experienced silver cannot have the knowledge of silver
in the form : This is silver'. If a man who has seen silver
cannot recollect it at night or in the day if he misses to see
the object as similar to silver".Hypothesis of Misapprehension as an Offspring of other Hypotheses 371.
Again, when we recollect an object but fail to locate it as
a past event in time and space we hold that it is a case of
mutilated memory. When memory is not recognised in its true
character the distinction between memory and apprehension is
not detected. The non-detection of difference is called non-
apprehension (akhyāti).
As objects are revealed by the illusory experience so there
are four rival hypotheses current among the contesting logi-
cians. They are as follows: (1) misapprehension, (2) the
presentation of the unreal, (3) projection of consciousness and
(4) non-apprehension i. e. non-detection of distinction. Of these
four hypotheses, the hypothesis of misapprehension has been
discarded as there is no sufficient reason behind it.
The Hypothesis of Misapprehension is the Mongrel Offspring of
the other Hypotheses
The hypothesis of misapprehension presupposes one of the
three alternative hypotheses: (1) Silver which occupies some
other time and space stimulates the sense organ to produce the
consciousness of silver at this spot and at this time. (2) Or, the
mother-of-pearl which conceals its own distinctive form and
assumes the form of silver, produces the consciousness of silver.
(3) Or, the stimulating object is one and its appearance is
something different. The mother-of-pearl stimulates the eyes
to produce consciousness but what appears is silver. Now, if
the Naiyâyikas subscribe to the first alternative, viz., silver
stimulates the eyes then the awareness of silver refers only to
the unreal object. But it is not a case of misreading since the
unreal silver is presented to such consciousness.
Now, the Naiyãyikas may contend that silver is real since it
occupies some other time and space. But this contention is not
tenable since silver, being at a remote time and space beyond
the range of sense-organs, is as good as nothing.
Moreover, are existent time and space presented to our
consciousness? Or, are the non-existent ones presented to our
consciousness? If with regard to the first alternative they
answer in the affirmative then silver which is here and now has372
Nyayamanjari
been presented. Hence, it should not be a case of illusion. If
time and space are not present, i.e., be non-existent then they,
like silver (absent), cannot stimulate the sense-organ to
produce consciousness.
Now, the Naiyāyikas may plead their case in a different
manner. They interpret the judgment "This is silver" in the
following way: They hold that the memory supplies the
knower with the predicate, i.e. silver. The predicate is wrongly
referred to the mother-of-pearl as 'this', i.e., the subject of the
said judgment. In other words, the judgment of memory that
this is silver wrongly refers to the mother-of-pearl. It is a case
of misreference. Let this view be examined. The Naiyāyikas
hold that silver which is remembered is such
an object as
existed in the past. But how can a past object be referred to?
Remembrance is nothing but consciousness. How does it refer
to an unreal object? The Naiyāyikas may contend that as an
act of recollection is not causally connected with an object so
no object determines its character. Let this contention be exa-
mined. Let it be granted that memory is not produced by an
object. Still, the other terms of consiousness bear resemblance
to memory as all divisions of consciousness including memory
are subsumed under the genus of consciousness. If this is true
then it is difficult for the Mimāṁsakas to agree with the
Naiyāyikas in the point that in the judgment of memory "This
is silver" such a predication takes place. The reason at the back
of this note of dissent is this: How can the judgment of memory,
which is not produced by an object, present an unreal object to
consciousness? The reason is plain, viz., the act of memory is
in no way connected with the object which is supposed to be
presented by it. Now let us examine the second hypothesis. It
amounts to this that the mother-of-pearl conceals its own form,
assumes the form of silver and presents itself to consciousness.
The Naiyãyikas strongly deny that it is not an illustration of the
presentation of the unreal. Then it is indeed a novel drama in
which the mother-of-pearl plays the part of Sită. (The critic
means to say that as an actor who is not Sità creates the illusion
in the mind of the audience that he is Sitä, so the mother-of-
pearl which is not silver passes as silver.) Let us assume the
suggestion of the Naiyáyikas and put this question to them.374
Nyayamanjari
The refutation of the hypothesis that an unreal object is presented to
consciousness
Is the hypothesis of the presentation of the unreal a better
one? Shall we accept it? No, it is also untenable since it does
not stand the test of reasoning. What does the phrase the
presentation of the unreal signify? Does it mean the aware-
ness of an absolutely unreal object, i. e., the awareness of an
object which exists nowhere? Or, does it mean the conscious-
ness of an object which exists somewhere but is absent from the
present locus? If the second alternative is accepted then the
presentation of the unreal object amounts to the misapprehen-
sion of the real object since the logicians who uphold the hypo-
thesis of misapprehension admit that silver does not exist in the
present context but exists somewhere in the real universe.
But nobody experiences an object which is absolutely unreal.
The leaf of the sky-lotus-plant has never been experienced.
Now, it may be contended that an unreal object is also present-
ed to our consciousness since the impressions are regularly
revived. Such a contention is not tenable since it is unreaso-
nable to conjecture that the impressions of an unreal object
remain stored up in our mind. The term vāsanā requires
explanation. The impression which arises from the experience
of a real object is called vāsanā. How does such a vāsanā revive
the awareness of an unreal object? (How does such a vasana
owe its existence to the awareness of an unreal object?) The
upholders of the hypothesis of the presentation of an unreal
object inay subscribe to the view that this väsana is a class by
itself and is also distinct from an impression. But they should
explain why a particular visani produces the awareness of
silver but not of another unreal object since the unreal objects
are not mutually distinct. Why does not the vasana which
produces the knowledge of silver present the sky-lotus instead
of it? How is it possible that the law of presentation is obeyed
by visană? We should not discuss the problem regarding the
nature of visani. An unreal object is absolutely impotent.
Hence it cannot bear the burden of a true
other words, an absolutely unreal object has a place neither
practical use. In
in the world of theory nor in the world of practice. There-Hypothesis of unreal object presented to consciousness refuted
375
fore, the hypothesis of the presentation of the unreal object is
to be absolutely discarded.
The Refutation of the hypothesis that an Illusory Object is the pro-
jection of Consciousness
What does not exist is presented to our consciousness as a real
one. Hence the hypothesis of the presentation of the unreal
object is in no way superior to that of the misapprehension of
an object. Therefore, the hypothesis that an illusory object is
merely the projection of consciousness is better than that of an
illusory one as framed by the other rival schools which propose
that an external object is experienced. But the so-called exter-
nal object cannot be proved to be an object of such experience.
Therefore, consciousness itself plays the role of both the knower
and the known.
The event of consciousness which apprehends as subject, pro-
jects itself as an external object and allows itself to be appre-
hended as an object. It is absolutely unrelated to the external
objects but performs all the worldly transactions involving
external objects. This is the essence of the hypothesis that the
illusory object is nothing but the projection of consciousness.
The refutation of the hypothesis under discussion is as follows:
This hypothesis is also unsound. If consciousness plays the
double role of the knower and the known then both the subject
and the object are nothing but consciousness. In that case the
consciousness should not express itself in the form "This is
silver" but in the form "I am silver". Moreover, what is really
an internal object is assumed to be appearing as an external
object. Hence, the hypothesis of the projection of consciousness
should turn to that of misapprehension. It also represents the
presentation of the unreal object since the actual externalisa-
tion of consciousness is not possible. The upholders of this
hypothesis may contend that the above criticism is pointless
since consciousness is real. Such a contention does not hold
good. The externality itself should be submitted to scrutiny.
Let us see whether the alleged externality is real or not. The
externality of conscious is not at all real since consciousness can
never be external to itself. If the externality of consciousness is376
Nyayamanjari
proved to be unreal then the hypothesis in question is virtually
the view that the unreal object is presented to our consciousness.
The Hypothesis that an illusion consists in the Non-Discrimination of
the two separate Acts of Knowledge is proved to be True in order to
establish the hypothesis that Knowledge is Intrinsically True.
The above three hypotheses, viz., the projection of consci-
ousness, the presentation of an unreal object and the misappre-
hension of an object interpenetrate one another. They also in-
volve a logical contradiction. The hypothesis of non-discrimi-
nation is the best of all. The hypothesis which cannot be refuted
by the upholders of the above three hypotheses is that of non-dis-
crimination. In the hypothesis of the projection of consciousness
it does not reveal itself as consciousness since it divides itself
and reveals itself as an object i.e., something other than cons-
ciousness. The hypothesis of the unreality of an object is also
based upon a wrong assumption since no object is presented to
our consciousness as unreal. If our experience had recorded its
evidence in favour of the above hypothesis then there would
have been no incentive to our movement for practical purposes,
i.c., for the attainment of the object of knowledge etc. The
hypothesis of misapprehension is tenable if the object which is
misapprehended is within the field of vision. But it overdoes
when it holds that the object which lies outside the field of
perception and does not produce consciousness is presented to
consciousness. No critical thinker can indeed agree to the pro-
posal. Thus the upholders of the hypothesis of misapprehension
have accepted the suggestion that the object which is recalled
in memory produces consciousness. Thus the remembrance of
silver becomes unavoidable in order to explain the illusory
judgment that this is silver. The memory of silver does not ex-
press itself in its true colour in the above judgment since the
judgment does not assume the form of self-consciousness "I
remember silver".
As the memory of silver and such other acts of memory
assume an obscure form, so the logicians describe such indis-
tinguishable memory as fading or indistinct or having lost its
mark of distinction. The suggestion that memory assumes an
indistinct form has been also accepted by the logicians of theIntrinsically true nature of knowledge established
377
rival schools. When an object which has been frequently infer-
red is inferred by means of a very familiar mark we implicitly
remember the invariable relation of concomitance, belonging to
the mark. The above implicit remembrance of the universal
relation lacks the distinguishing feature of its specific kind.
The non-recognition of indistinct memory is called akhyati
(the term has been explained as non-discrimination). This form
akhyāti has been used here in a privative sense. It means a
failure to quote apprehension of an object.
Thus we see that all the contesting parties will not take an
exception to the sense of akhyāti as described above. But the
school of the Prabhākaras has eclipsed the fame of all other
logicians having been able to give such meaning of the term as
is accepted by all.
Now, a possible question arises in our mind with regard to
the hypothesis of non-discrimination. How does the judgment
***This is silver" illustrate non-discrimination? The reason be-
Chind the question is this that 'this' refers to the substratum in
front of us and reveals it in true character and though the pre-
•dicate 'silver' is supplied by the unidentified, indistinct memory
yet it is not possible to identify 'this' with 'silver' due to non-
discrimination. An answer to this question is as follows: The
yonder object, i.e., the substratum in question, is not clearly
-apprehended as the mother-of-pearl. If it had been clearly
apprehended then there would have been no illusion in our mind.
The yonder object, i.e., the substratum in question, is present-
ed to our consciousness only as a shining one. Silver is recalled
in our memory owing to the operation of the law of similarity
since the shining object, now cognised, is similar to silver. There
are two distinct acts of consciousness, viz., the perception of the
-substratum in question and the remembrance of silver. But
though they really differ from each other yet they are not mu-
"tually distinguished as such. Hence non-discrimination in the
-shape of a failure to detect their mutual distinction takes place.
"Therefore the term akhyāti does not denote the absolute nega-
tion of consciousness. The act of perception should always
maintain its distinction from the act of remembrance since the
•object perceived is different from the object recalled in memory.
"The implication of this argument is that the judgment "This isNyayamanjari
378
silver" as interpreted by the Prabhakaras is inadmissible. The-
reply, given by the Prabhakaras is that if the distinction of the-
two separate acts of consciousness is not detected then can the
non-detection of difference point to anything but to the identity
of the indiscernible.
The hypothesis of non-discrimination does not justify itself if
it takes its stand upon the above experience. The above judg-
ment implies the identity between the subject and the predicate.
In other words, what is this is silver. Does not this wrong detec-
tion of identity suggest the hypothesis of misapprehension? The
objectors mean to say that the mother-of-pearl is wrongly inter-
preted as silver. The Prabhakaras meet this objection thus :
The knower moves for silver because he fails to distinguish the
perception of the mother-of-pearl from the remembrance of
silver. As the two acts of consciousness are not distinguished so
the knower identifies them, having subsumed them under the
common genus of consciousness. This conclusion is arrived at
when the problem is solved by the method of back calculation.
This is the explicit statement of Prabhākara logic on this point.
(Some logicians apprehend that the two substrata of the two-
acts of consciousness are not known to be identical at the out-
set since such an admission is sure to lead to the hypothesis of
misapprehension.) Thus they intend to modify the Prabhakara
hypothesis to some extent. They hold that the two distinct acts.
of consciousness are not cognized to be different in the beginn-
ing. In the next moment they are cognized as identical. But we'
do not appreciate the merit of thus modified hypothesis.
If the identity between the two acts of consciousness is cogni-
zed then the hypothesis of non-discrimination will surely lose.
its ground and the hypothesis of misapprehension will be stated
in an indirect manner.379
Intrinsically true nature of knowledge discussed
true character of consciousness. We do not hold that the chara-
cter of silver is at first attributed to this and that the contradic-
tory judgment negates the attribution. But we hold that the
contradictory judgment does not reveal such distinction as has
not been detected before. This' does never signify silver. What
is denoted by 'this' is not silver. This is always this and silver is
always silver. There is no exception to this rule. It has been
stated by the contradictory judgment that this is something
else and silver is something other than silver. The difference
between the two acts of consciousness is recognized by means of
this contradictory judgment.
Now, another question with regard to the above hypothesis
arises in our mind. The judgment "This is silver” may per-
fectly illustrate the non-detection of difference between the act
of perception and that of remembrance. But how can the
Prabhākara explain an illusory experience in a dream from the
standpoint of non-discrimination? (The objector means to say
that the dream-experience does not arise from the failure to
distinguish the act of perception from that of remembrance
but only represents a single act of consciousness) The Prabhã-
karas meet this objection thus: Oh timid fellows! critically
judge the nature of your dream-experience.
Sometimes, the distinction of the act of remembrance from
that of perception is not cognized. But the dream-experience is
entirely constituted by remembrance the specific character of
which is not recognized.
How will the Prabhākaras explain the above experience in
terms of remembrance since it is not conditioned by the aware-
ness of a similar object? Such an objection does not hold good
because the fact of remembrance is not determined by a single
condition but by a plurality of such conditions. The inner organ
which is over-powered by the contaminating influence of slum-
ber is of course one of the conditions of remembrance. Even if
we accept this answer then will the Prabhākaras solve the prob-
lem, viz., "How are the vision of the two moons and the ex-
perience of bitterness in sugar explained in terms of indistinct
memory? Oh fool of consumed brain! Why do you not follow
the Prabhākara argument though it is repeated to you again.
and again?:380
Nyayamanjari
The Prabhakaras hold that all cases of the so-called illusion
are not explained in terms of the indistinct memory. But they
admit that every case of such illusion is due to the non-detec-
tion of difference. In some cases, the so-called illusion consists
in the indistinct memory-image. In some other cases, the act of
remembrance is not distinguished from that of apprehension.
But there are a few cases when the objects which are actually
recalled in memory are not so cognized. In some other cases,
the faculty of vision is divided into twain, being affected by
certain diseases such as diplopia, etc. The organ of sight, being
thus divided, cannot behold the single moon
as such. There
are other cases where the organ of taste, i.e., the tongue, com-
ing in touch with the flow of bile experiences the bitter taste.
Though the tongue is in contact with sugar yet it fails to ex-
*perience sweetness belonging to sugar.
In this way the judgment that conch-shell is yellow is else
explained.
In fine, the so-called illusory judgment is nothing but a
failure to detect the difference between the two acts of know-
ledge. An illusory judgment is not such as does not accord with
facts. An illusory judgment which does
not so accord raises
-doubt as to the truth of a judgment.
One who does not doubt the truth of a judgment does not
depend upon the accordance of a judgment for the ascertainment
of its truth. So we do not subscribe to the hypothesis that the
truth of a judgment is extrinsic.
As the truth of a judgment is intrinsic so the truth of the
Vedas is self-evident. Thus the truth of the Vedas is not deter-
mined by means of the two negative conditions, viz., (1) the
non-contradiction of the subject matter of the Vedas and (2)
the absence of defects in the author.
The establishment of the hypothesis of Misapprehension in order to
probe the hypothesis that the Truth of a judgment is Extrinsic
The hypothesis of non-discrimination is being refuted by the
following arguments: It has been stated that in case of the
so-called illusion there are two distinct types of consciousness,
viz, (1) apprehension and (2) remembrance and they are not
mutually distinguished but cognized as a single act of know-Intrinsic nature of the truth of a judgment discussed
381
ledge. Such a statement is not based upon sound logic since-
the judgment of illusion is intuited by us as a unit of knowledge-
like an act of recognition. What is a shining substratum in front.
of us is silver. This is the distinct manner in which it is perceiv-
ed. What remains in front of us is silver. This perception
resembles the true perception of silver, Silver is not presented
to our consciousness as an object experienced before but as an
object which is being experienced at present Remembrance is
such consciousness as reveals an object which has been experi-
enced before. But it does not reveal an object which is being
experienced now. The Prabhakaras hold that consciousness
itself is self-illuminating, i.e., self-conscious. It should be care-
fully examined in which form the awareness of silver presents
itself to our consciousness. If it presents itself as an act of
memory then their assumption that the act of remembrance
assumes the non-recognizable defective form goes in vain,
Again, if it presents itself in the garb of an apprehension then
it is a clear case of misapprehension since remembrance appears.
as an apprehension. Now, the Prabhakaras may contend that
the consciousness of silver reveals itself as a non-specific act of
consciousness. Such a contention is not sound. As the act of
consciousness refers to silver as its object so it is either appre-
hension or remembrance since an object-consciousness cannot
but belong to either of these two classes. It should not also be
held that it is a piece of vague consciousness which fails to re-
veal an object since it is introspected by self-consciousness and
suggests, this consciousness cannot be identified with that of a
person in a dreaming state. Moreover, the object-consciousness.
which reveals silver is in no way different from the self-cons--
ciousness illuminating 'this'.
The subject and the predicate of the judgment that this is
silver are revealed by the same consciousness. Now, how do
you distinguish the consciousness of the subject as an act
of perception from that of the predicate as an act of rem-
embrance? This' which is revealed should be 'properly
interpreted. If the piece of the mother-of-pearl with all its
characteristic feature is presented to our consciousness then
there is no chance of the remembrance of silver with the dawn-
ing of the above perception. If the perception of the said object*382
Nyayamanjari
provokes the memory of another similar object in obedience to
the law of similarity then the remembrance of the object does
not remain indistinguishable from the act of perception which
excites it. If we perceive Devadatta and remember another
person, his similar, then we have no confusion between these
two distinct acts.
The awareness of this reveals only the non-specified substratum
but not the piece of the mother-of-pearl. If the Prabhākaras
subscribe to the above hypothesis, we feel the least hesitation to
accept it. Let us now trace the growth of the judgment "This is
silver". In the beginning we perceive the piece of the mother-of-
pearl as characterized by the property which is common to it
and silver. This perception excites such a common impression
as is not incompatible with it. The impression, being excited,
revives the memory of such specific property as is not incompa-
tible with the above general property. As this specific property
is recalled in memory in the said manner so the judgment,
"This is silver" becomes possible. The above general property
is at the root of the presentation of the specific property. The
judgment implies that what is this silver. Thus, it suggests iden-
tity between this and silver. A person who
in need of silver
moves for it when he thinks that he perceives silver. (Jayanta
does not mention all the intermediate steps that lead to the
judgment of illusory perception. It is not a case of normal per-
ception. It is really knowledge by complication.)
Very well, the Prabhakaras have held that a knower moves
for an object when he fails to draw a distinction between appre-
hension and remembrance. It has reached our ears that this
idea has been borrowed from the school of Dharmakirti.
Dharmakirti holds that a person moves for an object which is
a combination of sensed and imaginary matters. The Prabhā
karas are hard hit with this plagiarism. A man does not move
for an object as long as he is not convinced of the fact that the
perceptible object has been sensed by him. How can a person
who is in need of silver go for it unless he strongly believes that
he has perceived silver? Therefore, it must be admitted that
such a movement presupposes the perception of silver but not
the indistinct memory of silver.
Now, the Prabhakaras have remarked that the upholders ofIntrinsic nature of the truth of a judgment discussed
383
the hypothesis of misapprehension admit the conditionality of the
:recollection of a silver in the production of the Judgment that this
is silver. This remark is partially true. The Naiyâyikas admit that
the specific property of silver is recollected. Let us illustrate our
point of view. When a substratum in front of us comes within
the range of our vision we perceive it only along with its such
general properties, e. g., its height, etc. as are shared in common
by the two objects. Then the distinguished feature of the above
two objects is recalled in our memory. A doubt follows in the
wake of the above remembrance. Similarly, when we behold
the substratum before us we simply perceive its non-distinguishing
general character such as its brightness but not its distinguishing
feature. Then, we remember the characteristic feature of silver
with the result that we misread the yonder object as silver. Thus,
the illusory judgment that this is silver flashes in our mind.
The difference between a doubt and an illusion lies in this that
a doubt is preceded by the recollection of the characteristic
feature of the two objects whereas an illusion is preceded by the
recollection of the distinguishing feature of a single object.
*Therefore, one who has no previous experience of silver cannot
have the illusory judgment that this is silver. Again, if he does
not behold a similar object such as a piece of the mother-of-
pearl at dead of night then he cannot mistake any other object
for silver. Though memory plays some part in the production
of the above judgment of illusion yet this does not mean that
memory alone constitutes the whole of it. One should not keep
silence on this point only with the mention of memory since an
illusion based upon memory is also experienced by us. Therefore,
we, Naiyāyikas rather appreciate the truthfulness of the
neo-Prabhākaras who hold that the illusory judgment follows in
the wake of memory since they do not conceal the evidence of
their experience.
The bad argumentation of the Prabhakaras regarding the
·cause of illusion has been refuted by the sound logicians.
If an effect is cognized as being produced by a particular
-cause then it is useless to discuss whether the particular cause is
•competent enough to bring about the particular effect.
An effect cannot come into being without being caused.
"When an effect takes place a cause is to be postulated. The384
Nyāyamanjari
cause of an illusory judgment has been already assumed. It is.
the defective sense-organ. Likewise the sense-organ accompanied.
by the existing impression is the cause of recognition.
We admit that the barley plants do not grow out of the
defective śāli seeds. But still bad cakes are prepared from them.
In fine, we hold that the sense-organ, i. e., the eyes, being
defective, is not able to grasp the peculiar shape of the mother--
-of-pearl, viz., its triangular shape. It visualises merely the
common property, i. e., its brightness. Its awareness revives the
memory of the characteristic feature of silver. The sense-organ
in question in co-operation with the said memory produces the
illusory judgment that this is silver. The sense-organ is relatively
defective. When the sense-organ which produces illusion is.
judged from the point of view of a true knowledge it is called.
defective. If it is judged from the side of its own effect
then it is a proper cause but not a defective one. Hence,
the illusory judgment that this is silver is an instance of perce-
ptual apprehension but not an instance of half-lost memory.
Now, let us see what is implied by the contradictory judgment
that this is not silver. It negates such silver as has been appre-
hended before. In other words, it clearly signifies that what has.
been perceived by me is not silver. What is attributed is negated.
What has not been experienced before is not attributed. If an
object which is not attributed is negated, why is gold like silver
not negated?
The Prabhākaras have given a different meaning to the said
contradictory judgment. They hold that it clearly distinguishes.
apprehension from memory unrecognized before. It is really
no explanation of the contradictory judgment. It is merely a
play on words since it does not get the sanction of experience.
The contradictory judgment does not suggest that the undif-
ferentiated consciousness is differentiated. This point is too
insignificant to deserve a long discussion. Hence, the memory
of silver does not take place in connection with the illusory
judgment that this is silver. The Prabhākaras may contend that
silver is remembered because it was experienced some time in
the past. In that case silver is recalled in memory in accor-
dance with the normal laws which govern the occurrence of
memory. But nobody is aware of its existence. Such memoryIntrinsic nature of the truth of a judgment discussed
cannot also be held to be supernormal for obvious reasons.
When a personi sees in a dream that his head has been cut off
he should be ashamed of the statement that this experience
involves the memory of such a fact as has not been experienced
before. It may be contended that he experienced the cutting
off of his own head in the previous birth. Such a contention
has no worth at all. Why does he remember a particular incident
of his past life? Is this memory governed by a law? How is it
that a particular incident among the experienced ones is recalled
in memory only at a particular period of time to the exclusion
of the other ones? How is it that all experienced incidents are
not remembered at all times?
385
The Prabhakaras put some questions to the Naiyāyikas.
They run thus: If you discard the hypothesis that an unreal
object is presented to consciousness, how do you explain the
above dream-experience Which object does it refer to ? The
reply to the above questions is as follows: You will listen to the
answer which will be given by us. But in a nut-shell we say
now that the unreal object is never presented to consciousness.
But we do never hold that an object which has never been
experienced cannot be cognised.
Now, the Prabhakaras may put a question to the Naiyãyikas
"if the object is not experienced by you how do you know that
it is real." The answer to this question is this that though an
object may not be experienced by a person yet it may be experie-
nced by somebody else and thus may be called as real. An
object which has been experienced by a person is not remember-
ed by another person. Hence the Prabhākaras cannot explain
á dream-experience in the same manner as the Naiyāyikas do.
In other words, the explanation of the dream-experience as
suggested by the Prabhākaras does not have the same merit as
that of the Naiyāyikas.
The thesis of the Prabhakaras that the dream experience is
representative by its nature but its representative character is
not grasped by us should be thoroughly examined. Let us see
the form which it acquires. If it attires itself in the garb of some
other form of consciousness then it will be a clear case of
misapprehension. If the Prabhākaras hold that the dream-
experience is not at all cognied then dream would be the same386
Nyāyamanjari
as deep slumber is. It is a fact that we have some experience
when we dream. But one cannot hold that the whole of dream-
experience consists only of memory which remains ever
obscure. Thus the Prabhākaras hope against hope to establish
the thesis that memory assumes a mutilated form so that it is not
recognised. How does the thesis of non-discrimination gain
ground as the single moon is some times presented to our cons-
ciousness as the two moons.
The Prabhākaras may contend that when the eye-rays are
divided into twain the single moon is not seen as such.
The Naiyãyikas take an exception to this defence. They
hold that the eye-rays, being diseased, may not visualise the
moon as one. But Oh Vedic scholar, how shall we conceal the
fact that the double vision of moon is illusory? Now, the
Prabhākaras may contend that the eye-rays, being divided,
have the number 'two, and the perceiver fails to grasp the said
number as belonging to its.proper locus. Thus, they explain the
said illusion in terms of non-discrimination. This explanation
does not hold good since the eyes and their rays are always
supersensuous.
When we behold the single moon do we perceive that the rays
of the eye are one? But it is a fact that nobody will perceive that
the ray of the eye is one since the eye-ray itself remaining super-
sensuous, reveals the object.
Now, if the Prabhākaras subscribe to this view then they
should admit that the above case of valid perception is an
instance of non-discrimination.
Moreover, they have explained the illusory judgment "Sugar
is bitter" in terms of non-discrimination. They hold that
bitterness is tasted but a person fails to taste it as belonging to
bile. Such an explanation as futile as the attempt of a
drowning man who catches at a straw in order to save him.
The critics will not mind if the Prabhakaras hold that a
person senses bitterness, assign a place to it, viz., sugar? The
critics fail to understand it.
The excess of bile which remains deposited in a senseorgan is
supersensuous like the eye-disease called diplopia. But it pro-
duces illusion, though undetected, as undetected fever causesIntrinsic nature of the truth of judgment discussed
387
headache. There is no need of pushing forward this topic any
further.
Thus, we see that every case of illusion cannot be explained
in terms of nondiscrimination. It should also be noted that the
hypothesis of non-discrimination does not strike at the root of
the hypothesis that the truth of a judgment is extrinsic.
In the judgment "This is silver" the predicate 'silver' may be
supplied either by apprehension or by the mutilated memory.
Thus, the truth of the judgment is called in question.
In order to ascertain the truth or otherwise of a doubt the
standard of accordance is to be applied. When the truth of a
judgment is determined by a reference to accordance with facts
it is extrinsic.
Otherwise, the truth or otherwise of a doubt cannot be ascer-
tained. The Prabhakaras cannot gainsay it. In fine, as the truth
of a judgment refers to accordance for its determination so it is
extrinsic.
The upholders of the hypothesis of non-discrimination believe
that it is an antidote to the theory that the world has no rea-
lity. Such a belief is baseless. Memory plays on important part
in the former hypothesis. Memory is not true as it is not pro-
duced by a real object. When our parents are dead and gone
and their bodies are consumed, we have their memory. The
implication of the theory of non-discrimination is that every
judgment is true. Therefore, the world is real. But the upholders
of the unreality of the world prove their thesis, illustrating the
above memory which is based upon the unreal objects. The mere
denial of an illusion cannot refute the thesis of the Śūnyavādins
(the upholders of the unreality of the phenomenal world).
If it is held that there is a sound argument which counter-
acts the hypothesis that the truth of a judgment is not self-
evident. The Šūṇyavādins also approve of this trend of thought.
Such a statement is not fair. If the critics were sincere then
they should have straightly put forward the argument and dis-
cussed the matter. Why do they bring in the hypothesis of non-
discrimination and discuss it ?
The main defect from which the hypothesis of non-discrimi-
nation suffers is this: As the true object which a judgment
refers to has been ignored so the hypothesis of non-discrimina-388
Nyayamanjari
tion has been based upon a weak foundation. Thus, what has
been stated goes contrary to experience. Therefore, their care-
lessness is strongly condemned.
It has been nicely stated: The spear has been only broken.
But the god of love-against whom it was directed has not
been killed. You have simply disgraced yourself but the object
has not been accomplished. In other words, the Prabhakaras
have not been able to prove the hypothesis of non-discrimina-
tion-the task undertaken by them. But in order to do it they
have simply contradicted experience.
The upholders of the hypothesis of misapprehension may put
forward three alternative suggestions in order to justify their
hypothesis. These suggestions have been refuted one after an-
other. But they have not been fairly refuted. Silver is the
object which is revealed by the judgment "This is silver". Let
us take it to be the first of the three alternative suggestions.
Now, the critics subject this suggestion to severe criticism. They
hold that silver is not present there but if it is the object of the
said judgment and is revealed by it then the judgment in ques-
tion involves the presentation of an unreal object. These critical
remarks are not very sound since though silver is absent here
yet it is present somewhere else. But those who hold that an
absolutely unreal object is presented to consciousness assert
that the object of an illusory judgment exists in no space and in
no time. It does not exist in past, present and future times. It
is absolutely unreal. Therefore, we do not feel the necessity of
thinking that such an unreal object exists in some other
country.
Now, the following question is put to the upholders of mis-
apprehension. How is an absent object which is misread pre-
sented to our consciousness? Jayanta says in reply to this ques-
tion. "What shall we do if such an object is presented to our
consciousness ?".
But an object which belongs to no time and occupies no
space has never been experienced as yet like the sky-lotus.
The difference between an absolutely unreal object and an
object which is absent from a particular space lies in this that
the former has been never experienced nor will be, but the latter
is experienced.Intrinsic nature of the truth of a judgment discussed
389
If an object is absent from a spot, how does it produce its
perception at the spot? Again, if it does not produce percep-
tion, how is it revealed by perception? Our answer to these ques-
tions is as follows: Even if we have mal-observation of an ob-
ject, it provokes the memory of another object similar to it. The
object thus recollected is somehow presented to the illusory judg-
ment of perception. As an animal which is required at a spot is
brought there with a noose tied round its neck so an object
which is absent from a spot but is presented to our consciousness
is not acquired to be physically present there. When an object
is revealed within it makes us aware of the fact that it belongs to
the outer world. Such presentation does not mean that we pro-
ject our consciousness or we perceive an unreal object. The
reason behind this statement is this that the object is perceived
as distinct from the act of perception and that the presentation
of an absolutely unreal object does never take place. Therefore,
the mother-of-pearl, either concealing its form or attiring itself
in the garb of another, is presented to our consciousness. This is
the second alternative suggestion which may cling to in defence
of our hypothesis of misapprehension.
But an objection to this suggestion has been raised before.
The player who plays the part of Sitä in a drama makes neces-
sary changes in dress. Does the mother make such a necessary
change in its dress? If it does not do then how is it referred to
by the judgment "This is silver ?" We should not be laughed
at if we say that we have witnessed the drama in which the
mother-of-pearl plays the above part. We hold that what appears
to be silver is really the mother-of-pearl. The substratum which
stands in front of us reminds us of a particular piece of silver
by virtue of its shining character bearing a close resemblance
to that of silver. The substratum, without being characterized
by its specific property is presented to consciousness. Something
which is in front of us is apprehended to be silver. As a matter
of fact, the specific property of the mother-of-pearl, viz., its
triangularity, etc. is not detected. So, the mother-of-pearl is
described as an object which conceals its own form. Again, as
the remembrance of silver follows in the wake of its perception
so it is called that it attires itself in the garb of silver. A large
number of judgments of illusory perception is due to a defect in390
Nyāyamanjari
the object or a defect in the sense-organ. The following examp-
les such as the mother-of-pearl appearing as silver, the rays of
the sun being mistaken for water, the cloud being taken for the
city of the Gandharvas, á piece of rope being taken as a snake;
the vision of double moons, the conch shell being perceived as
yellow, sugar being tasted to be bitter, the perception of a
loose tuft of hair floating in the air, etc. illustrate the above
class of illusion. This type of illusion takes place when an object
which produces perception is misread as another. There is
another type of illusion which is objectless. It owes its existence
to a defect in the internal organ. There is no case of misreading.
What is presented to consciousness is entirely supplied by
memory.
The third alternative suggestion is this :-
The alambana of a judgment is one thing but what is present-
ed to consciousness is something else. This view is held by
some logicians of the Nyaya School. What is an alambaná?
Does it signify the object that is very adjacent to the perceiving
mind? In that case the ground upon which the object is located
should also be apprehended as an alambana. If an ālambana is
defined as an object which produces an awareness then the
sense-organ such as the eyes should also be called an ālambana.
But if it is defined as that which couses an awareness, becomes
at the same time the object of such awareness and is referred to
by the demonstrativa prohoun 'this', then the definition is free
from all defects.
Now, a problem arises in our mind, viz., "What is an alambana
either of the illusory judgment that there are two moons in the
sky or of the judgment that there is a tuft of loose hairs before
the eyes?" A certain disease which is called 'timira' resides in the
eye-ball and looks like a collection of loose hairs. The same
disease divides the eye-rays into twain. The eye-rays, being
detached from each other, separately behold the moon. Thus,
one and the same moon is visualised as two. There is another
form of timira disease which manifests another symptom.
'Timira' like smoke or fog takes shelter in pores of retina and
stands in the way of the continuous flow of the eye-rays. The
eye-rays come out in a scattered manner. When they come in
contact with the rays of the sun, they appear as a collection ofIntrinsic nature of the truth of a judgment discussed
loose hairs. They become the source and object of the illusory
perception since when the sun is not up or is down, such an
illusory perception does not take place..
The white clouds constitute the source and object of the
illusory perception of the city of the Gandharvas since they
appear sometimes as a house, sometimes as a palace and
sometimes as a rampart. Hence, the above three suggestions are
the defectless supports of the hypothesis of misapprehension.
Another objection has been raised against the hypothesis of
imisapprehension that the hypothesis of the projection of cons-
ciousness and that of the presentation of an unreal object
encroach upon the hypothesis in question. In other words,
these three hypotheses interpenetrate one another and hence
lack the mark of individual distinction. Of these three hypo-
theses the two hypotheses, put forward by the Buddhists, viz.,
the hypothesis of the projection of consciousness and that of the
presentation of an unreal object will be refuted in the chapter
on Apavarga where the thesis of Subjective Idealism will be
rejected. Hence, there is no need of discussing the character of
these two hypotheses. Thus, the charge of interpretation has
been answered.
391
The prabhākaras have stated that they alone can claim the
distinction of original thinking since the hypothesis of mutilated
memory which has been contributed by them has been accepted
by all of the contesting parties. With regard to this claim let
the other parties give their own verdict. But we can say this
much that the remembrance of silver precedes the illusory
perception of silver. The memory of silver produces the illusory
judgment that 'this is silver' due to knowledge by complication.
In this judgment silver is the predicate. This is the process of
the illusory perception of silver in a nutshell. In order to
describe it we have; of course, admitted the efficacy of the
hypothesis of the incomplete expression of memory, i.e., the
hypothesis of mutilated memory, But our intellect does not stop
here. We also admit that we are aware of the experience of
silver. The hypothesis of mutilated memory is not the only peg
upon which the theory of illusion is suspended. Therefore, we
arrive at the conclusion that the hypothesis of misapprehension
is immune from all defects.Nyāyamanjari
The Prabhākaras have discussed various definitions of contra-
diction. Somebody defines it to be non-coexistence. Others
define it as the wiping out of the impressions. Similar other
definitions have been discussed. As the Naiyāyikas accept
none of them, so let them be rejected by the Prabhākarás.
Hence, the critics cry in the wilderness as their criticism is
really pointless. They vainly dry up their throat. Now, let
the term 'vişaya-apahāra' (meaning literally, the taking away
of the object) signify contradiction. It does not mean that
the object which has been cognized has not been experienced.
But it conveys the meaning that the object which has been
.cognized before has not existed at the time of its experience.
It does not suggest at the same time that the object which has
been experienced before is now non-existent, being destroyed.
If it had conveyed such a meaning then in every case of its
contradicted experience the knowledge of the non-existence of
its object would have been true like the knowledge of the non-
existence of a jar which had been cognized before but was
destroyed afterwards by the stroke of a mace. Now, another
apprehension arises in our mind. When an object exists at a
spot but we commit a mistake that it does not exist, does the
object possess the two imcompatible predicates, viz., existence
and non-existence? In other words, should we suppose that
the object exists and does not exist at the same time since
contradiction does not deduct anything from the predicative
character of an object? Such an apprehension should not be
entertained since when we have definite knowledge of contra-
diction, the predicate of the substantive known before, is
cancelled. We knew an object as silver at that time. But we
now know that it is not silver but something else. This is what
contradiction does.
392
Now, another question arises in our mind. Every phenome-
non of awareness reveals only an object which is compresent
with it. If this is the case then how can a subsequent jud-
ment which contradicts an antecedent one imply that the
object referred to by the latter was then absent ? What shall
we do? Because a judgment is born with such an innate
function. When a jar is broken we know that it does not exist.
Unlike it when a contradictory judgment arises in our mind weIntrinsic nature of the truth of a judgment discussed
393
know that the object referred to by the opposite judgment did
later
not exist at the time of its occurrence. We shall prove
on in the section on the refutation of the doctrine of universal
flux that an object which is confined only within the bounds of
present time is cognised.
Let us now consider the next definition of contradiction.
Contradiction is such as sets at naught the resultant form of a
knowing process. The judgment that the object which is
being known is avoidable or acceptable is the resultant form
of a knowing process. This point has been discussed in the
section on the difinition of perception. The knowing process
is surely contradicted because its resultant form is discredited.
Now, a question may be put to us, viz., "How does a contra-
dictory judgment dispense with the resultant form ?"
An answer to this question is this :---
I
If it completes its task while it sings or dances or repeats
some sacred incantations or offers libation to fire then it
requires no other intermediate process to realize its object.
If it is held that an end is not directly attained and a chain of
intermediate means awaits in the path which leads to the
destination then how can we fix up the limit to such means?
How do we pass on from one means to another? Another
intervening means is required and so on ad infinitum In other
words, if we admit that under no circumstances a goal is direct-
ly reached then the fallacy of regressus ad infinitum will surely
discredit the very assumption itself. In fine, we should not
doubt the efficacy of the above hypothesis raising unimportant
questions. When a contradictory judgment arises it sets aside
the resultant form of the opposite experience. Hence the
latter experience is said to be contradicted.
●
Some object to the above conclusion on the ground that
contradiction takes place when the object is one and the same
and that it does not take place when the objects are different.
But such an objection is not fair. They have taken a wrong
Contradiction is not applicable to
view of contradiction.
Contradiction is
Reality, i.e., to the objects known by us.
A judgment is
confined within the sphere of judgments.
contradictorily opposed to another when the subjects of these
two judgments are one and the same but their predicates are394
Nyayamanjari
incompatible with one another. . These predicátes are asserted
to be incompatible because they refer to such objects as are
incompatible with one another. Now a question arises in our
mind, viz., if an object is known to be..possessed of variegated
colour then why does not this judgment involve a contradict-
ion? The answer to the question is this :-There is contadict-
ion in the judgment because the subsequent judgment does
not appear, cancelling the antecedent öne. Many different
attributes may belong to one and the same substratum. They
are also known to co-exist harmoniously. There are judgments
in which many different predicates are asserted to the same
subject but none of them is incompatible with the other. There
is no contradiction in the above judgment referring to the
egated colour because the subsequent judgment comes into
being without negating the prior judgment in question.
ti-
It has been stated that the antecedent judgment being well
established; the negating subsequent judgment which is a new
comer on the field should be counteracted. But it is reasonable
to hold that the subsequent judgment contradicts the anteced-
ent one since cancelling the former, the latter appears. More-
over, the subsequent judgment alone contradicts the antecedent
one since it correctly refers to the object of knowledge and is
strengthened by some other proofs. Thus, the relation of
contradiction holds between the two judgments. Again, if
we subscribe to the hypothesis of misapprehension then the
usage of contradiction becomes unmistakably proper. There-
fore, this hypothesis is better.
The Refutation of the Hypothesis of a Section of the Mimamsakās
Some Mīmāṁsakas who are not adept in the science of logic
hold that the up-holders of the hypothesis of misapprehension
define it as the mistaking of one thing for another, viz., the
mother-of-pearl is mistaken for silver. But such a mistake does
not take place since there is some sort of silver which is
presented to our consciousness like the true silver. The silver
which is an object of true knowledge is accepted by all persons
to be existent. It is called as common. The silver which is
referred to by an illusory judgment is taken to be existent
under abnormal circumstances. It is called as
uncommon.Mimāmsala hypothesis of Misapprehension refuted
395
Thus they differ from each other. In modern language the
former has existence but the latter has merely subsistence. The
object which is referred to by the judgment "This is silver" is
silver. The object will be silver even if the judgment in
question is false. In some cases, silver is conducive to our
business-transactions. In other cases, it is not so. What is
conducive to our business transactions is laukika. What is
The Naiyayikas hold that the illusory
not so is alaukika.
judgment, "This is silver" refers to a piece of the mother-of-pearl.
But it is really a piece of alaukika (uncommon) silver. As it is
presented to our consciousness as silver so it is silver. But as it
cannot be used as common silver so it is uncommon (alaukika).
The above thesis is put forward by him who is a creator of
a new object but does not know the implication of judgments.
The implication of the contradictory judgment is that there
is no silver. The negative judgment that this is not silver
negates the identity of silver. But it does not point to the
uncommonness of silver.
It may be contended that the negative judgment that this
is not silver signifies that this is not common silver. He suggests
that the above negative judgment is incomplete but should be
made complete by the insertion of an appropriate predicate,
viz., 'laukika'. In the Mimāṁsā literature the filling up of an
incomplete sentence is noticed. The sentence 'samyajatraira-
ngâni' is incomplete. It is completed by the addition of the
appropriate verb 'samiyujyantām'. Likewise; the negative
proposition that this is not silver should be made complete by
the addition of the predicate 'laukika'. This learned Vedic
scholar has not as yet given up his method of explaining the
Vedic texts but there is no scope of its application here. He
holds that the negative proposition that this is not silver pur-
ports to convey that this is uncommon silver (the reading in
the printed text is incorrect. It should be 'katham taddhar-
matvena alaukikatvam grhyate'. This interpretation is absurd.
Because if silver is not perceived then its property 'uncom-
monness' cannot be cognised. But if the above negative pro-
position conveys that this contains the negation of silver
then no such trouble arises. The negation of silver does not
presuppose the perception of silver since the negation of silver394
Nyayamanjari
incompatible with one another. These predicates are asserted
to be incompatible because they refer to such objects as are
incompatible with one another. Now a question arises in our
mind, viz., if an object is known to be.. possessed of variegated
colour then why does not this judgment involve a contradict-
ion? The answer to the question is this :-There is contadict-
ion in the judgment because the subsequent judgment does
not appear, cancelling the antecedent öne. Many different
attributes may belong to one and the same substratum. They
are also known to co-exist harmoniously. There are judgments
in which many different predicates are asserted to the same
subject but none of them is incompatible with the other. There
is no contradiction in the above judgment referring to the vari-
egated colour because the subsequent judgment comes into
being without negating the prior judgment in question.
It has been stated that the antecedent judgment being well
established; the negating subsequent judgment which is a new
comer on the field should be counteracted. But it is reasonable
to hold that the subsequent judgment contradicts the anteced-
ent one since cancelling the former, the latter appears. More-
over, the subsequent judgment alone contradicts the antecedent
one since it correctly refers to the object of knowledge and is
strengthened by some other proofs. Thus, the relation of
contradiction holds between the two judgments. Again, if
we subscribe to the hypothesis of misapprehension then the
usage of contradiction becomes unmistakably proper.
fore, this hypothesis is better.
There-
●
The Refutation of the Hypothesis of a Section of the Mimāṁisakās
Some Mimāṁsakas who are not adept in the science of logic
hold that the up-holders of the hypothesis of misapprehension
define it as the mistaking of one thing for another, viz., the
mother-of-pearl is mistaken for silver. But such a mistake does
not take place since there is some sort of silver which is
presented to our consciousness like the true silver. The silver
which is an object of true knowledge is accepted by all persons
to be existent. It is called as common. The silver which is
referred to by an illusory judgment is taken to be existent
under abnormal circumstances. It is called as
uncommon.Mimamsaka hypothesis of Misapprehension refuted
395
Thus they differ from each other. In modern language the
former has existence but the latter has merely subsistence. The
object which is referred to by the judgment "This is silver" is
silver. The object will be silver even if the judgment in
In some cases, silver is conducive to our
question is false.
business-transactions. In other cases, it is not so. What is
conducive to our business transactions is laukika. What is
The Naiyāyikas hold that the illusory
not so is alaukika.
judgment, "This is silver" refers to a piece of the mother-of-pearl.
But it is really a piece of alaukika (uncommon) silver. As it is
presented to our consciousness as silver so it is silver. But as it
cannot be used as common silver so it is uncommon (alaukika).
The above thesis is put forward by him who is a creator of
a new object but does not know the implication of judgments.
The implication of the contradictory judgment is that there
is no silver. The negative judgment that this is not silver
negates the identity of silver. But it does not point to the
uncommonness of silver.
It may be contended that the negative judgment that this
is not silver signifies that this is not common silver. He suggests
that the above negative judgment is incomplete but should be
made complete by the insertion of an appropriate predicate,
viz., 'laukika'. In the Mīmāṁsā literature the filling up of an
incomplete sentence is noticed. The sentence 'samıyajatraira-
ngăni' is incomplete. It is completed by the addition of the
appropriate verb 'samyujyantām'. Likewise; the negative
proposition that this is not silver should be made complete by
the addition of the predicate 'laukika'. This learned Vedic
scholar has not as yet given up his method of explaining the
Vedic texts but there is no scope of its application here. He
holds that the negative proposition that this is not silver pur-
ports to convey that this is uncommon silver (the reading in
the printed text is incorrect. It should be 'katham taddhar-
matvena alaukikatvaṁ grhyate'. This interpretation is absurd.
Because if silver is not perceived then its property 'uncom-
monness' cannot be cognised. But if the above negative pro-
position conveys that this contains the negation of silver
then no such trouble arises. The negation of silver does not
presuppose the perception of silver since the negation of silver396
Nyayamanjari
is not a property of silver. The negation of silver is surely
cognised if the remembrance of silver precedes such cognition.
There is no silver at the spot. Therefore, the proposition that
uncommon silver exists should be no more spoken of. We
cannot define silver as that which is revealed by the knowledge
of silver but the correct definition of silver is this: "What is
apprehended by the uncontradicted experience of silver is
silver".
Does the difference in the nature of judgments referring to
silver constitute the basis of the division of silver into two
classes, viz., common and uncommon? Or, does the difference
in the nature of propositions, viz., positive and negative, con-
stitute such a basis? Judgments do not supply us with the basis
of the above division. Sometimes, we, also, come across the
judgment that this is not silver. The first one points to the
existence of silver. But the second one refers to the negation
of silver. But they do not respectively refer to common and
uncommon silver.
Now, these Mimaṁsakas may contend that the positive pro-
position refers to common silver and the negative one points
to uncommon silver. Or, they may suggest that when we move
for silver, seeing it, it is common silver and when we refrain
from doing so, knowing it, it is uncommon silver. The Naiya-
yikas take an exception to this contention or suggestion. What
is a proposition? A proposition is nothing but the verbal
statement of a judgment. The above division of silver does not
find a basis in the negative proposition. As a judgment does
not establish the division so the negative proposition does not
point to uncommon silver. Now, the Mimamsakas may revise
their hypothesis and hold that the pragmatic test works out
the division. Silver which has practical utility is common.
Silver having no such utility is uncommon. In that case women
who are being embraced in a dream should be common. But
a jar which is destroyed just after its appearance, i. c., which
serves no purpose should be uncommon.
Moreover, a person who does not call the mother-of-pearl
as silver knows for certain that it is not silver. But he does not
know that this is uncommon silver. The Mimämsakas may
still urge that he knows it to be uncommon silver. If he knowsMimāṁsaka hypothesis of Misapprehension refuted
397
it to be so then why does he move at all for it in order to achieve
his practical end? Now if the Mimamsakas give a reply to this
effect that one mistakes uncommon silver for common silver
then the hypothesis of misapprehension which has been much
decried appears on the scene to rescue them.
In fine, the Naiyãyikas remind these Mimamsakas of the
real situation that the latter should not cherish hatred towards
the hypothesis of misapprenension and that they should frame
a hypothesis in obedience to the evidence given by the uni-
versal experience.
The Mimāṁsakas are so much anxious to establish the hypo-
thesis that the truth of a judgment is self-evident that they do
not desire to take their wives out of their home (If they go out.
then others will get an opportunity of noticing their conduct
and infer the purity of their character from their conduct. In
that case, their chastity, i. c., the truth, will not be self-
evident).
Even if the Mimāṁsakas make all sorts of frantic efforts to
prove their hypothesis, the self-evident character of the truth
of a judgment will not be established because it has been esta-
blished that there is a broad division of knowledge into two
classes, viz., true and false knowledge. Moreover, we should
also note that when a doubt arises in our mind in order to
solve it we should have recourse to agreement between know-
ledge and the successful movement for the attainment of the
object known.
The Mimamsakas take a lot of trouble to prove the hypo-
thesis that the truth of knowledge is self-evident. But there
is no need of taking so much trouble since they cannot esta-
blish the pet hypothesis that there is no illusion and that the
so-called illusion is explained in terms of non-discrimination
between two distinct acts of consciousness. Why do they move
about in a serpentine lane to reach the goal? Let them travel
by the main thoroughfare.
The hypothesis that consciousness projects itself does not
hold good because an object is always cognized as an external
one. In other words, as consciousness cannot externalise itself
so the above theory is untenable. The hypothesis explaining
illusion that an unreal object is presented to consciousness isNyayamanjari
untenable because an unreal object can never be known. The
hypothesis of non-discrimination is equally wrong because it
has been already subjected to severe criticism. Therefore, the
men of light and learning should subscribe to the hypothesis
of misapprehension.
398
As the misapprehension of an object is possible and a false
judgment bears a close resemblance to a true one so the truth
even of a true judgment is called in question. In that
case, we
are to depend upon accordance with facts for the determina-
tion of the truth of a judgment. Hence, the truth of the Vedas
is extrinsic but not intrinsic.
!
The establishment of the hypothesis that the truth of verbal testimony
is extrinsic
Though we, even, leave aside the hypothesis that the truth
of perception and other sources of knowledge is intrinsic as
an open questiton yet there is no room for doubt about the
hypothesis that the truth of verbal testimony is externally
determined.
When a person perceives an ordinary object or indirectly
knows it but does not make himself sure of the truth of this
knowledge he moves towards the object provided such an action
does not demand much exertion from him. He does not feel
much interest in ascertaining the truth of perception or some
other form of knowledge because the task is a very easy one.
But the Vedas, the best source of the verbal testimony, reveal
transcendental ends of human life such as Heaven and Final
emancipation from all kinds of sorrows. A judicious performer
of sacrifice should not prepare himself for performing sacrifice
such as Jyotiştoma and such other sacrifices which entail great
efforts upon the performer without ascertaining the truth of
the Vedic injunctions enjoining them. Therefore, the truth of
them should be surely determined. We also assert that their
truth is only extrinsically known to us. A word produces the
knowledge of an object. But how does it do it? When we
carefully listen to the words of an experienced person and
minutely watch the corresponding movement of another expe-
rienced person employed by the former, we know the meaning
of a word, i. c., the relation of a particular word to a particularIntrinsic nature of the truth of Verbal Testimony
399
object. A word produces the knowledge of an object in a
person who has known its meaning. We shall discuss later on
whether the meaning of a word is natural or conventional.
The character of a word is like that of a lamp, viz., it is the
illuminator of an object. When a lamp shines it illuminates
a near object which is either pure or impure. Similarly, when
a word is employed by a person and 'reaches the ears of a
listener it produces the knowledge of an object which is either
true or false, either consistent or inconsistent, either fruitful or
fruitless and either an action or an accomplished fact. This is
what constitutes its nature. But the distinction of a lamp from
a word lies in this that a word in order to communicate the
knowledge of an object depends upon its meaning whereas a
lamp produces the knowledge of an object without depending
upon any relation with it. The truth or falsehood of verbal
knowledge entirely depends upon a person who makes the
statement. If a person correctly sees an object and is honest
then the knowledge, communicated by him, is true. If he is
otherwise then the knowledge, communicated by his statement,
is false. It has been proved that a word has no natural rela-
tion to an object. Similarly, the knowledge, communicated
by a word, is not naturally true. If the words had intrinsic
truth in them then the statements of a deceitful person would
not have been contradicted. The accordance or discordance of
verbal knowledge with facts respectively depends upon the
qualification or the defect of a speaker. It is not difficult to
describe the qualifications which lie at the root of a truthful
statement like the qualifications of a sense-organ. The qualifi-
cations and defects of a person are well known. Love, hatred
etc. constitute his defect whereas his compassion and such
other virtues constitute his qualification. The qualification of
a person means that of his statement. The qualification of a
person does not mean the good qualities belonging to his body
as it does when we speak about the qualification of our eyes
etc. If it is held that the good quality of a person does not
contribute towards the truth of his statement then it may be
as well pointed out that his defects should not be held respon-
sible for the falsehood of his statement.
The good qualities of a person simply remove the defects400
Nyayamanjari
in a person but do not contribute towards the truth of his state-
ment. This is the hypothesis of the Mimāṁsakas; the Vedic
scholars. They are only to take oath in order to establish it.
The knowledge derived from a Vedic passage is true simply
because no contradiction arises to counteract it. If this is the
contention of a sect of thinkers then the passage, "One should
enjoy a lac of beautiful damsels in order to obtain the dignified
status of a Vidyadhara," should also be true. Somebody has
made a remark to this effect :-
As object which is seen in a dream vision as belonging to
some other islands can inspire the belief of no body in its exis-
tence though its reality is neither proved hor disproved by our
experience. Similarly, a Vedic passage which informs us about
a transcendental object the reality of which is neither proved
nor refuted by a distinct proof is considered to be trustworthy
by no body.
The Mimāṁsakas may contend that the vision in a dream is
not true because it is known to be produced by a defective
condition. The defect which belongs to the inner organ is the
sleep itself.
Now, the Naiyāyikas put the following question to the
Mīmāṁsakaš, “What have you got to say regarding the invali-
dity of the knowledge, derived from a sentence. 'One should
enjoy a lac of beautiful damsels étc. ?" They may answer that
the source of it, i. e., the author of it, is not known to us. If
this is your reply then the source of the Vedas, according to
you, is far less known to all. Now, how do you distinguish the
Vedas from such sentences? If you hold that the above sen-
tence is not accepted by the great men then the source of the
truth of the Vedas is to be traced out. The hypothesis, that
the truth of the Vedas is to be accepted as a general rule as
due to the fact that they produce knowledge, is not tenable.
If it is not definitely known that the author of a sentence
has the direct knowledge of the object, signified by the sentence
then its truth is not determined. But a sentence is not true if
its meaning does not involve merely inner contradiction.
In order to prove the infallibility of the Vedas Kumärila
holds that there is no author of the Vedas. Hence, the
defects which, belonging to the conditions, invalidate theObjections to the acceptance of God
Vedas float in the air, i. c., are not applicable to the conditions
of the Vedas since the Vedas to not owe their origin to any
such conditions. The hypothesis is not sound. If the Vedas
are not composed by an author then they cannot be held to
be true since the good qualities which are responsible for the
validity of the Vedas will also be conspicuous by their absence.
It is also not very reasonable to hold that the Vedas have got
no author. We shall now discuss the point whether the Vedas
have been composed by an author or not.
How can a person who has direct knowledge of all trans-
cendental objects compose the Vedas and teach us ? Because the
Vedas contain such injunctions as prescribe actions which are
conducive to various transcendental results, lying beyond the
range of all other proofs.
The Naiyāyikas give a reply to the above objection. Any
and every man cannot compose the Vedas. The lord of all
gods who is thoroughly competent to create the three worlds
is the author of the Vedas. God surpasses all in his excellence,
has omniscience, eternal bliss and compassion. He is immune
from five evils such as transcendental illusion etc. He has nei-
ther worldly existence nor organic life nor sufferings.
401
Objections to the acceptance of God
What do you say with regard to god? The possible answer
to it is that He is deft in the creation of the world (three
regions of the universe). The rejoinder to this statement is
that
you are too simple to follow the niceties of logic. God is
not perceived like colour etc. Moreover, he is not also an object
of inner perception like pleasure etc. He is nor also an object
of transcendental perception of the sages since they have
not been established as existent. God is not an inference
since an înference in this case is not based upon perception.
God lies beyond the range of perception. Every case of
inference is based upon universal concomitance.
no mark which may be universally and invariably connected
with God. Inference based upon general ground is not appli-
cable to God. Such a general mark is conspicuous by its absence.
The earth and other such objects cannot be proved to be
effects. At least no intelligent thinker will endorse this
There isNyayamanjari
hypothesis. The unity of the parts of a mountain does not
have the way for postulating a creator. The union of the
parts of a mountain is distinct from a pot which is created by
its maker. The parts of a mountain have assembled and been
united together in a distinct way which excludes the idea that
it is an effect. If for the sake of argument it is admitted that
it has a beginning in time and is an effect, still it is not an
invariable mark of the existence of God just like grass etc.
The purport of the statement is that mountains etc. have a
natural growth like that of grass etc. The vegetables and
plants which grow wildly do not depend upon cultivators.
Moreover, at the time of growth they are never perceived
as such. As no creator is known to us as perceived, His non-
perception is enough to establish his non-existence. But in the
case of Earth and vast sheets of water the creator may be
postulated as distinct from the visible creators. But such a
postulation is not tenable since the mark will be too wide to
arrive at a definite conclusion. If the case of the union of
parts of a mountain is possible without a creator, the creation
of Earth and water may be possible by a natural process.
Therefore, the inference is fallacious. It is as fallacious as the
inference that he is a Brahmin since he is a man.
An infer-
ence must be based upon experience. This much
be
may
admitted that the so-called creator is no better than a potter.
Such an inference is contradicted since other specific charact-
ers as expected do not follow from the above conclusion.
A creator who has movement in the shape of intervening
process has a body like a potter. If He has a body, He is not
omniscient. He has imperfection and other limitations of his
mental powers. If we infer the existence of God, He is no
better than a potter. The creator of Earth is no better than
a potter. But His other specific attributes cannot be established.
How are they inferred? Such a probandum has no similar
instance to confirm its establishment. If the creator is merely
established, then how will His specific attributes be established
or known? Now, will corporeal or incorporeal God create the
earth etc? In this connection our observation is that incorporeal
creator is never seen. If He is corporeal, His body is an effect
like that of Caitra (a man). Is the body of God, being an
402Objections to the acceptance of God
403
effect, created by Himself or is it created by another God? It is
unwisely rash statement that He creates His own body. If
another creator is assumed then an infinite series of creators
will be the logical conclusion.
Let us hold such a conclusion. What is the defect in such
a conclusion? The defect is this that it is based upon no
source of knowledge. You are perplexed to establish a single
God. What will happen to you if you try to prove the exist-
ence of an infinite number of Gods. Will He create the
universe by physical operation like potter? Or, will He
create it by His mere will? These hypotheses are hard to
establish. By physical operation nobody can create by hundreds
of cycle of the worlds i.e. by hundreds of mythical years.
Moreover, the unconscious atoms do not obey the will of Him.
Moreover, the hypothesis is open to other charges. Has he
any purpose to serve by creating the universe ? or, does He
create the universe, having no purpose to serve? The second
hypothesis is absurd since if He has no purpose to serve by
creating the universe, then He is open to the charge of doing
imprudent act. The first hypothesis requires no scrutiny since
the contenders do not subscribe to it.
God has no desire to fulfil. As He is perfect He enjoys eter-
nal bliss. He has neither love nor hatred. He is free from
passions. He has no end to realize by engaging Himself in the
task of creating the universe. We do not make out what is His
object to serve. Does He undertake it out of compassions.
Before the creation in the universe the individual souls are free
from all passions, sufferings etc i.e. impurities like the libe-
rated souls. Therefore they did not deserve compassion.
The very compassionate persons feel compassion only when
their heart melts with pity observing the repeated sufferings
of the creatures. But no body feels for the souls having no
sorrow and other sources of sufferings like the soul at state of
liberty. He also does not know to create such a world which
provides us with enjoyments of pleasures alone. Even if He
makes such a provision, such enjoyment is only short-lived.
Such a weak defence does not carry any weight. Nothing is
impossible for the great Lord since He enjoys limitless indepen-
dence, and all the objects, in that case, submit to His inviolableNyayamanjari
command. If the contenders hold that the Lord of the creatures
takes into consideration all the acts, good and evil, perform-
ed by the creatures and creates the world as the creatures
deserve, such an explanation is not satisfactory. Let the un-
merited acts alone create the world and the Lord of creatures
has no business at all. The theorist may contend that the
matter or elements require the guidance of the conscious being
and that God is the fittest soul to create the world out of the
unconscious materials. Such an assumption is not tenable. The
souls are conscious beings who are competent to discharge the
function of supervisors since all such materials are for them.
There is no need of assuming another supervisor. Moreover, His
absolute majesty is curtailed, being dependence upon the acts
of all souls. Such limited majesty has no use at all. No king
likes to enjoy a kingdom if he is to depend absolutely upon
his minister and has no power to make choice of things and is
to accept the choice of his minister as his own. If He is Lord,
He should have absolute independence. If He cannot exert his
own independence, such a Lord has no need. No body enquires
the motives of the Lord if He does something.
The creator moves to create this universe from the sportive
spirit. If you hold that the creator enjoys the feat of sport by
creating this world having good and evil elements then we
take an exception to this view that the world being devoid of
pleasure as a result of his sport the God parts with His nature
in the shape of blissfulness which He possessed before the
creation of the world since He had all His desires fulfilled but
no wants.
404
The great souls should not indulge in such sports as require
much exertion and create panic in the hearts of all without
an exception. Hence the Protector of the world is neither a
creator nor a destroyer ofit.
If God preserves the acts of all creatures of the three
divisions of the universe then the possibility of the fruition of all
acts at a time will be ruled out. In other words, the goal of
universal liberation will be never reached. If the work ceases
then the recreation of the world will not be possible since the
varieties of the world will not be possible having no different
kinds of acts as their efficient causes.Ojbections to the acceptance of God
Now another hypothesis states that God goes on functioning
for a period of a hundred years of which a day is much longer
than the age of an earth and that after this period He feels a
desire to destroy the created world. As a result the dissolution
of the universe takes place. This period is mythological night
of Brahman. When this night is over he feels an inclination
again to create the world. By His desire the efficacy of the
latent acts revives and the acts, being active construct this
world. This hypothesis is not tenable.
If the creation and the destruction of the world depend upon
the desire of the God, let it be alone the cause of the appearance
and the disappearance of the world.
Let it be so. There is no need of the hypothesis of acts. If
we examine the hypothesis as revised closely, we find that it
is riddled with the three unanswerable objections. These are as
follows, viz., (1) His Majesty turns out to be merciless; (2) He
becomes merciless without any rhyme and reason since His act
of creation of the world is cruel; and as (3) the desire of God
is competent enough to bestow good and bad consequences, the
injunctions and prohibitions of the Vedas become gratuitous
assumptions. Another fresh problem appears to discredit the
Nyaya hypothesis. It is this that the non-realization of the state
of perfection is the inevitable logical conclusion since the desire
of God overrules everything and if the God so desires, the
liberated souls may be again bound down by the state of bondage.
In other words they may be reborn as ordinary creatures. There-
fore, we conclude that God is not responsible for the creation and
the destruction of the world. The chain of logical arguments
shows clearly that inference has no capacity for demonstrating
the existence of God. Comparison has no scope at all. The
eternal Vedas cannot rightly point to the existence of God. If
the god is the author of the Vedas then the infidels like us can
place no confidence in the statement of the Vedas. If it is stated
that the Vedas are true because the God is their author and
that God exists since the Vedas are the source of His existence
then the argument is riddled with the unanswerable vicious
circle. The existence of God cannot be established. If it is
argued that the hypothesis of God is only a fair presumption to
explain the existence of the world then we can boldly assert
405Nyayamanjari
be
that such a presumption is not necessary as the world may
explained otherwise since all the sources of valid knowledge
acceptable to us fail to establish the existence of God, God is
conspicuous by His absence.
¹406
It is not fair to believe in the existence of God on the strength
of a rumour current in the popular mind that God exists. It is
no better than the baseless heresy that a Yakṣa (a kind of spirit)
lives on the banian tree. The result of the close examination
reveals that the elaborate statement in the mythological story of
the creation and the destruction of the universe goes in vain
since the moral philosophers cannot lend their support to such a
whimsical world without plan and purpose.
The establishment of the existence of God
We, the theorists, say in reply to the above objections that
it is a truism that our perception does not reveal a person
who is skilled in constructing a mountain and other such
objects. Similarly, the inference based upon the perception of
similar objects is not capable of establishing the existence of
God. Therefore, such an inference is ruled out.
But the inference which is based upon general observation
has competence to prove the existence of God. We state our
inference in the following logical proposition thus :—The
earth and other such created objects are an effect. Such an
effect is dependent upon a maker i. e. a creator who knows
how to create and the purpose of creation. This is the pro-
bandum and the probans is the characteristic feature of an
effect and the similar example is a jar.
In a short logical form :
All effects are dependent upon a creator.
The earth is an effect.
Therefore the earth is dependent upon a creator.
The formal validity is stated in the last syllogism. The mate-
rial validity has been stated in the first one.
The rejoinder to the abore distinct criticism
It has been stated that the earth is not an effect. Who says
so? Is he a Cirvika or a Buddhist or a Mimāriisaka ?Existence of God Established
How should a Cárváka give a lie to the hypothesis that the
carth is an effect because he holds that the Vedas have been
composed by somebody though they are essentially different
from other literary products.
It does not behove the Mimärsakas to deny the earth the
character of an effect. Sabara has clearly stated that the true
character of an object is revealed to us though we do not
know its origin. This piece of cloth has been produced by the
combination of threads. But we can safely infer that it will
be destroyed when the combination of threads will be served
or when the threads themselves will be destroyed. Similarly,
the knowledge of the destruction of hill and such other things
which consist of parts may also take place. Sometimes, we wit-
ness the partial destruction of a hill. When some portion of a
hill is damaged by the torrential rain falling from the cloud of
the rainy season the mass of a projecting hill i. e. a rock slides
down. Kumārila, the author of Sloka-värttika has said that the
relation of universal concomitance holds between the two
terms the character of being an effect and that of being destru-
ctible and that they are co-extensive. The actual verse of the
Šloka-värttika says that if the middle term and the major term
are co-extensive and each of them pervades the other then we
can only infer the major term from the middle but no rice
tersa.
From the above statement, we may safely infer that the hill
is an effect because it is destructible. Hence, it emboldens us
to hold that it is not true that the character of an effect does
not belong to a hill even from the Mîmāṁsaka point of view.
The Buddhists who do not tolerate the suggestion that some
objects are eternal even at the time of universal destruction
cannot disprove the hypothesis that the above-mentioned
objects are effects. Hence, the conclusion that the earth and
such other objects are effects stands irrefutable. In order to
prove the conclusion that these objects are effects by means of
a syllogistic argument we put forward the minor premise that
they (these objects) possess the combination of parts. We
directly perceive them as having the combination of parts.
*
The counter attack of the Buddhists runs thus -We do not
make out the cogency of the word 'such' in such combination,
407408
Nyayamanjari
When smoke in a kitchen is produced by mild fire, being
kindled by the gentle fanning of housewife, it is very slender.
But when smoke in a mountain is produced by the great trunks
of big trees, being consumed by blazing fire which is fanned by
the strong storm, it rises straight up to the sky and increases in
volume. Shall not we infer fire from such smoke? Now, the
objectors may contend that smoke in general is known to be
universally connected with fire in general. Hence, one infers
fire from smoke. We also point out that the combination of
parts of a whole is universally connected with an agent who
combines them. Hence, let us infer an agent from the combi-
nation.
(Now, the Buddhists take an exception to the Nyāya hypo-
thesis from another point of view). They urge that the word
'combination' instead of denoting a real universal stands for
a mere nominal identity. The Naiyāyikas say in reply "Oh
Buddhists ! do you admit the existence of real smokeness (the
universal of smoke) in your system of Logic and Metaphysics?"
The Buddhists may contend that there is an imaginary nega-
tive object on which the popular convention is based but there
is no real universal. The imaginary negative universal of smoke
is non-non-smoke. It distinguishes smoke from the sky, time,
etc. Now the Naiyãyikas say in reply "Very well let us also
follow the path, chalked out by you, and hold that there is a
negative imaginary universal, viz., non-non-combination. It
serves the purpose of a conventional universal and distingui-
shes the combination of the earth, etc., from the sky, time, etc.
Whenever, we have an experience of smoke we have a com-
mon idea. This common idea leads to the assumption of a
common element which is negative in its character and is a
construction of our imagination. If the Buddhists hold this view
then they may find out such a negative common element in
this case since we experience a common idea in every judgment
referring to a combination of parts. But they may contend
that the combination of parts which is known to be due to the
operation of a creator does not agree in all fours with those
which are not known to be such. The Naiyāyikas do not see
much force in this argument. The different combinations of
parts such as the combination of parts of a jar, that of a cloth,Existence of God Established
that of a house, etc., are not similar. The common element in
a combination surely belongs even to the combination of parts
of a hill. Hence, the word 'such' which qualifies combination
as stated before has no significance whatsoever.
The wild plants and immovable objects have been cited as
negative examples in order to invalidate the above generalisa-
tion. But we point out in this connection that the above cases
are the subjects of inference and should not be cited as nega-
tive examples. If the objector cites the subjects of inference as
negative examples then the very possibility of an inference will
be cut off. As the time of the origin of this earth and such
other objects lies beyond the range of our sense-organ so their
-creator is not seen by us. The truth of the judgment that a
creator does not exist because he is not seen may be doubtful.
But the creator of the big trees which have very recently
grown is not seen by us. If we make a thorough search but do
not find out the creator then we know for certain that the
creator does not exist because he is not seen. Moreover, if the
cases which we cite as negative examples are included by our
opponents in the list of the subjects of inference then they
strike at the very root of the fundamental law of inference since
the generalizations which are materially invalid will surely pass
as valid ones under the present device.
A reply to the above objection is as follows. Though the
origin of some of the immovable objects is visible to us yet
we do not see the creator because he has no body. An objec-
tion to the above solution may be put thus:-How can the
so-called creator combine the parts of an object since he cannot
put forth his energy in the outer world, having no body. We
shall meet this objection later on that an incorporeal creator is
active. If the creator is invisible then it cannot be held that
he does not exist because he is not seen. Hence, the hypothesis
that the widly grown trees have no creator does not fairly serve
the purpose of negative examples.
The objectors have also suggested that the hypothesis of an
invisible creator is superflous since the immovable objects are
effects of visible causes such as earth, water, etc. Such a sugges-
tion is not logically sound. Those who believe in the existence
of the next world assume that the invisible principle of merits
409410
Nyayamanjari
and demerits is also one of the conditions which are responsible.
for an effect. The followers of Brhaspati, i.e., the materialists,
should also subscribe to this assumption in order to explain.
logically the world of manifold objects.
Now, it may be contended that the assumption of the invisi-
ble principle of merits and demerits as a condition is a necess-
ary one because the variety of worldly objects is not explained.
without resuming it. If you argue in the following manner
then we also point out that the assumption of an intelligent
creator is a necessary one, since the unconscious conditions.
cannot produce their effects without being guided by an intelli-
gent creator. Hence, the immovable effects are not produced
without the imparted activity of a creator. They are not to.
be cited as negative examples. Therefore, they cannot contra-
dict the truth of the major premise that all effects having parts.
are produced by a creator.
It has been objected that if the negative examples are taken
as the subjects of inference then which will be the rule that
decides the validity of inferential knowledge? Such an objec-
tion is not fair. If the objector can prove without the shade
of a doubt that a particular case is surely a negative example
then who can hold that it is to be taken as a subject of infere-
nce? Ifone argues that this fellow is a Brahmin because he
is a man or that an object is eternal because it is knowable
then even the creator of the universe will not be able to include
a negative example in the group of the subjects of inference.
An object cannot be designated as this or as that according to
the sweet will of anyone of the contending parties. Regarding
the immovable objects we have only stated that it has not been
proved that they have not been created by a creator. Now,
another fresh question arises in our mind. Even if we admit
that the immovable objects are subjects of inference then the
above generalization is not immune from an exception. The
so-called subject of inference cannot but be either a positive or
a negative example since an object cannot simultaneously have
such two properties as are contradictory to each other. If the
big trees are, in reality, created by a creator then they are posi-
tive examples. If they are not so created then they are nega-Existence of God Established
tive examples. They are either positive or negative examples.
There is no other possibility left to them.
An answer to this objection is as follows. If there is no such
thing as the subject of inference then the positive and negat-
ive examples, implying a necessary reference to the subject of
inference, become merely insignificant verbal expressions. A
positive example is such as helps to prove that the predicate in
question belongs to the subject of inference. A negative exam-
ple is such as helps to prove that the predicate in question does
not belong to the subject of inference. If the Naiyāyikas argue
like this then they should define a subject of inference.
A positive example is that which illustrates the belonging i.e.
the existence of the major term to it whereas the negative
example illustrates the non-existence of the major term without
the least shade of a doubt.
411
If the rival parties have a dispute over the matter whether
the predicate in question belongs to a particular subject or not
then the latter is called as the subject of inference. The
Naiyāyikas also approve of the hypothesis that the two contra-
dictory predicates do not simultaneously belong to a subject.
The subject of inference (pakṣa) has been so defined by a
biased mind since it has been so framed by the propounder of
a thesis to serve his interest. The mover of the thesis has
introduced the new termin the above sense into the above
designation of their logical literature.
Whenever a doubt, viz; whether a consequence belongs to
the subject of inference or not, arises in our mind, a syllogistic
argument is put forward to solve it. But if the consequence
is unknowable or unknown then we do not put forward a syllo-
gistic argument. This point has been already discussed. The
subject about which it is doubted whether the consequence
belongs to it or not is called a paksa. It remains a pakṣa until
it is decided that the consequence belongs to it or it does not
belong to it. When the decision is reached the above pakşa
becomes either a positive or a negative example. It is not fair
to cite a particular case as a negative example so long as it
remains a pakşa.
Now, a fresh objection may be raised by our opponent. A
reason is not sound if it belongs to a negative example. Simil-Nyayamanjari
arly, it is not reliable if it belongs to a doubtful negative exam-
ple. It is doubtful whether a creeper has been created by a
creator. Thus the combination of parts is not a true reason.
Such an objection is baseless. Let us take a familiar example.
We argue that the hill is fiery because it is smoky. We do
not definitely know that there is fire on the hill. Therefore,
the hill is a doubtful negative example. Smoke belongs to the
hill. Hence smoke should not be a reliable reason.
subject where the presence of the consequence is doubted
becomes a negative example then the very possibility of infere-
ntial knowledge is ruled out.
If every
412
Now, the objector may contend that though the above
subject, i. e., the hill has been converted into a pakṣa and has
become a source of doubt whether the consequence in question,
i. e., fire belongs to it or not yet smoke which belongs to it
leads to the inferential knowledge of fire because the relation
of universal concomitance holding between smoke and fire has
been established with reference to the other cases. If this solu-
tion is accepted by you then we shall also prove our point
in this manner. The earth and the big trees are doubtful
cases. We do not definitely hold that they have been created
by a creator. But they are effects. It has been ascertained
with regard to the other instances that an effect is invariably
produced by a creator. As they partake of the character of an
effect so it is, also, to be accepted that the reason unfailingly
points to the consequence with which it is universally connect-
ed. If you differ then you are to point out the negative exam-
ples which contradict the truth of his generalization.
Some other critics hold that the trees which grow wildly
should not be referred to as negative examples. The above
induction will be contradicted when the earth and such other
objects will be cited as negative examples. These examples
obstruct the very process of generalization. When we arrive
at a generalization all the examples positive and negative are
taken into consideration. Let us examine the process of gene-
ralization. Whenever we generalize we think that whatever
has a combination of parts has been created by an intelligent
creator. Again, when the process of generalization works in
our mind, an idea that, there is no God etc., gets itself imprint-Existence of God Established
413
ed upon our mind. When it is inferred that fire is cold be-
cause it is the conclusion of the major premise that whatever
is an effect is cold such a major premise does not arise. This
major premise is arrived at by a process of induction. But
whenever the process of induction is at work to realize the
determinate final form, the contrary idea that though fire is
an effect yet it is hot appears in our mind. As an impotent
person cannot beget a son so the conclusion that such and such.
objects have been created by a creator does not follow from the
suggested but intermediate major premise. This is the sum.
and substance of the objection.
Such an objection does not hold water. In connection with
the definition of inference it has been proved that a broad
generalization which is universally accepted is framed without.
any reference to a particular case. It is not a fact that when we
infer that fire is cold, the inference is invalidated because induc-
tion is obstructed. But it is to be noted that the above inference
is wrong because it is contradicted by our perception.
Moreover, your method of invalidating the inference that the
earth and such other things have a creator will also strike at the
root of the inference, put forward by you, that the apprehension
of sound etc. being an act, is produced by an instrument like the
act of hewing. Because when we arrive at the induction that all
acts are produced by instruments, we are not aware of the fact.
that the apprehension of sound etc. is produced by an instru-
ment, and hence this act of apprehension will falsify the induc-
tion. We should also note that the earth and such other objects
are subjects of inference, i.e., they constitute the minor term in
the syllogism in question. It is extra-ordinarily strange to con-
tradict the truth of a syllogism by an appeal to its minor term..
Now, the objector may still press his point with the remark
that the earth and such other things are contrary examples but
are not really subjects of inference. The Naiyāyikas have describ-
ed them as subjects of inference only to suit their purpose.
The Naiyāyikas meet this argument: Oh Mimâṁsaka ! if you.
hold this view then the apprehension of sound etc. should not
also be the subject of inference. It should be treated as a nega-
tive example. It should not be described as the subject of
inference.414
Nyayamanjari
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend thus: The judgment that
the acts such as the apprehension of sound etc. are not produced
by instruments is an absurdity. Therefore, the above apprehen-
sion and the like should not be treated as negative examples.
The Naiyäyikas may also say in reply that as the judgment
that the earth and such other things have no creator is an
impossibility so they should not be described as negative
examples.
Now, the Mimamsakas may point out that the creator of those
objects is not perceived by any body. The Naiyāyikas also meet
this objection thus. The instrument of the apprehension of sound
etc. is not also perceived. Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend
that the said instrument is not perceived because it is a transcen-
dental object but not an unreal one. The Naiyãyikas also hold
that such a contention is not convincing since the creator of the
earth etc. is not perceived because He is transcendental but not
unreal. Now, the Mīmāṁsakas may further contend that the
existence of the instrument in question is inferred since an effect
cannot be produced without the operation of an instrument.
Such a contention does not satisfy the Naiyáyikas. They will
also plead their case in the same strain that the existence of the
creator of earth etc. is ínferred since an effect cannot be produce-
ed if there is no creator to produce it.
As the existence of the said creator is inferred so the judgment
that the creator does not exist does never appear in our mind.
In the absence of such a judgment it is glaring mistake to assert
that the earth and such other objects are contrary examples.
When we notice probans but do not infer the probandum we
entertain a doubt regarding the presence of the probandum in
the subject of inference. Even in case of a very familiar proban-
dum such as fire such a doubt is not to be avoided. If a doubt
implies that the subject of inference when the presence of a pro-
bandum is questioned is to be taken as a contrary example then
we cannot even infer fire from smoke.
In case of the syllogistic argument that the earth has a crea-
tor because it is an effect, if the reason, put forward, is held to
be a fallacious one then smoke which is held to be a mark of
fire may also be asserted as a fallacious one since fire is not seen
on the hill at the time of inference.Existence of God Established
Now, it may be contended that fire may be seen if we actu-
ally go to the place and move about in search of it. We simply
say in reply to this contention, "Oh good sir ! ramble a hund-
red years with this idea deeply rooted in your brain". But it
does not improve the condition of the above probans if the pro-
bandum is seen afterwards. It still remains to be fallacious at the
time of inference. Again, if the person who infers fire does not
go about to find out fire because he is not in need of it then
what will you do? In other words, how will you establish your
case that smoke is not a fallacious reason when we infer fire on
the hill and have no intention of seeing it?
In fine, the probans, viz., being an effect or being a combina-
tion of parts, is not a fallacious one.
It has been objected that the particular which is inferred does
not belong to the example which illustrates induction. This ob-
jection reveals only their superficial observation since such ab-
sence of the probandum does not negate the truth of the inferen-
tial knowledge, In other words, an inference of this type is not
a fallacious one. Again, if a fallacy of this type is admitted then
inference per se will be discredited. This very argument can be
set against the inference of the auditory sense-organ, put forward
by the objector. When we cut a tree with a big knife, it has
been perceived by us to be a hard substance. Should our audi-
tory sense-organ, the instrument of an action, be like it ?"
"Certainly not" is the answer. It is different from the big
knife. A dissimilar object being inferred, the probandum in
question does not belong to the example. Let us clearly state
our point. The sense-organ in question is supersensuous. But the
instrument of the act of hewing is not supersensuous. Does any-
body hold that the inference of such a sense-organ is thereby
fallacious ?
Now, in order to safeguard his own position, the objector
may hold that the general proposition is this: “All acts are pro-
duced by an instrument" Hence, we deduce only an instru-
ment which one has no right to specify on the basis of the
above generalization. Similarly, the general proposition, framed
by the Naiyāyikas, is put forward thus : "All combinations of
parts of a particular type are effectuated by a creator". The
deductive conclusion which follows from it is that this particular
415Nyayamanjari
combination of parts is effectuated by a creator. The Naiyāyi-
kas may be allowed to state this much only but nothing more. In
other words, they should not specify the creator as such and such.
But it should also be noted that there is no such reason
as contradicts the specific properties of the creator. Let us take
a few concrete cases which illustrate the cancellation of some
specifications. Sound is non-eternal because it is an effect. The
reason in question contradicts some specifications of sound such.
as non-audibility, etc. The hill is fiery because it is smoky. We
know on the strength of this inference that the hill contains.
such fire as sets at naught some qualifications, viz., "belonging
to a kitchen" etc. Thus a reason is said to be contradictory when
it establishes the contradictory negation of the probandum in-
stead of proving the probandum. But it should not be called as
a contradictory one when it proves a particular type of proban-
dum which is dissimilar to that of the probandum illustrated in
the example. The reason, employed in the above syllogism, does
not prove that the earth and such other objects have not been
created by a creator. The reason in question is absolutely diffe-
rent from the reason employed in the syllogism "This is a horse
because it has horns." Therefore it is not a contradictory one.
416
Moreover, the reason in question does not illustrate the type
of Kālātyaya Apadişța fallacy. This type of fallacy suggests
that the reason which is employed to prove the presence of a
probandum in a subject of inference must belong to it (the
subject of inference). But it is learnt from the other sources of
knowledge, viz., perception or verbal testimony that the pro-
bandum in question does not belong to the subject of inference.
It has not been proved by perception or verbal testimony that the
earth and such other objects have no creator. On the contrary,
we shall cite passages from the Vedas which lend their support
to the conclusion arrived at by the above syllogistic argument.
of
The reason in question does not illustrate the type
Satpratipaksa fallacy. If a reason is employed in such a syllogism
it is counter-balanced by another syllogism which proves the
just opposite of the conclusion of the first one. The reason
behind the appearance of the two opposite syllogisms is this:
The exclusive possibility of one of these two syllogisms has not
been determined. The two reasons which point to the twoExistence of God Established
opposite conclusions are present in the subject of inference.
The presence of such reasons constitutes the source of doubt.
Besides this, there are other conditions of doubt. But in the
present case, there is no such factor as leads to a doubt.
Moreover, the probans in question is not such as does not stand
in the relation of universal concomitance to the probandum.
In some syllogisms the reason which is employed has no power
to enlighten the intended probandum. Let us illustrate our point.
The atoms are non-eternal because they have small size. The
small size of an object cannot assure one of its non-eternality.
But in the syllogism that the earth and such other objects are
produced by a creator because they are effects, the relation,
subsisting between 'being produced by a creator' and 'being an
effect', is that of universal concomitance. The reason necessarily
implies the consequence. The above relation has been discover-
ed by us from sound experience. Hence, there is no room for
the contradiction of the syllogism in question and there is no
chance of the appearance of an obstacle which will stand in the
way of arriving at the conclusion. If we employ an adequate
reason in order to prove the existence of God then nobody finds
an opportunity of throwing mud on it in order to discredit it.
In fine, we hold that the reason, viz., being an effect, put for-
ward by us (as pointing to the existence of God), is not open to
the charges which have been brought against it by our critics.
Therefore, the existence of God is surely established on the
strength of the sound reason indicated above. The truth of
inference is admitted by all. We have also discussed a good deal
to prove the validity of inferential knowledge. Hence, there is
no obstacle to the path of proving the hypothesis that God exists.
Philosophers of the other schools of thought have put forward
some other argument in order to prove the existence of God.
Let us illustrate some of them. The gross elements produce
pleasure and pain under the guidance of an intelligent being
because they have sensible properties such as sound etc. like the
musical instruments e.g., a drum etc. The gross elements
perform certain acts such as the act of carrying a load etc.,
being presided over by a conscious principle like a horse. The
fallacies which may be ascribed to these syllogistic arguments
will be got rid of in the light of the defence adopted in the previ-
417418
Nyāyamanjari
ous example. It has been also objected that the hypothesis "The
earth has a creator" may be taken as proved. But it does not
mean that the said creator has some exceptional atributes such
as 'eternality' 'omniscience' etc. It simply means that there is a
creator and nothing more can be asserted of him. From which
source do the theists learn His specific attributes? Some logicians
step forward and say in reply to this question that the Vedas
supply us with the above attributes.
It has been stated in the Nārāyaṇa-Upaniṣad that He has eyes,
faces, hands and legs on all sides and He unites Himself with
merits and demerits and with the five elements in order to
create heaven and earth (i. e., the whole universe).
Moreover, in the Svetāśvatra Upanișad a verse runs thus: “He
has no legs yet He moves. He has no hands yet He catches hold
of objects. He has no eyes yet He sees. He has no ears yet He
hears. He knows everything (He is omniscient). Nobody can
know him. Everybody says that he is the most excellent soul".
"The above passage suggests that God is the creator of all and
knows everything. Some Mīmāṁsakas hold that the Vedic texts
which contain injunctions, laudations, condemnations, anecdotes
and records of glorious exploits, purport to signify only rites to
be performed but they do not lay emphasis on the promised
objects. Such a view is absolutely wrong. It will be shown that
the above texts signify in the same strain both the rites to be
performed and the promised objects. As the Vedas are not the
only source of God so the fallacy of mutual dependence is avoid-
ed. (If the Vedas had been the only source of God then the
very existence of God would have been open to the said fallacy.
If the Vedas are the source of true knowledge then the existence
of God is established. Again, if the existence of God is proved
then the Vedas are the source of true knowledge. Thus the
whole argument moves in a vicious circle. But if the existence
of God is proved by some other source of true knowledge then
there is no scope for the above fallacy to vitiate the authority
of the Vedas). Some Vaišeşikas hold that in the syllogistic
argument "Earth has a creator because it is an effect" the
relation of universal concomitance holding between the middle
term and the major terms has its both aspects, positive and
negative, satisfied. This middle term is based upon anotherExistence of God Established
419
middle term which is connected with its major term only by
means of the relation of universal concomitance having only the
negative aspect satisfied. As a distinct effect in the shape of
pleasure, pain, etc., points to the existence of the soil which is
other than the body so earth and such objects, being distinct
effects, imply the existence of an omniscient creator having no
parallel. It is a truism that the human being like us cannot
create earth, etc. Earth and such other objects must be created
by some creator as they are effects. So their creator is distinct
from us, having very limited knowledge and power.
Some other logicians hold that the distinctive features of God
are not established by means of an inference but only through
the process of elimination of the other makers. This universe
which is being perceived by us admits of diversity. It is the
place where innumerable living beings enjoy various degrees of
pleasure and pain. It is impracticable for a person other than
one possessed of super excellent attributes.
Jayanta now records his own view. When a person sees
smoke, smells its fragrance, recognises it to be issuing from the
burning sandal-wood and distinguishes it from others, he infers
fire as consuming the sandal wood from it. Similarly, we infer
a distinct creator from a distinct effect. Likewise, we infer that
the weaver who has made the cloth is very expert when we see
a very fine cloth. A potter who has acquired proficiency in
preparing various earthen objects such as a pitcher, etc., handles
the materials in order to produce them on proper occasions.
Similarly, God who is in the know of the processes of creating
and destroying the universe where all creatures enjoy pleasure
and pain can be the creator of the universe as he feels the
necessity of creating and destroying it. For this reason the
Supreme Lord is omniscient.
As the individual soul is relatively omniscient since it is the
mover of all the sense-organs which sense only that respective
objects, so God who is the mover of all individual souls is
omniscient when He is compared and contrasted with them.
Vedavyasa says in his Gītā, "There are two kinds of Purusas
in this universe. The changing purușas belong to the first type.
The unchanging ones are included in the second type. All
composite bodies constitute the changing ones. The individual420
Nyayamanjari
souls constitute the unchanging ones. The best Purușa is other
than these two types. He is called the Supreme Soul. He is
changeless. He is immanent in the three worlds. He controls
and preserves them all."
The same idea has been repeated in the Māṇḍūkya-Upanișad.
Two birds of the same kind very close to each other rest on the
same tree. One of them tastes the delicious fruit. The other
simply witnesses it without tasting it.
For this reason He is omniscient.
The ignorance of all creatures is due to passions in the shape
of love, hatred, etc. But God is immune from all these feelings
etc. and hence He is omniscient. The above defects accrue to
the creatures since they enjoy pleasant and unpleasant objects.
How can these defects cling to God who blesses all and has
eternal bliss and consciousness? How are these shortcomings in
the shape of love, hatred, etc. possible in God who has eternal,
pure and serene consciousness? The reason behind the absence
of these defects in God is this that they (defects) owe their
origin to the wrong way of Thinking.
The eternality of God's consciousness and all other attributes
Is God's consciousness eternal? If he had remained sans cons-
ciousness even for a time-atom then various activities and
enjoyments of pleasure and pain on the part of all living beings
in this universe should have been absolutely suspended, since
they presuppose the operation of merit and demerit for their
coming into being and merit and demerit operate only under
the guidance of His desire. Why do you assume that His cons.
ciousness persists during the period of dissolution? The answer
to this question is this that His consciousness lasts till the
commencement of the universal dissolution. But during the
period of dissolution there exists no such condition which can
destroy His consciousness. Hence it is assumed that His cons-
ciousness is eternal. His consciousness which grasps all sorts of
objects, past, future, subtle, enveloped, etc., admits of no diver-
sity, since if He had several acts of awareness then they would
have been neither simultaneous nor successive. If His different
acts of consciousness were successive then He would have no
consciousness at least for sometime. In that case, all worldlyEternality of God's Consciousness
421
transactions should have suddenly collapsed. If we assume that
all acts of His consciousness are simultaneous then we should
assume that each act of consciousness grasps everything in the
universe, since He is omniscient. In that case, how can we
distinguish one individual act of consciousness from another?
His consciousness is said to be immediate because it bears a
close resemblance to perceptual awareness. Though it resembles
perception yet it is not produced by the sense-object-contact. It
is like sunlight which reveals such objects as do not produce
it. The other attributes of the Supreme Soul are also eternal
like His consciousness, since they are not conditioned by the
contact of the internal organ with the soul.
He has, indeed, neither sorrow nor hatred. He is not in need
of impressions which, being revived, develop into memory. He
requires no memory because He has always, the direct know-
ledge of all objects. For this very reason He requires no infere-
ntial knowledge. As a will to mitigate the sufferings of all crea-
tures follows His nature so merit which constantly grows in
Him is not excluded from Him. It has a great task to acco-
mplish, viz., the creation of the universe. He has eternal bliss
since it is learnt from the Vedas that He is ever blissful. A person
who enjoys no bliss has no capacity for undertaking such a
huge task.
Now a question arises in our mind. If His will is eternal like
his consciousness and so is His bliss then the word will also be
infinite. If He always wills to create the universe then it will
never meet with destruction. Again, if it is admitted that He
constantly wishes to destroy the universe then the destruction
of the universe will go on day and night and know no stop.
Such an objection does not affect our position. His will per se is
eternal because it is not produced by the contact of the internal
organ with the soul. But it is qualified sometimes by an object,
viz., the creation of the universe and at other times by another
object, viz., the destruction of the universe. During the interval
between the creation of the universe and its destruction when
the universe persists, the creator of the universe wills that this
particular effect should follow from this particular action. A
particular resolution of His mind is His mental activity. It has
been stated in the Vedas that His Kama and Samkalpa are422
Nyayamanjari
'always true, i.e. they are never baffled. The word 'Kama'
stands for will. The term 'Prayatna' signifies mental activity.
Five attributes out of the nine ones of the soul belong to Him.
They are as follows:-Consciousness, bliss, will, conation or
mental activity and merit. The remaining four attributes, viz.,
sorrow, hatred, demerit and impressions do not inhere in Him.
God is a distinct member of the class of souls. He is not a class
by Himself. Patañjali in his Yoga-sūtra says that God is a dis-
tinct soul who has neither illusion, nor egoism, nor love,
nor hatred nor fear of death, who has no undertaking, who has
neither birth nor life nor worldly enjoyment and who has neither
merit and demerit. The details of God are supplied either by
the Vedas or by an act of inference or by the process of elimi-
nation.
Incorporeal God
Somebody puts a knotty question to the Naiyāyikas. It runs
thus "Does corporeal or incorporeal God create the uni-
verse ?" The answer to the question from the standpoint of the
Naiyāyikas is that incorporeal God creates this Universe. Now,
a further question arises in our mind. Those who are associated
with an action are real agents but those who are not so associat-
ed are not agents. The term 'agent' has no conventional mean-
ing. As an incorporeal being has no action so it cannot be an
agent. Is agency found anywhere in an incorporeal being? One
who has consciousness, will to do something and mental acti-
vity is called an agent. It has been stated that such agency
surely belongs to God. The agency of our incorporeal soul is
noticed when it moves its own body. As the soul moves the
body merely by its will-force so the possible charge against the
agency of the soul that it should undergo a lot of troubles in
connection with its various operations has been replied.
If God does not behave like a potter, i.e., if He does not im-
part His mental activity to the constituent elements of the uni-
verse through the medium of His body like a potter then how
does unconscious dead matter obey His will?
The reply to this objection from the Nyâya point of view is
this :—"As the unconscious body obeys the will of the soul so
the unconscious atoms will submit to His will.Incorporeality of God
What is the motive of God behind the creation of this world?
A question like this may be raised in order to negate the exis-
tence of God. But such a question is not at all fair. God's nature
prompts Him to fashion this universe at one period of time. But
the same nature prompts Him again to destroy it at another
period of time. Why does His nature manifest itself at regular
intervals? If a person puts a question like this to us then we
submit the following by way of reply. The person who raises.
the above question is a big fool. Let him behold the sun. He
rises and declines regularly. Now if it is held that the nature
of the sun-god is moulded by the merits and demerits of all
creatures then our reply to it is this that the same rule applies to
the hypothesis of God as well.
We may also hold that the creation of the universe is like a
sport to Him. This does not show that this is an aimless task.
If He engages Himself in this sport, He does not feel tired.
Those who indulge in sports do not feel sorry for the hard
labour. Or we stick to the view that out of sheer compassion
for creatures He undertakes to create and destroy the universe.
The objectors have taken an exception to this view. They hold
that it is unreasonable to entertain such a view. But we review
the argument of the objectors and reassert our original view.
The reason behind our reassertion is as follows. The cycle of
creation is beginningless. Hence, the souls are saturated with
good and bad potential habits as they are tied down to the
chain of merits and demerits. As they cannot enter into the
main gate of final emancipation in such a plight so are not they
objects of pity? The actions, the fruits of which have not been
enjoyed are not uprooted. But an action cannot bear its fruit if
there is no world. Hence, the compassionate God is bent upon
creating hell etc. in order to make possible the fruition of an.
action.
When the creatures incessantly enjoy the fruits of their
actions they get tired. In order to give them recreation at some
intervals He also brings about the destruction of the universe.
Hence, the whole process of creation and destruction owes its
origin to His compassion.
Now, another objection arises in our mind that the simultane-
-ous destruction of all objects of the universe cannot be reason-
423424
Nyayamanjari
ably maintained. The residues of actions which have not borne
fruits cannot be so obstructed that they remain impotent. Such
a statement is also dogmatic. The potency of the persisting
actions is suspended by the irresistible will-force of God. Thus,
their power of bearing fruits is impeded. But when they are
energized by the will-force of God they produce results. They
remain fruitless when their power of bearing fruits is over-
powered by the will-force of God. Why do they obey the law,
imposed upon them by God? The answer is that the unconsci-
-ous objects without being guided or moved by a conscious being
are never seen to produce their effects.
Now, a rival hypothesis may be pressed that the conscious
souls should guide all merits and demerits of all creatures.
Kumārila also lends his support to it. He holds that as all em-
bodied souls can only perform actions so the conclusion is self-
evident that they are the masters of their own merits and de-
merits, i.e., they control them. Again, if the same conclusion is
proved by a distinct syllogistic argument then an old story is
simply repeated (more literally, a proved conclusion is only
re-established). Such a conclusion is not amenable to reasons.
The individual souls are not controllers of their actions since
they are many and are at cross purposes. Suppose, an immov-
able object which is the source of pleasure and pain of crores of
creatures is to be constructed. Or, a king who affords happiness
or suffering to crores of creatures is to be created. Can so many
different individuals who are at cross purposes be united in inau-
gurating either of them ? Because they agree to differ. The mem-
bers of an institution, educational or religious, sometimes arrive
at an agreement to effectuate a work of common weal but not
always. But when big palaces are under construction the arti-
sans such as carpenters etc. who are employed there, follow the
direction of the supervising engineer-the man entrusted with
the sole responsibility. Even the small insects such as ants obey
the same rule in collecting earth, i.e., in constructing a mould
of earth. They do it in view of a public good. Or, they carry
out the direction of their leader as the artisans follow the
command of their head. How will many individuals agree to
be united in order to construct a common immovable objectIncorporeality of God
425
which is a source of pleasure to some and at the same time that
of pain to others? Moreover, the hypothesis that the uncon-
scious materials combine themselves to produce such an object
has been already refuted. Hence, a single intelligent superinten-
dent, who can guide unconscious merits and demerits is necessa-
rily assumed. His control is as follows: When He desires, merits
and demerits bear their fruits.
Hence, the existence of only one God is accepted by us. But
the hypothesis of two or more Gods is to be discarded since the
work for public welfare will remain suspended in case of a diver-
sity of opinions or difference in plans among Gods. Suppose
Gods are many and are at cross purposes. If the resolution of
one of them is frustrated then he will cease to be a paramount
ruler. Hence, the hypothesis of one God is better. The stored-
up actions of all creatures commence to produce various effects
in accordance with His will. Thus, the creation of the universe
is fairly explained. Such actions remain inactive and no effects
are produced if He so desires. Thus, the hypothesis of dissolution
is nicely proved.
Kumärila has also taken an exception to the hypothesis of
creation and dissolution and said thus :-The creation of the
universe signifies that all objects in this universe are produced
The dissolution of the universe stands for the simult-
Such an
aneous destruction of all objects in this world.
assumption of creation and dissolution is not based upon sound
logical basis.
at once.
No
Such an adverse criticism is not sound. Let us, now, set
aside the hypothesis of universal creation and dissolution.
merit and demerit of a creature can by themselves bear fruits.
They do so when they are guided by the will of God. Thus,
the assumption of God is a necessary one, otherwise, all our
religious practices will break up.
The Mahābhārata says to this effect :-
his
Every creature is ignorant. He has no control over
happiness and sorrow. According to the divine ordinance a
creature goes either to heaven or to hell (i.e. as God sends
him).
Now, a question arises in our mind. Let the will of God
If this is so, why are
alone create and destroy the universe.-424
Nyayamanjari
ably maintained. The residues of actions which have not borne
fruits cannot be so obstructed that they remain impotent. Such
a statement is also dogmatic. The potency of the persisting
actions is suspended by the irresistible will-force of God. Thus,
their power of bearing fruits is impeded. But when they are
energized by the will-force of God they produce results. They
remain fruitless when their power of bearing fruits is over-
powered by the will-force of God. Why do they obey the law,
imposed upon them by God? The answer is that the unconsci-
ous objects without being guided or moved by a conscious being
are never seen to produce their effects.
Now, a rival hypothesis may be pressed that the conscious
souls should guide all merits and demerits of all creatures.
Kumārila also lends his support to it. He holds that as all em-
bodied souls can only perform actions so the conclusion is self-
evident that they are the masters of their own merits and de-
merits, i.e., they control them. Again, if the same conclusion is
proved by a distinct syllogistic argument then an old story is
simply repeated (more literally, a proved conclusion is only
re-established). Such a conclusion is not amenable to reasons.
The individual souls are not controllers of their actions since
they are many and are at cross purposes. Suppose, an immov-
able object which is the source of pleasure and pain of crores of
creatures is to be constructed. Or, a king who affords happiness
or suffering to crores of creatures is to be created. Can so many
different individuals who are at cross purposes be united in inau-
gurating either of them? Because they agree to differ. The mem-
bers of an institution, educational or religious, sometimes arrive
at an agreement to effectuate a work of common weal but not
always. But when big palaces are under construction the arti-
sans such as carpenters etc. who are employed there, follow the
direction of the supervising engineer-the man entrusted with
the sole responsibility. Even the small insects such as ants obey
the same rule in collecting earth, i.e., in constructing a mould
of earth. They do it in view of a public good. Or, they carry
out the direction of their leader as the artisans follow the
command of their head. How will many individuals agree to
be united in order to construct a common immovable objectIncorporeality of God
which is a source of pleasure to some and at the same time that
of pain to others? Moreover, the hypothesis that the uncon-
-scious materials combine themselves to produce such an object
has been already refuted. Hence, a single intelligent superinten-
dent, who can guide unconscious merits and demerits is necessa-
rily assumed. His control is as follows: When He desires, merits
and demerits bear their fruits.
425
Hence, the existence of only one God is accepted by us. But
the hypothesis of two or more Gods is to be discarded since the
work for public welfare will remain suspended in case of a diver-
sity of opinions or difference in plans among Gods. Suppose
Gods are many and are at cross purposes. If the resolution of
one of them is frustrated then he will cease to be a paramount
ruler. Hence, the hypothesis of one God is better. The stored-
up actions of all creatures commence to produce various effects
in accordance with His will. Thus, the creation of the universe
is fairly explained. Such actions remain inactive and no effects
are produced if He so desires. Thus, the hypothesis of dissolution
is nicely proved.
Kumarila has also taken an exception to the hypothesis of
-creation and dissolution and said thus -The creation of the
universe signifies that all objects in this universe are produced
at once. The dissolution of the universe stands for the simult-
aneous destruction of all objects in this world. Such an
assumption of creation and dissolution is not based upon sound
logical basis.
Such an adverse criticism is not sound. Let us, now, set
aside the hypothesis of universal creation and dissolution. No
merit and demerit of a creature can by themselves bear fruits.
*They do so when they are guided by the will of God. Thus,
the assumption of God is a necessary one, otherwise, all our
Teligious practices will break up.
The Mahabharata says to this effect :-
his
Every creature is ignorant. He has no control over
happiness and sorrow. According to the divine ordinance a
-creature goes either to heaven or to hell (i.e. as God sends
him).
Now, a question arises in our mind. Let the will of God
alone create and destroy the universe. If this is so, why are426
Nyāyamanjari
merits and demerits of all creatures assumed as conditioning
the creation and the destruction of the universe? As answer-
cannot be offered without assuming merit and demerit as
factors of the universe. If God is absolutely independent of
merits and demerits in the matter of producing the various
objects then He is open to three charges, viz., (1) God's.
cruelty, (2) Vedic injunctions and prohibitions becoming a.
dead letter and (3) the unreality of final emancipation. Hence,
God enjoys complete independence in controlling merits and.
demerits. But He is not absolutely independent of them. If He-
depends upon them, how is He a paramount ruler of the
universe ? Such an objection does not hold good since a proof
is not subservient to our needs. Or, if He is held to be depend-
ent upon merit and demerit, His paramount lordship is not at.
stake. There is no need of continuing..wordy battle with a.
contesting atheist who has focussed his attention upon an iota.
of sophistry.
As the bad logicians have set up fallacious counter-arguments.
against the sound arguments put forward by us and these argu-
ments have been refuted so the existence of God who is able to.
create the three worlds has been established.
It is our conviction that we commit a sin if we talk with those-
who do not believe in the existence of God, established by
sound logic. For this reason, it is highly reasonable not to.
enter into disputation with these fellows.
By His will the three worlds come into being, persist for a
definite period of time and meet with destruction at the end of
the cycle of existence. I bow down before the supreme lord,
who is an embodiment of goodness, distributes the fruits of
actions of all creatures among them and has eternal conscious-.
ness and bliss.
The favourite Hypothesis of the Mimāṁsakas that sound is eternal is-
being asserted
It cannot be proved that the Vedas are composed by God.
even if the existence of God, the supreme being, as proficient
in the creation of the three worlds, is established.
It may be suggested to our mind that God has created the
Vedic words, fixed up the relation holding between a VedicMimamsaka hypothesis that sound is eternal
427
word and its denotation and composed the Vedas. This
suggestion is not applicable to all words-not to speak of the
Vedic words.
A word is a series of letters which manifest themselves in a
close succession. But these letters are indestructible. How can
they be created by God? The relation of significance is not
created by God since it represents the intrinsic power of words.
As heat inseparably belongs to fire so the power of significance
intrinsically belongs to words. Such power is an eternal
property of words. The Vedas have not been composed by a
person because they are intrinsically different from the ordinary
poems composed by the poets. As the Vedas bear a stamp of
distinction so no element of them has been composed by God.
We, the Mimamsakas will take no exception to the hypothesis
that God has created and destroyed mountains. But we stick
to the view that the truth of the Vedas is intrinsic, i.e., self-
evident because they are independent of an author. It is also
a truism that though we deny authorship of the Vedas to God
yet we are not sworn enemies of the hypothesis of God, the
personal creator. The absolute independence of the Vedas
explains the intrinsic truth of the Vedas. God may be a
remarkable author or a competent creator but in no way helps
the composition of the Vedas.
How are these letters eternal? Do they not pass away as
soon as they are heard? How do you cherish the hope of
establishing the hypothesis that the Vedas enjoy the absolute
independence? (The Mimamsakas hold that sounds are
eternal. The Vedas consisting of eternal sounds
are also
eternal. What is the basis of this assumption? The Naiyāyikas
raise the most fundamental question).
Let us discuss the pros and cons of the problem.
An objection to the hypothesis that sound is eternal
No argument which establishes the eternality of sounds
flashes in our mind. But perception and presumption point
to the hypothesis that sounds are eternal. The arguments
which prove the non-eternality of sounds run thus :—-
These reasons which point to the non-eternality of sounds
are now being stated. Sound is an effect because it is experi-428
Nyayamanjari
enced only when some effort precedes to produce it. The
proposition that all effects are non-eternal admits of simple
-conversion as the character of being an effect and non-etern-
ality are two co-extensive terms and pervade each other.
If one of them is established as belonging to a subject of in-
ference then the other term, also, necessarily belongs to it. In
other words, these two terms are so related that each of them
alternately becomes the reason of the other, i.e., when one
becomes the reason, the other the consequence and vice versa.
A sound is an effect to be produced by our effort because it
is experienced by us only when we make an effort so that the
air within our body comes in contact with a particular part
of our body and becomes separated from it. A sound is also
destructible because it is not experienced after its pronuncia-
tion. We know that a sound has perished because we do not
experience it as lasting even for a moment soon after it has
been pronounced. A sound is an effect because we use it as an
object of the verb 'to make'.
Persons who make these expressions 'Make a sound', Do not
make a sound', etc. know for certain that a sound is an effect.
As the same sounds are simultaneously experienced in many
places so they are effects. As they are produced in so many
different places so they are localized in them. Again, a sound
is non-eternal because a sound evolves from another sound.
Let us take an example, viz., 'dadhyatra'. The semi-vowel 'y'
evolves from the vowel 'i' because the semi-vowel 'y' bears a
close resemblance to the vowel 'i' and because whenever we hear
the former letter we are reminded of the latter. The semi-vowel
'y' is also subject to destruction because it is an evolute like
the juice of grapes or that of sugar-cane. We also know that
a sound is an effect because if there is an increase in the
quantity of its cause then the effect, viz. a sound, increases in
volume. When many persons with greater effort utter the word
'cow' the sound becomes very loud. But when a few persons
with less effort utter the word 'cow' the sound becomes very
small. As greater is the number of threads so bigger is the
size of a piece of cloth and as lesser is the number of threads
so smaller is the size of a piece of cloth. From the above relation
holding between threads and a piece of cloth we know that a pieceAlimamsaka hypothesis that sound is eternal
of cloth is the effect of threads. Similarly, we know that a
sound is the effect of our effort.
429
(The Mimāṁsakas, now, make their position clear and try to
meet the argument put forward by the Naiyãyikas). They con-
tend that the eternality of a sound is an established truth. A
sound is experienced only when some effort precedes it. It is
not produced by such an effort. Its manifestation is only due to
it. As there is the possibility of the perception of a sound only
when it is manifested by our effort so there is no hard and fast
rule that a sound is an effect of effort since the latter precedes
the former. The contact and the separation of the air with and
from the certain inner parts help the manifestation of letters.
But as they are very short-lived so when the letters are manifest-
ed by the aid of palate, etc. They do not last long after their
utterance to be perceived by us. The use of the verb 'to make*
is not decisive. It is sometimes loosely used. When we ask some-
body to prepare fuels from a heap of cow-dung we use the root
kr (to make) in Sanskrit. Or when we ask somebody to cut a
log of wood into long pieces of wood, we use the root kr (to
make)in Sanskrit. We do not ask the person to produce some-
thing. But we ask him to impart certain forms to some pre-exis-
ting matter. So, the use of the verb 'to make' does not invariab-
ly show that the causal relation subsists between an effort and a
sound. The simultaneous perception of a sound in different dire-
ctions is possible like that of the Sun even if the sound is one but
not many. The hypothesis that the relation of causality holds
between the two letters as one of them changes into another
does not hold good since one is substituted by another. The word
'dadhi, ends in the vowel 'i' and retains its distinct form as long
as there is no euphonic change. The vowel 'i' is replaced by 'y*
when euphonic change takes place but the semi-vowel 'y' is a
distinct letter. But the vowel 'i' does not change into 'y' as milk
evolves sour milk. It is not advisable to hold that the semivowel
'y' is the effect of the vowel 'i' because these letters are uttered
by the aid of the same inner limb i. e., palate. The consonants
of the 'c' group, the semi-vowel 'y' and 's' are all palatal. If the
two objects are similar, it does not mean that they are causally
related to each other since the relation of similarity holds be-
tween two such objects as are not causally connected, e. g., theNyāyamañjari
-eyes and the petals of a lotus-flower are similar but are not cau-
.sally connected. The rule of Panini's grammar regarding the
euphonic change is that the vowels 'i' 'u', etc. respectively chan-
ge into 'y', 'v', etc. when a vowel follows in immediate succe-
:ssion the former ones. It does not purport to convey that the
vowel 'i' undergoes a change in form and becomes 'y' as milk
changes its form and becomes sour milk. But it indicates that
the above-mentioned vowel 'i' yields its place to the semi-vowel
"y' when there is possibility of euphonic change. The words,
the objects denoted by them and the relation of significance hold-
ing between them are eternal. The instructive work simply
informs of the presence of these words, meanings, etc. but does
not create them. Moreover, milk changes into sour milk but
vice versa. But the semivowel 'y' sometimes becomes the vowel
i'. When the semi-vowel 'y' changes into 'i' we get the form
"vidhyati' from the root 'vyadh'. Hence, the hypothesis that
the causal relation exists among letters cannot be established.
If a word which consists of letters is uttered either by a strong
man having loud voice or by many then the constituent letters
do not increase in number. But they remain as they are. But
an inarticulate noise increases in volume under the above-men-
tioned circumstances. Experience teaches us that the volume of
an inarticulate sound increases but the letters do never increase.
430
Presumption has been put forward as a proof of the hypothesis that
the words are eternal
The non-eternality of sounds cannot be proved by those
resemblances of proof. But we now put forward presumption
as a proof of the hypothesis that the words are eternal.
A word is uttered with the purpose of communicating its
meaning. If it is held that a word perishes as soon as it is
uttered then it cannot convey its meaning.
If a person employs a word the relation of significance of
which is not known at all then it does never convey its sense.
All persons who use words are unanimous in this point (that
a word conveys its meaning).
We are aware of the relation of significance when we observe
the activities of an experienced person who is employed by an-
other such person. The relation of significance is cognised only-An opposite view that the words are eternal
431
when a long period of time has passed away after the uttera-
nce of words by an experienced employer.
The proof behind the above statement is as follows: An exp-
erienced person orders another experienced person with the
following words 'Fetch a white cow'. In response to this
mandate the latter brings there a white cow. There stands
a boy who does not know the language of the order. But
he watches the movement and activities of the man who
has carried out the above mandate. Thus, he himself makes
"out the meaning of the whole sentence as he understands
that the whole movement of this person ordered is based
upon the thorough understanding of the words of the order. The
person who has been ordered sets to work because the words,
:spoken by the person who gives the order, constitute the spring
of his action and because there has been no other condition
"which impels him to work. The boy conjectures that he has un-
derstood something from the order, given to him. After some-
time when he sees that an object is being brought by the person
he understands that the person has followed the meaning from
the above order. But the object, denoted by the above sentence,
is not a simple but a complex one. It consists of many elements,
viz., an attribute, an action, a universal and a particular. The
:sentence which embodies the order consists of many words. He
does not understand the meaning of each word all at once. He
hears these words in various combinations (positive and nega-
tive). He gradually learns the meaning of the word 'cow'
after having repeatedly heard it in various combinations. He
-comes to learn that the word 'cow' denoted the universal of
•cowness or a concrete particular, i, e., an individual cow as a
member of the cow-class or as qualified by the universal of cow-
ness, as the Naiyãyikas suppose. Hence, it requires a long time
to make out the relation of significance holding between a word
and its meaning. Therefore, it is to be admitted that a word end-
aures a long period of time but is not short-lived.
Now let us assume that the relation of significance holding
between a word and the object denoted by it is grasped by us
though the word itself is transient. But still the above-
hypothesis does not convince us. If the word, the relation of
significance of which has been grasped, passes away then howNyāyamanjari
eyes and the petals of a lotus-flower are similar but are not cau-
sally connected. The rule of Panini's grammar regarding the
euphonic change is that the vowels 'i' 'u', etc. respectively chan-
ge into 'y', 'v', etc. when a vowel follows in immediate succe-
:ssion the former ones. It does not purport to convey that the
vowel 'i' undergoes a change in form and becomes 'y' as milk
changes its form and becomes sour milk. But it indicates that
the above-mentioned vowel 'i' yields its place to the semi-vowel
"y' when there is possibility of euphonic change. The words,
the objects denoted by them and the relation of significance hold-
ing between them are eternal. The instructive work simply
informs of the presence of these words, meanings, etc. but does
not create them. Moreover, milk changes into sour milk but
vice versa. But the semivowel 'y' sometimes becomes the vowel
'i'. When the semi-vowel 'y' changes into 'i' we get the form
"vidhyati' from the root 'vyadh'. Hence, the hypothesis that
the causal relation exists among letters cannot be established.
If a word which consists of letters is uttered either by a strong
man having loud voice or by many then the constituent letters
do not increase in number. But they remain as they are. But
an inarticulate noise increases in volume under the above-men-
tioned circumstances. Experience teaches us that the volume of
an inarticulate sound increases but the letters do never increase.
430
Presumption has been put forward as a proof of the hypothesis that
the words are eternal
The non-eternality of sounds cannot be proved by those
resemblances of proof. But we now put forward presumption
as a proof of the hypothesis that the words are eternal.
A word is uttered with the purpose of communicating its
meaning. If it is held that a word perishes as soon as it is
uttered then it cannot convey its meaning.
If a person employs a word the relation of significance of
which is not known at all then it does never convey its sense.
All persons who use words are unanimous in this point (that
a word conveys its meaning).
We are aware of the relation of significance when we observe
the activities of an experienced person who is employed by an-
other such person. The relation of significance is cognised only-An opposite view that the words are eternal
431
when a long period of time has passed away after the uttera-
nce of words by an experienced employer.
The proof behind the above statement is as follows: An exp-
erienced person orders another experienced person with the
following words 'Fetch a white cow'. In response to this
mandate the latter brings there a white cow. There stands
a boy who does not know the language of the order. But
he watches the movement and activities of the man who
has carried out the above mandate. Thus, he himself makes
out the meaning of the whole sentence as he understands
that the whole movement of this person ordered is based
upon the thorough understanding of the words of the order. The
person who has been ordered sets to work because the words,
:spoken by the person who gives the order, constitute the spring
of his action and because there has been no other condition
which impels him to work. The boy conjectures that he has un-
derstood something from the order, given to him. After some-
time when he sees that an object is being brought by the person
he understands that the person has followed the meaning from
the above order. But the object, denoted by the above sentence,
is not a simple but a complex one. It consists of many elements,
viz,, an attribute, an action, a universal and a particular. The
:sentence which embodies the order consists of many words. He
does not understand the meaning of each word all at once. He
hears these words in various combinations (positive and nega-
tive). He gradually learns the meaning of the word 'cow'
after having repeatedly heard it in various combinations. He
"comes to learn that the word 'cow' denoted the universal of
•cowness or a concrete particular, i. e., an individual cow as a
member of the cow-class or as qualified by the universal of cow-
mess, as the Naiyāyikas suppose. Hence, it requires a long time
to make out the relation of significance holding between a word
and its meaning. Therefore, it is to be admitted that a word end-
ures a long period of time but is not short-lived.
Now let us assume that the relation of significance holding
between a word and the object denoted by it is grasped by us
though the word itself is transient. But still the above-
hypothesis does not convince us. If the word, the relation of
significance of which has been grasped, passes away then how432
Nyayamanjarī
can we make out the meaning of another new word whose-
relation of significance has not been known to us?
If the relation of significance of one word is known to us
and another word can convey its meaning then all words.
should have communicated their meanings when the relation.
of significance of only one word has been detected.
Now, the upholders of the above hypothesis may also assume
that when the speaker uses a word, he utters the word, fixes up.
its meaning, communicates its meaning to others and teaches
others to use the word correctly. Such an assumption is not
at all tenable. So many different activities cannot take place
with simultaneous occurrence. Now, they may argue that when the
meaning of a word has been grasped and the word has passed
away, a new word appears and conveys the meaning of the
nonexistent word since the new word is exactly the same as the
old one. Such a hypothesis is not tenable. It is not reasonable
to hold that one word is similar to another word since they do.
not possess many parts in common, being themselves partless.
As the speaker himself does not know the meaning of the new
word so he should not utter a word in order to communicate
his idea, labouring under the apprehension that the listener
cannot understand its meaning. Now, the upholder of the
above hypothesis may contend that the speaker utters only such
a word as is similar to another significant word. The so-called
significant word also conveys its sense because it is similar to a
third word which is supposed to be significant. If he adopts
this line of procedure then the first significant word which was
uttered at the dawn of creation should be referred to since the
right use of all words which are similar to the initial word
presupposes it (the initial word) as its basis. But as a matter
of fact such a procedure cannot be adopted since the long
series of similarities with the initial word at the start is never
taken into consideration. In such a long series of similarities,
the basis of similarity is lost sight of since the words being trans-
ient, the chain of similarity cannot be traced to a great length.
The words uttered in the long past cannot bear a resembl-
ance to the words pronounced at present since the speakers
being different, the conditions and the cause of these two sets of
words belonging to the different periods of time, are different,An opposite view that words are eternal
433
viz., the mouths, the places of utterance, the efforts of the air
within the body and the actual contacts of the air with the
places of utterance and the actual separations of the air from
them are different. If it is held that the communication of the
meaning of a word is possible under the supposition that the
word in question is similar to another word which has been
known to be significant then such a communication of meaning
will be surely false like the inferential knowledge of fire from
the sight of mist resembling smoke. Therefore, as a word does
not carry a sense because it is similar to another word so the
hypothesis that a word (viz. a cow) endures long (i. e. eternal)
is to be accepted.
Now, the Naiyāyikas may adopt a different line of argument
and hold thus:-In case of inference we discover the universal
relation of concomitance holding between smoke and fire
because we focus our attention upon the common property of
smoke, i. e., the universal of smoke but not upon the different
particulars of the smoke-class. Similarly, we shall only take the
persistent universal belonging to the letter 'g', but not the
individual 'g' s into consideration with the net result that a
word will have no difficulty in communicating its meaning,
Such a hypothesis is not tenable. The universal of smoke
certainly exists. But the universal of all words is a wide
common property. It belongs to letters which convey meaning
and also to such letters as do not convey meaning. The univer-
sal which belongs to the word 'cow' cannot be proved. (There-
fore it is difficult to hold that the word 'cow' conveys its
meanings through the medium of a universal belonging to the
word 'cow', by means of successive letters which are not related
to one another as its constituents? If the whole, i.e., the
word 'cow' is not constituted then which locus does the
universal of the word 'cow' belong to? It is a truism that the
universal which belongs to the pieces of cloth does never belong
to the threads, i, e., the constituents of a piece of cloth.
Now, the Naiyāyikas may contend thus: Let the universal
which belongs to the word 'cow' be not accepted as existing.
But it is reasonable to hold that the universals which belong
to the different letters 'g' etc. the constituents of the word 'cow',
will do the above function. This alternative hypothesis is not434
Nyayamanjari
also sound. The universals which are asserted to belong to the
letters cannot be proved to be so. A particular is distinguished
from a universal, if the relation of identity-in-difference holds
between them. If a letter is repeatedly uttered then the differ-
ent appearances of the same letter are experienced as identical.
They are experienced to be so because the letter is one but
not because they possess one universal. If the elements which
manifest a universal in a particular are clearly distinct from
those in another particular then the existence of a universal
is clearly proved since the particulars possess very vivid marks
of difference. The individual cows having different names
'Savaleya' and 'Bahuleya' are vividly perceived to be mutually
different. Though the particulars, i.e., cows are clearly different
from one another yet they have a common name, i. e., a COW.
The experience of identity in them is due to the fact that they
all possess one and the same object, i. e., a universal. Hence
the existence of the universal of cow-ness is accepted.
In the light of this experience let us examine the above
hypothesis.
Have you ever experienced that the different utterances of
the same letter, viz., 'g' look like the individuals of the class of
a cow designated as Savaleya, etc. Why do you purport to
hold that a universal belongs to so many different manifestat-
ions of the same letter? When a child, an old man, a female
and a parrot read a line the persons who listen to it recognize
the difference in the speakers but do not recognize the differ-
ence in the letters uttered.
When Garga reads out a letter and Mathura does the same
thing the speakers are only cognized to be different. We all
experience that they are reading the same letter. Hence, there
is no difference in the letter which is being uttered by the two
different persons. When a person reads a line again and again
the same thing is repeatedly uttered. If the same words, e.g.,
Gangā, Gagana, Garga, etc. are repeatedly uttered then we
notice no difference in these words themsleves. When a letter
is pronounced with slow, moderate and fast speed there is
difference in sound but not in the letter. The different uttera-
nces of the same letter are not like so many particulars of a
class, viz., the individual cow ‘šavala', etc.
MAn opposite view that words are eternal
435
Even if we admit that a universal, viz., gatva, belongs to the
letter 'g' and that it expresses itself in and through various
sounds slow, fast, etc. then it does not prove that the consonant
'g' is many. The recognition of difference in the universal
'gatva' is due to its accidents Similarly, why do you not hold
that the consonant 'g' is identical in the midst of changing
sounds and that a change in the sounds of the same consonant
is accidental ? As the consonant 'g' essentially remains the same
so the experience of identity is true and that of difference is
untrue. The experience of difference is due to the defect in the
organs of speech that are responsible for its manifestation. This
hypothesis is also favoured by the economy of assumptions. In
fine, there is no such universal of 'gatva' belonging to the
particulars 'g', 'g', 'g', etc. We add a word more to the above
conclusion in order to give an exposition to our point of view
that the consonant 'g' occurring in the words 'go', 'guru' and
""geha' appear to be different owing to its association with the
different vowels. Hence, it is our impression that the appearance
of difference in a consonant is due to its accidental elements. We
also believe that a vowel may also be associated with the acci-
dental properties. As the accidental elements are uniformly
associated with all letters so the same vowel appears to be different
like a consonant due to its association with the said nonessential
element. The universal, viz., ‘atva' does not belong to the vowel
as 'a' as the universal 'gatva' does not really exist. The eighteen-
fold division of the vowel 'a' is based upon its accidental elements.
The experience in the divisions of a vowel, viz., 'a' such as
short, long and prolated follows from the difference in the
nature of the sound itself. As the semi-vowel 'v' is different
from the consonant 'g' so the vowel 'a' which is mute is not
different from the vowel 'a' which is sonant. But the vowel 'a'
is experienced to be the same in the midst of all the changing
associations.
The objector may argue thus :-
if the constituent letters of
the two words are the same, how do the two words convey
different meanings? The objector illustrates his point citing
the words 'araṇyam' and 'aranyam.' The word 'aranya' denotes
a forest but the word 'ãraṇya' means 'forest-born'. There is no
difference between 'a' in āraṇya and 'a' in araṇya since 'a' is short436
Nyayamanjari
whereas 'a' is long. The Mimāṁsakas meet this objection with the
remark that the above difference in the sense lies in the sound
itself. The length of the sound being not the property of the word
itself how does it help to convey the meaning? The answer in
this question is that it is like the speed of a horse.
As the speed of a horse serves the purpose of a man who rides
it so the property of sound which is not a letter helps the letter
to convey its meaning.
We cannot subscribe to the hypothesis that universal belongs
to the vowel 'a'. The reason is as follows. The long 'a' and the
prolated 'a' do not share the universal of atva in common. The
short vowel 'a' and the long vowel 'a' do not share the universal
of atva in common. Hence, the vowels like a, i. u, etc. do not
admit of difference so they do not possess universals. All the
letters do not possess a common universal of word-ness. If they
had possessed such a universal then a word would not denote a
distinct sense. Hence the analogy of smoke, i. e., the universal
of smoke does not hold good in this case. In other words, it is
not possible to hold that a word conveys its meaning by means
of a universal belonging to it.
If we do not assume that a word is eternal then we cannot
explain the communication of meaning by a word. Thus, the
proof of presumption is the source of the true knowledge of the
eternality of a word.
Some hold that presumption is not distinct inference. But it
is not true that we cannot put forward a syllogistic argument in
support of our hypothesis.
-
The syllogism runs thus:- A word is eternal because it com-
municates its meaning only when the relation of significance
holding between it and its meaning is grasped. The positive
example is smoke. The Mīmāmṁsakas mean to say that when
smoke is seen we are in a position to infer fire because we know
that the universal relation of concomitance holds between smoke
and fire. Similarly, when we hear a word which is sound we
know another object provided that we are aware of the relation
of significance holding between the word and the object. This
knowledge is inferential because we are aware of the object
denoted by a word on the strength of a particular relation
holding between the word and the object. The next point, viz.,An opposite view that words are eternal
437
the eternality of a word, has been explained by Jaimini in his
Mimārsā Sūtra (I. I. 18). He holds that a word is eternal
because a word is uttered by a person in order to communicate
its meaning to another person. The word lasts till the meaning
is communicated. A word is uttered by a person. Another person
hears it. He remembers the relation of significance holding
between it and the object denoted by it. Then he understands
that the word conveys this meaning. The word persists until
and unless the meaning is not communicated. If the word does
not endure, its meaning cannot be communicated. It is a perma-
nent object like the soul because there is no source of its
destruction. It does not perish on the destruction of its parts
because it has no parts. How is it that it has no parts? Let us
explain why it has no parts.
If we put forth very little effort to pronounce a letter then it
may be inaudible but never becomes partly inaudible. The parts
which make
up
wholes admit of two kinds. Some of them have
made up wholes but the others have not as yet constituted
wholes. Have the parts which are supposed to produce a letter
effectuated whole or not? we perceive threads which are parts
of a piece of cloth. But we see no such parts of a letter. We are
not in a position to infer parts of a letter because there is no
middle term. A letter does not persist like some other subs-
tance if its parts on which it rests are destroyed because it is a
partless whole like the soul and requires nothing to stand upon.
It cannot be held that a letter is neither permanent nor
impermanent since a third alternative is not possible. More-
over, permanent and impermanent objects exhaust the whole
of universe.
Hence, if a letter disappears for some time and does not meet
its destruction then on its reappearance nobody can destroy it.
A letter is eternal because it is not numerable. Common
people say that the word 'cow' has been eight times pronounced.
But they do not hold that eight different words have been
pronounced. Hence each letter maintains its constant identity
among its different manifestations. When the repetition of an act
is counted we use the suffix 'kṛtvasuc,' It is attached to a word
when that on which the act of utterance rests is one and the
same. Hence, only the act of utterance repeatedtly takes place.438
Nyayamanjari
It has been stated by Kumārila to this effect. If the locus of
an act is one and the same then and then only the repetition
of the act is possible. This repetition of an act is denoted
by the suffix Kṛtvasuc'. As this suflix is used so the act
of utterance which rests upon a single letter is repeated.
It is attached to numbers. They hold that the suffix 'kṛtvasuc'
applies to the words denoting numbers. From the use of kṛtvasuc
we learn that an object is recognized to persist as identical in
the midst of its various appearances. The representative auditory
perception that this is that word 'cow' is a proof of its eternality
(i. e. of the word 'cow'). The auditory perception is known to
all listeners. It is not illusory since neither the sense-organ-the
instrument of this perception, is suspected to be defective nor
its object is suspected to involve contradiction.
The above act of recognition in question is an auditory
perception since it is causally connected with the contact with
ears. This causal relation is ascertained by means of positive and
negative concomitance. The instrument which produces it is not
known to be defective. Again, this piece of consciousness is not
such as oscilates between two opposite predicates, i. e., it is not
indeterminate. Moreover, we anticipate no such contradictory
judgment as 'This is not such' which contradicts it. This judg-
ment may be shown to refer to an object which is novel since
it refers to an object which is qualified by the present existence.
Moreover, though the recognitive judgment refers to an object
which is known before yet it is accepted to be a piece of valid
knowledge. The Naiyāyikas cannot discredit it like the
Buddhists with the remark that it is a piece of invalid knowledge
since they do not subscribe to the hypothesis of universal flux.
Some logicians hold that the recognition of a letter as same
is due to similarity. Such a view does not hold good. Other
logicians hold that such a recognition takes place because it
refers only to the universal which the individual letters partake
of. These two hypotheses have been already refuted.
(The points in criticism are as follows: Similarity consists
in the possession of many parts in common with another object.
As letters are partless so they are similar to none. No universal
inheres in letters since each letter is merely an individual. NoOn the Nature of Letters
439
universal belongs to a word since a word cannot be shown to
be a whole consisting of parts, viz. letters).
Some hold that the piece of consciousness which refers to a
letter is not vali since it refers even to an absent letter, i. e.
a letter which has disappeared. Such hypothesis is not tenable
since when a word or a letter is cognized it has not disappeared.
The very cognition of a word or a letter refutes the suggestion
of disapperance.
The Naiyāyikas including Jayanta admit that a sound persists
three or four atoms of time. Though it endures for this short
span of time yet this short stay does not preclude the possibility
of a sound of being recognized. But we do not perceive an object
if it lasts only for an atom of time. The reason behind it is this.
that if an object passes away at the time of its perception then
it cannot be perceived. (In other words, the object which is
perceived is one of the conditions of its perception. The condi-
tion is always antecedent to its effect. The object, being the
condition of its perception, precedes it. Again, an object which
is perceived is required to last when its perception takes place.
If an object lasts only for an atom of time then it cannot be
perceived.) We shall discuss this point when we shall refute the
doctrine of the universal flux.
We may also add in this connection. At midnight when the
sky is enveloped by the dense cloud, as dark as black-bees,
some object is recognized even by means of the short-lived
flashes of lightning. Similarly, a letter is recognized to be one
and the same by means of short-lived air-waves which give
birth to an uninterrupted series of conjunctions and disjunctions.
of the air with and from the different parts of the mouth such
as guttural, palatal etc. This is a case of auditory representative
perception.
The Hypothesis that a Letter is only manifested but is not produced
is untenable.
The Naiyāyikas come forward and refute the hypothesis of
the Mīmāṁsakas. They hold that the very word “Mārutaiḥ” in
the last verse of the preceding section reminds us of the line of
criticism. Let us leave the argument on the strength of recogni-
tion at the outset. If we subscribe to the hypothesis of manifes-440
Nyāyamanjari
tation then we cannot explain the auditory perception of the
distinct letters at the different periods of time.
$
All the letters are eternal and all-pervasive so each of them
is present everywhere. In that case why do we hear a particular
letter at a time to the exclusion of the others? What is the
determining factor in this case?
. Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend that the different 'dhvanis'
manifest different letters. They define a dhvani as the air which
blows within the body, comes in contact with a particular
portion of the mouth and becomes separated from another such
portion. Or, they define a dhvani as the conjunction and the
disjunction of the inner air with some part and from some other
part. Do these dhvanis make an improvement either upon the
object of such perception or upon both of them? They may select
any of these hypotheses. But each of them is defective. If it is
held that some change is introduced into the instrument of
hearing for its betterment then all the letters should be
simultaneously perceived. But can you explain when a particular
letter, e. g, 'ga' is only perceived by the modified organ of
hearing to the exclusion of the other letters? How do you derive
the rule that imposes restriction upon our hearing? The improve-
ment of the instrument means the exhaling of the motionless
inner air. But all the letters which belong to the particular
region will reap the fruit of this improvement. (Space constitutes
the instrument of hearing. All the sounds which belong to that
portion of the space will be heard since their common ground is
affected by this act). When the screen (i. e. the drop-scene) is
lifted up and the unobstructed eyes find an opportunity of seeing,
the spectator beholds all the objects on the stage. Similarly,
when the motionless inner air is taken out all the letters which
remain in the inner region should also be simultaneously heard
with our ears.
The Mimāṁsakas hold that the organ of hearing is constituted
by the space. But it is all-pervasive and partless. If somewhere
some improvement is made on it then all the beings will have
their organ ofhearing improved. Thus all of them simultaneously
hear alike all the sounds.
If it is held that the object of hearing is improved upon, then
a letter or a word, which is, according to the Mimämisakas,On the Nature of Letters
441
"partless and all-pervasive being improved upon, should be heard
everywhere. The word 'cow' which has become manifest in
Madras should also be heard in Kashmeir. The Mimamsakas
-cannot also revise their hypothesis and hold that an improvement
upon the letter or the word is indirectly brought in and through
its locus. Such a contention is not tenable since the Mimāṁsakas
hold that a letter or a word stands upon no locus. Even if they
admit that a word or a letter finds support in the space, matters
do not improve since the space is an indivisible single entity.
They cannot also hold that word 'cow' is partly improved upon
since it is a partless whole. The following verse has been stated
by Kumārila in his Sloka-Värttikam. The sense of the verse is
this. If a letter or a word is pronounced with little effort then
- either we fall to hear it or when we hear it we hear it completely
and distinctly. The sense of this verse is this that a letter or a
word consists of no parts.
If the Mimāṁsakas revise their hypothesis and hold that both
the instrument and the letter or the word should be improved
upon then this revised hypothesis should not be immune from
the above two defects, viz., (1) all the letters or words should be
:simultaneously heard and (2) a letter or a word should be
simultaneously heard from all the different spaces. The objects
which are co-extensive and sensed by the one and same sense-
organ
are not known to be manifested by the different illuminators.
If a householder enters a room with a lamp in his hand in
order to see a pot of sour milk, then the lamp reveals not only
the pot but also the cakes lying on the spot adjacent to that of
the pot.
a
In fine, if we subscribe to the hypothesis that a sound i. e.
letter, is produced but not manifested then we may soundly
explain why a letter is heard only within a restricted area. More-
over, if we subscribe to the hypothesis of manifestation then we can
not maintain the distinction between the loud and the low sounds.
Again, we cannot explain why a sound is drowned by another.
A letter is neither loud nor low since it admits of no intrinsic
difference. The very act which manifests a letter has no such
qualitative difference so that a letter may be presented to our
-consciousness as loud or low. The air which may be held to help
its manifestation may be strong or gentle. But how can one440
Nyayamanjari
tation then we cannot explain the auditory perception of the
distinct letters at the different periods of time.
All the letters are eternal and all-pervasive so each of them
is present everywhere. In that case why do we hear a particular
letter at a time to the exclusion of the others? What is the
determining factor in this case?
. Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend that the different 'dhvanis'
manifest different letters. They define a dhvani as the air which
blows within the body, comes in contact with a particular
portion of the mouth and becomes separated from another such
portion. Or, they define a dhvani as the conjunction and the
disjunction of the inner air with some part and from some other
part. Do these dhvanis make an improvement either upon the
object of such perception or upon both of them? They may select
any of these hypotheses. But each of them is defective. If it is
held that some change is introduced into the instrument of
hearing for its betterment then all the letters should be
simultaneously perceived. But can you explain when a particular
letter, e. g, 'ga' is only perceived by the modified organ of
hearing to the exclusion of the other letters? How do you derive
the rule that imposes restriction upon our hearing? The improve-
ment of the instrument means the exhaling of the motionless
inner air. But all the letters which belong to the particular
region will reap the fruit of this improvement. (Space constitutes
the instrument of hearing. All the sounds which belong to that
portion of the space will be heard since their common ground is
affected by this act). When the screen (i. e. the drop-scene) is
lifted up and the unobstructed eyes find an opportunity of seeing,
the spectator beholds all the objects on the stage. Similarly,
when the motionless inner air is taken out all the letters which
remain in the inner region should also be simultaneously heard
with our ears.
The Mimāṁsakas hold that the organ of hearing is constituted
by the space. But it is all-pervasive and partless. If somewhere
some improvement is made on it then all the beings will have
their organ of hearing improved. Thus all of them simultaneously
hear alike all the sounds.
If it is held that the object of hearing is improved upon, then
a letter or a word, which is, according to the Mimāṁsakas,441
On the Nature of Letters
partless and all-pervasive being improved upon, should be heard
everywhere. The word 'cow' which has become manifest in
Madras should also be heard in Kashmeir. The Mimāṁsakas
-cannot also revise their hypothesis and hold that an improvement
upon the letter or the word is indirectly brought in and through
its locus. Such a contention is not tenable since the Mimāṁsakas
hold that a letter or a word stands upon no locus. Even if they
admit that a word or a letter finds support in the space, matters
do not improve since the space is an indivisible single entity.
They cannot also hold that word 'cow' is partly improved upon
since it is a partless whole. The following verse has been stated.
by Kumārila in his Sloka-Värttikam. The sense of the verse is
this. If a letter or a word is pronounced with little effort then
either we fall to hear it or when we hear it we hear it completely
and distinctly. The sense of this verse is this that a letter or a
word consists of no parts.
If the Mimāṁsakas revise their hypothesis and hold that both
the instrument and the letter or the word should be improved
upon then this revised hypothesis should not be immune from
the above two defects, viz., (1) all the letters or words should be
:simultaneously heard and (2) a letter or a word should be
simultaneously heard from all the different spaces. The objects
which are co-extensive and sensed by the one and same sense-
organ are not known to be manifested by the different illuminators.
If a householder enters a room with a lamp in his hand in
order to see a pot of sour milk, then the lamp reveals not only
the pot but also the cakes lying on the spot adjacent to that of
the pot.
a
>
In fine, if we subscribe to the hypothesis that a sound i. e.
letter, is produced but not manifested then we may soundly
explain why a letter is heard only within a restricted area. More-
over, if we subscribe to the hypothesis of manifestation then we can
not maintain the distinction between the loud and the low sounds.
Again, we cannot explain why a sound is drowned by another.
A letter is neither loud nor low since it admits of no intrinsic
difference. The very act which manifests a letter has no such
qualitative difference so that a letter may be presented to our
consciousness as loud or low. The air which may be held to help
its manifestation may be strong or gentle. But how can one442
Nyāyamanjari
grasp the quality of the air by means of the organ of hearing?
If an object consists of parts then there is possibility of experi.
encing it differently since it is most likely that the same parts are.
not uniformly perceived in all cases. But if a letter admits of no
parts then such an explanation does not hold good. Therefore,.
the hypothesis that a letter is produced is a better one.
All the Charges against the hypothesis of manifestation are answered
A reply to the criticism contained in the earlier section is as.
follows: The Mīmāṁsakas prefer the hypothesis that the instru--
ment of hearing is to be improved upon to the other one. This
sense-organ, being somewhat improved upon by the air, grasps.
a particular letter. This organ which has been thus improved
upon, being accompanied by a particular set of conjunctions
and disjunctions of the air with and 'from certain portions of
the mouth, grasps a particular letter. As the Naiyāyikas hold
that such conjunctions and disjunctions are able to produce
letters so we, the Mimamsakas, hold that they are capable of
manifesting letters.
Another objection, raised by the Naiyāyikas, is this that there-
is no such experience as points to the hypothesis that the different
letters are manifested by the different illuminators. We, the.
Mīmāṁsakas, give a reply to this objection with the remark.
"Who is this man with a thousand eyes, expressing such a view ?”
Smell belongs only to the earth. All the different smells are.
co-ordinate attributes of earth. They are also grasped only by
the same sense-organ, viz., the nose. But our experience throws
light on the fact that the smell, in different cases, is manifested:
by the different manifestors. The smell of earth is manifested
somewhere by its contact with fire, somewhere by its contact
with the rays of the sun and somewhere by the sprinkling of
water on it.
We, the Mimamsakas, do not subscribe to the hypothesis that
the taking out of the air is the only factor which makes improve-
ment upon the instrument of hearing. If it were so then it
would be merely the common manifestor of all letters. But the
real improvement is something else. It is constituted by its-
capacity of manifesting a letter. The instrument acquires manyOn the Nature of Letters
443.
capacities but each capacity is competent only to manifest a.
single distinct letter.
The Naiyãyikas take an exception to the hypothesis that
the space constitutes the sense-organ of hearing and point out.
that if the space is held to be such an organ then all beings.
should have the same organ of hearing. But such a criticism is
not sound because the principle of merit and demerit determines.
the distinction in the result. As a jar is a limiting adjunct
which imposes limitation upon the sky, so there may be other
limiting adjuncts which introduce difference into the space and
the possibility of having a distinct organ of hearing is explained.
Thus, deafness or the power of hearing is explained by means
of principle of merit and demerit. The Naiyãyikas hold that
the sky constitutes the organ of hearing. Therefore, the
Naiyāyikas, have been paid in their own coin. The Mīmāṁsakas
do not subscribe to the view that the sky alone constitutes the
organ of hearing. They hold that each person has a distinct
organ of hearing, otherwise the distinct auditory perception of
each person cannot be explained.
Bhartṛmitra, a celebrated Mimämṁsaka, has stated that if it is
held that an improvement is made upon the letter by contact
of air then the all-pervasive letter will not be benefited by it
since this improvement will remain confined only within the
well-defined boundary but will not go beyond it. Though an
improvement cannot be made upon a portion of a letter since it
is a partless substance yet a letter is heard only within a
restricted area just as a universal which is all-pervasive is seen
only in a limited sphere.
The Naiyāyikas shall have also to subscribe to this decisive view.
A universal is all-pervasive. But it is perceived only in an
individual. Though it completely reveals itself in and through
an individual yet it is not a truism that it is not perceived in and
through other individuals. Similarly, though a letter is all
pervasive yet it is heard only at the spot where a dhvani.
(a definite set of well-defined conjunctions and disjunctions)
exists. We should also note that when it is heard it is heard
perfectly and completely. Though it is heard at a spot yet it is
also heard at other spots under similar circumstances. As the
body of an individual is the manifestor of a universal so a-444
Nyayamanjari
dhvani is an illuminator of a letter. It is pointless to hold that
a letter is heard ifit is located upon a substance and that it is
not heard if it is not located upon a substance.
As a letter is not grasped as ubiquitous and partless so the
properties of dhvani, viz., dullness, sharpness, etc., appear to
be the properties of a letter. In a like manner though plumpness
and thinness, etc., are the properties of a body yet they are
known to us as belonging to the universal. The person who
has never experienced the plump cow individuals such as
Sābaleya, etc., is known to perceive the universal of cow-ness
as thin.
7
Or, the properties such as sharpness, dullness, etc., are not
presented to our consciousness as those of a letter. But the cons-
ciousness of a letter appears to us to be sharp or dull since an
act of consciousness simulates its manifestor.
Likewise the letters either increase or decrease in volume.
But they do never eclipse one another. (In other words, the
letters appear to be such because the consciousness of a letter is
either sharp or dull. This derivative property of an act of
consciousness is attributed to a letter. A letter always remains
to be the same.)
As the dim light of a lamp is thrown into shade by the
brilliant ray of the sun so the weak current of air is surpassed by
the strong current of air.
Thus the above two hypotheses, viz., (1) an improvement is
made upon the organ of hearing and (2) an improvement is
made upon the letter are proved to be true since they are now
freed from all defects. Hence, the hypothesis of the manifestation
of a letter is better since a letter is proved to be eternal on the
strength of recognition.
The hypothesis of the manifestation of a letter is better than that of
the production of a letter since the former obeys the law of parsimony.
Sirs, let us now discuss which of the two hypothesis, viz., that
of the new origin of a letter and that of the manifestation of a
letter, obeys the law of parsimony.
Let us at the outset examine in detail the hypothesis of creation.
The Naiyayikas, the Vaišeșikas, the Samkhyists and the Buddhists
subscribe to the hypothesis that a letter is an effect. No bodyOn the Nature of Letters
thinks of the wretched philosophers, viz., the Cārvākas, in this.
context.
The venerable Vaišeşikas agree with us the Mimämisakas, in
the manner of perceiving sound. A sound is produced either by
conjunction or by disjunction. It, being thus produced, spreads.
over all directions. It goes up and down. It also proceeds
obliquely. When it spreads it looks like a round Kadamba flower
with its pollen on all sides. Each sound produces another
similar sound at a very close quarter. Thus a sound generates
many similar sounds. They, on their turn, produce other similar
sounds in a similar manner. Or, as a wave produces a series of
waves so a sound produces a series of sounds. A sound which
is last but one of the series arises in the sky confined within the
ear-walls. It inheres in the sky, limited by the ear-walls. It is.
sensed by the organ of hearing, i. e. the limited sky. But such a
conjecture simply provokes our laughter.
The hypothesis that a sound produces another sound is a very
uncommon one. A man of common sense fails to follow such a
hypothesis. Two acts of consciousness are known to be causally
connected. But the causal nexus is not known to hold good
between the two sounds.
445-
No body places his confidence in the hypothesis that a sound
produces on all sides up and down its similar sounds at a place
very close to that of a listener.
If a sound produces at all a series of sounds why does not
the series continue to exist for all times to come since the abrupt
exhaustion of the velocity of a sound does not take place like
that of the velocity of the air. How is it that a sound is veiled
when the sky is partitioned by the walls, etc.? The inherent
cause of a sound is the sky. It, being all-pervasive, exists even
within the wall.
Now, the Vaišeṣikas may contend that the sky which has no
contact with a wall which envelops it is the material cause of a
sound. In that case, they should furnish us with sufficient proofs.
Again, if a sound produces a similar sound then how is it
that a faint sound produces a long sound? A near sound is
heard to be loud but a distant one is heard to be faint.
A series of sounds cannot be compared to that of waves
since a wave has size, motion and speed but a sound has none...Nyāyamanjari
The Vaiseşikas have argued that a sound produces a similar
-sound because it is an attribute like a colour. Such an argument
is baseless because the minor premise that a sound is an attribute
involves the fallacy of material contradiction. It has not yet
been established that a sound is an attribute.
-446
A sound is never experienced as depending upon a substance.
But when we perceive an attribute, viz., colour, etc., we perceive
it is inhearing in a substance. Therefore, how can a sound be
an attribute?
The main argument of the Vaiśeşikas that a sound produces
another sound because it is an attribute like the attribute of
-colour is opposed by the following counter-arguments. A sound
-does not produce another sound because it is a soundlike the sound
which is produced within the ear-hole. Conjunction and discon-
junction do not produce a sound because they possess the essence
of conjunction and disjunction like the other conjunction and
disjunction which do not produce sound. These counter-
arguments are ready at hand. We should not dilate upon this
insignificant hypothesis.
The followers of Kapila hold that the mode of the
of
organ
hearing goes to the place where a sound is produced. It assumes
the form of a sound. In other words, a sound imparts its form
to the mode of the said organ. Thus the mode of the organ under-
goes a change. But the mode is intermixed with the sky. Why
does the near sound impress its form on the mode but not the
-distant one? Is there any law to govern the above change in
the form of a mode? As there is no such law so a sound which
is produced near Cawnpur should be heard in the distant
village Gauramülaka in Kashmir. Moreover, a sound which is
produced in a partitioned area should also be heard since that
mode of the organ of hearing which has no dimension cannot
be obstructed by the partition walls when it goes out to reach
the sound.
If the wind blows towards the organ of hearing from a sound
then the sound should not be heard since the flowing wind
blocks the passage of the moving mode.
But it is a fact that even a distant sound is heard if the wind
blows favourably, i. e., towards the organ of hearing. It is also
a truism that a near sound is not heard if the wind does notOn the Nature of Letters
447
blow favourably. But if we subscribe to the hypothesis of the
'Samkhyists then the near one will be heard but the distant
-one will not be heard under the above circumstances.
According to the Samkhyists there is identity between a mode
and a substance having the mode. The mode of the organ of
hearing should be like the organ of hearing. In that case, it is
-co-extensive with the organ of hearing The organ of hearing is
*very extensive. The mode of it should also be equally extensive.
.In that case, do not we hear all sounds near or distant alike?
The Arhatas (the Jainas) hold that a sound is a whole and
is constituted by a number of minute particles. Thus created,
it proceeds from its place of origin towards the ears of a person.
Thus it is heard. It is a very nice hypothesis stated by them.
Each letter consists of parts. They are changing particles.
*They constitute the whole. But it is a very curious hypothesis.
These particles are never perceived. Their process of combi-
*nation is consequently imperceptible. Each letter has its peculiar
combination of parts. Which letter is constituted by which
combination?
The constituents of a letter are very tight. They have been
•combined by no body. They cannot frame a whole in the shape
-of a letter as a very tight and impact body.
Thus, why is not the whole, viz. a letter, which is very light,
-deflected from its path by the blowing wind? Again, if it dashes
against a tree then why is it not shattered into pieces?
How long does such a weak letter move on to reach its destina-
tion? When it enters the ear of a person how is it also heard
by other persons?
If it is held that it comes out from the ear of that person
and goes
into the ear of another person then how will the
.Jainas explain the simultaneous hearing of a letter by many
persons ?
Now if the Jainas hold that many letters are simultaneously
created by a speaker in accordance with the number of hearers
then it will be pointed out that so many letters cannot be created
by the single effort of a speaker. Even if we admit that each
hearer has a distinct letter to hear then the possibility of
the simultaneous hearing of a single letter by many persons is
:simply ruled out.448
Nyayamanjari
We shall not discuss much about the keenness of the intellect
of the Digambara Jainas (the naked ones) since when they
display their intellect to defend their hypothesis the critics
simply laugh at their defence.
Almost all the Buddhists hold that a sound which is heard is.
not related to the organ of hearing. The organ of hearing has.
a peculiar power by means of which a sound is heard. But such
a statement comes from the lips of the foolish logicians. A.
distinct sound is as unrelated to our organ of hearing as a sound
in the close area is. But the Buddhists fail to explain why a
distant sound is only heard to the exclusion of the second one..
The Buddhists also violate the general rule regarding the
nature of an object, viz., something becomes an object only
when it becomes united with the subject. We have discussed
the Buddhist hypothesis only because it does not deserve to
be neglected like that of the Cärvâkas.
The hypothesis of the creation of a sound as offered by the.
logicians of the other schools have been heard. Now, let the
reader hear the hypothesis of the manifestation of an eternal.
sound as offered by the Mimāṁsakas.
Whenever a speaker intends to speak something a mental
activity sets in. It (mental activity) stirs up the inner organs.
such as the lungs, the heart, the stomach, the kidneys and the
liver. As a result of their activity the internal air comes out.
When the air comes out it acquires speed and motion. The
passage of the air from the within is very clear. Those who
hold that the air is perceptible feel the presence of the air
by means of touch if they place their hands near the mouth of
the speaker. But those who hold that the air is an inference-
may infer it from the motion of a piece of cotton placed before
the mouth of the speaker.
When the internal air comes out from within, it spreads.
in all directions. It, at the same time, drives away all the
motionless air which is an impediment to the manifestation
of a sound. It reaches the articular space enclosed by the cars
and thus makes a sound audible.
If the mental activity of the speaker is either great or small
then the speed of the air correspondingly becomes high or
low. When the air rushes out with violent speed and moves.449
On the Nature of Letters
on with great force it suddenly stops like a flying arrow and
cannot reach a very distant place.
The air is a mass. It is a material substance, having a
limited dimension. When it moves its movement is obstructed
by the other material substances encountering it on its path.
For this reason when a sound is manifested within an area
stand-
enclosed by the walls it is not heard by another person
ing outside. The hearer imagines that a sound comes from the
direction from which the air blows with speed. When a person
blows conch the air manifests an inarticulate sound.
Or, though a latter is not worthy of being grasped by the
ears yet the ears will have immediate experience of the univer-
sal of a sound.
In fine, we, the Mīmāṁsakas, do not indulge in idle imagi-
nation. The speed of the air is a well-known fact but not a
fiction. We have only indulged in imagination regarding the
improvement made upon the organ of hearing. This improve-
ment of the organ is supersensuous. This hypothesis is based.
upon presumption. It is not a very strange one. It has a logi-
cal necessity.
The impartial judges hold that the hypothesis of the mani-
festation of a letter obeys better the law of parsimony than
that of the creation of a letter.
Moreover, if we subscribe to the hypothesis of manifesta-
tion then we can explain why all letters are not simultaneously
heard. There is a hard and fast rule to show that a single
letter is only heard at a time. Again, recognition being a
source of valid knowledge, one should hold that a letter is
eternal.
The judgment "What is recognized is eternal" is not univer-
sally true because though an act of consciousness and an
action are recognized yet they are not eternal. The invalida-
has been stated in the chapter
tion of this generalization
on perception. Such a statement simply reveals your foolish-
ness. A fallacy cancels the truth of an induction. But it does
not interfere with the truth of perception. It becomes
irrelevant if we run from one conclusion to another. We shall
not take an exception to the conclusion that an act of cons-
incor
ciousness and an action are experienced by an act of452
Nyayamanjari
to be different owing to the distinct illuminators of a letter?
Or, is it that the distinct acts of consciousness refer to the
different letters i. e., ga's ? Now, if each letter is numerically
identical with the so-called another similar letter then the
difference in its awareness is explained by the diversity of its
illuminators. In that case, the assumption of the universal of
a letter is absurd since it has no locii to stand upon.
If the different acts of the consciousness of a letter refer to
the different individual letters then the letters which appear to
be the same are really many. But if these different individual
letters are presented to our consciousness as identical then
we should think over the matter and try to find out the object
to which the awareness of identity refers. Regarding this point,
we, the Naiyāyikas, hold that the awareness of the said identity
refers to a universal, e.g., gatva but not to a single letter,
e.g. ga. It may
be also stated in this connexion that the distinct
acts of the consciousness of ga, e.g. the awareness (es) of 'ga,
ga', etc. do not owe their existence to the action of the different
illuminators of the letter 'ga'. If the Mīmāṁsakas urge that the
different illuminators are only responsible for the appearance
of difference then why is not it that the letters such as y, r, I, V,
etc. are fundamentally one but they are presented to our cons-
ciousness to be different owing to the action of the diverse
illuminators? If it is admitted then the differences of all letters
are to be discarded and it should be accepted like the gramma-
rians that there is only one basic letter which is a partless whole
that transcends all differences.
The Mimāṁsakas may contend that as mutual distinction of
the letters, viz., v, r, 1, etc. is clearly noticed by all so how can
the hypothesis that all letters are substantially one be enter-
tained? But if the different speakers, viz., a man, a he-parrot
and a she-parrot pronounce the same letters then the Mimäṁ-
sakas may point out that the letters are the same but appear to
us to be different since the manifestors of the letters in these
cases are different. In the above case, there is very little chance
of taking an exception to the above solution. But when one and
the same speaker utters the word 'gagana' etc. how does the
first 'ga' appear to differ from the second one? The reason statedClassification and Unity of Letters
453
above does not apply to this case. The Manifestor of the two
ga's is the same.
Now, the Mimâṁsakas may contend that though the mouth
of the speaker is one and the same yet the airs which manifest
a letter are different. They say “Let the mouth be one. It does
not matter much". Some other thinkers hold that the mouth
itself is not one since it is an aggregate of several parts. If this
is the contention of the Mimamsakas then the objectors may as
well point out that the different airs similarly manifest the
letters y, r, 1, v, etc. The purport of this objection is this that
the letters should not be taken as essentially different.
Now, the Mimarisakas may contend, that when the letters
y, r, I, v, etc. are presented to our consciousness the specific
distinguishing feature of each letter is also presented to our
consciousness. But when the word 'gagana' is presented to our
consciousness no distinction between the first ga and the second
one is detected by anybody. In this case, there are two acts of
pronouncing but the letters pronounced are not different. This
contention is not sound. Though there is no awareness of speci-
fic difference yet there certainly exists numerical difference.
Specific difference is something other than general difference
since here there is the knowledge of numerical difference.
Now, the Mimãmsakas contend that the individual cow
designated as Sabaleya is known to be different from the indivi-
dual cow called as Bähuleya. Hence the difference existing
between them is real. But the one individual letter 'ga' is
not distinctly known to be different from the letter 'ga' pro-
nounced at a different period. One 'ga' may be quickly
pronounced. The other may be slowly pronounced. Such pro-
nunciation makes no real difference. The so-called difference
is only conditional.
Such a contention is not reasonable. In every individual cow
the distinguishing features of the different limbs such as dewlap,
hoofs, hump etc. are clearly cognised by us. Owing to their big
size this distinction is easily grasped. When sesamum, rice and
kulattha pulses are boiled and morsels are prepared from them
one morsel cannot be distinguished from another. But there is
numerical difference among these morsels since one morsel is
known to be other than another. Similarly, though the one454
Nyāyamanjari
letter 'ga' cannot be clearly distinguished from another letter
'ga' yet the former is numerically different from the latter.
Thus there are many ga's.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend that there is noticeable
distinction among the balls of boiled rice and if this distinction
is not grasped then the difference existing among the balls can-
not be grasped.
But such a contention is not tenable. If the above balls of
boiled articles are minutely observed then some of them are
observed as quadrangular, some others as triangular, some others
as round and so on. Thus each ball has its distinguishing
features. These characteristic features are presented to our
consciousness. But if we simply cast our eyes on them and make
no effort to detect the distinguishing features then we know
them to be numerically different. Thus, we bring home our
point that these balls are many.
Now, the Mīmāṁsakas may further contend that the aware-
ness of distinction is the consciousness of difference. But such a
statement is not true. The reason which is behind our criticism
is this. As action, e.g., the act of walking etc., consists of seve-
ral moments. Each moment is very subtle. There is a fine shade
of distinction which marks off one moment from another.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas urge that if a person does not cognize
the distinguishing features of an object then he has no know-
ledge of difference. Thus, the awareness of the distinguishing
features is regarded as identical with the awareness of difference.
Such a conclusion is not sound. The moments of actions like
the act of walking etc. are subtle. The difference of one
moment from another is detected though the minute distinctions
of such moment are not detected. Now, the Mimāṁsakas may
contend that it should be assumed that the distinguishing
features are cognized since the awareness of difference pre-
supposes the consciousness of the distinguishing features.
Now, the Naiyayikas come forward and join issue with them.
They hold that the letters in the word 'gagana' are apprehended
as different from one another. Thus, it may be as well assumed
that the distinguishing features of the letters are detected. But
they are not real. They are attributed to the letters owing toClassification and Unity of Letters
their association with the other factors. They are like the red
colour attributed to crystal.
The Naiyãyikas review this answer and point out that the
example quoted above is not an exact one. The red colour
attributed to a piece of crystal is due to its association with lac.
But the letters have innate distinguishing features in the shape
of various accents, such as either udätta or anudätta or svarita,
etc. The letters are always presented to our consciousness along
with these distinguishing features. The letters are never cognized
without having these distinctive marks. Therefore, the difference
of one letter from another is natural but not accidental.
455
As each act of consciousness involves a necessary reference
to an object such as a jar, a picture etc. but there is no such
consciousness as is blank. i.e., points to no object so the acts of
consciousness are many. Similarly, as each letter is marked by
a distinct accent so letters are many, it is not proper to hold
that consciousness is one and eternal but appears to be many
as it comes in contact with many objects which are to beregard-
ed as limiting adjuncts. The author of the Mīmāṁsā sūtra has
acknowledged that an act of consciousness comes into being
(vide his sutra on perception: buddhijanya pratyaksamiti). We,
the Naiyāyikas, shall afterwards refute the hypothesis that
consciousness is eternal. Now, if it is held that the diversity of
objects accounts for the difference in objects then the diversity
of objects should also be explained. Now, if it is held that the
diversity of consciousness points to the manifoldness of objects
then it may be pointed out that such a proposition involves the
fallacy of a vicious circle. In other words, the diversity of
objects points to the plurality of the acts of consciousness but
the plurality of the acts of consciousness presupposes the diver-
sity of objects. Thus, we arrive at the conclusion that the
difference of one act of consciousness from another is intrinsic,
the difference of one object from another is also intrinsic and
consciousness reveals it. There is no need of discussing other
relevant matters for the present. As the colour 'white' is many
such as brilliant white, grey white etc.-so the letters are many
since the vowels are accented in three different ways (either the
rising of the voice on a vowel is denoted or the falling of the
voice on a vowel is denoted or the rising and the falling of456
Nyāyamanjari
the voice on a vowel are denoted). Kumārila may hold that
the colour 'white' is really one but appears to be many because
it inheres in different locii: If he subscribes to this view then
he has lost his balance of judgment owing to the passionate
love for the above hypothesis.
"The action is one', 'consciousness is one' and 'the colour
'white' is one in this world'. Such statements are made by a
passionate gallant before a courtesan in her house. Moreover,
if this line of argument is rigidly followed then why should not
we accept the doctrine that the soul is one? The reason behind
the objection is this. Though we subscribe to the doctrine that
there is one universal soul yet we can explain why the soul
encased in this body is happy and why the soul enshrined in
that body is sorrowful because the different bodies impose
limitation upon the same soul. The path followed by the
Mīmāṁsakas is not far away from the doctrine of monism.
Therefore, they should no more brag of their superior logic.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend that in the word 'gagana'
the two ga's are not essentially different and they appear to be
different because of their association with the vowel 'a'. But
such a contention is not tenable because the Mīmāṁsakas hold
that the vowel 'a' is essentially one and the same and admits
of no difference. Again, let us cite a pair of similar words
‘digaja' and 'diggaja'. In the latter word there are two g's.
They are presented to our consciousness as different though the
prior 'g' has no association with the vowel 'a'. We may also
cite other pair of examples in which the two conjunctive con-
sonants have the same sound but are presented to our conscious-
ness as different. They are as follows 'samadaḥ and sammadaḥ':
‘malaḥ and mallaḥ', ‘āvikaḥ and āvikkaḥ', 'patiḥ and pattiḥ',
'patanam and pattanam' etc. The meaning of the word 'digaja'
is known to be different from that of the word 'diggaja' because
the two words are essentially distinct from each other but not
because the same consonant is pronounced twice. As the word
'diggaja' contains a larger number of letters so it has a different
meaning. But it is not a fact that the words 'digaja' and
'diggaja' consist of the same number of letters but have different
meanings when they are differently pronounced. Even if the
word 'go' is pronounced a hundred times then it conveys onlyClassification and Unity of Letters
and the same meaning viz. an animal having dewlap. The
expert etymologists hold that the word 'diggaja' contains two g's
but do never declare that it contains only one 'g' which is
uttered twice.
(
In the words 'go' 'guru' 'giri', 'geha' etc. though the vowels
which immediately follow the letter 'g' are different yet the
letter 'g' is presented to our consciousness as the persisting
identical object. Therefore, the letter 'g' is one and the same
object. This contention of the Mimamsakas is not tenable. It
has been proved by us, the Naiyāyikas, that in these words
there are different g's. In the words like ‘diggaja' etc. where
the first 'g' is not associated with a vowel the two g's have been
shown to be different. Let us make our position clear. We do
not deny existence to an identical element in the different
individuals, viz., g's, But we lay emphasis on the point that the
individual g's possess intrinsic difference since this difference is
an object of uncontradicted experience and cannot be otherwise
explained. The point which we intend to bring home is this
that the individual g's like the individual cows form a class.
Though the individuals are mutually different yet a universal,
an identical element, inheres in them. All the individual cows
are one when we look on them from the standpoint of the
universal of cowness. Similarly, all the individual g's are one
when they are looked on from the standpoint of the universal
of g-ness. But if the individuals as individuals are judged then
their difference is manifest. In other words, what we intend to
impress is that they possess an element of identity as well as an
element of difference. Now if the Mīmāṁsakas contend that this
difference is merely external i.e., an outer layer since the diffe-
rent manifestors explain the appearance of difference in letters
then we simply repeat the argument, stated before, that the
very existence of the different letters, 'y', 'r', 'l', 'v' etc. can be
explained away. Moreover, the individual cows such as Säbaleya
etc. are cognised by us to be different because their manifestors
are distinct. But the so-called different individuals should be
.really one.
457
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may put this question: "Which are
these different manifestors which make the individuals appear
as different ?" Kumārila also says to this effect. As dhvani458
Nyāyamanjari
is the manifestor of a letter so there is no manifestor of the
difference of the individual cows apart from their bodies. The
body of an individual cow invariably manifests the universal of
cowness. Let us explain the true statement of Kumärila. In case
of a letter, a letter does not manifest itself but dhvani manifests
a letter. The difference, belonging to a manifestor, explains.
why a single letter appears to be many. But in case of indivi-
dual cows etc. there is no manifestor of difference excepting the
body of an individual cow. If we do not subscribe to the view.
that the body of an individual cow is essentially different from.
that of another then how can we account for the distinction.
of an individual cow from another? Again, we recognize a
persisting element in the individual cow. This identical element
is the universal of cowness. There is no such proof as goes to
establish the universal of gatva (a universal belonging to the
letter 'g').
The above view is not tenable. The existence of the uni-
versal of cowness like the universal of gatva is not accepted
by all. It is not a sense-datum. But its existence is to be
established by means of reasoning. How do we cognize the
difference of an individual cow from another? The cognition
of such difference is due to the specific contact of the eyes.
with the individual cow. If we simply look at a cow, we do
not cognize this difference. But when our eyes have a special
contact with an individual cow this distinction of an indivi-
dual cow is perceived.
Now, the Mimamsakas may contend that the mere sensing of
an individual cow reveals its distinctive features. Such a
contention is not tenable. When we merely sense an individual
cow we know it only to be a cow. But if we perceive individual!
cows with their distinctive marks and express it by proposition
viz., "This is Savaleya". "This is Bahuleya" ete. then the
contact of the eyes with the object is invariably distinct. If
the first contact of the eyes with an individual cow produces
such a perception as is fortunate enough to reveal its distinc-
tive features then why has the first perception of the letter 'g'
been unfortunate in this respect? In that case when the letter
'g' reaches the ears and the different manifestors of the diffe-
rent letters remain unknown the difference holding betweenApplication of Universals to Letters
459
the two g's, contained in the words ‘gagana' and 'gangà' etc.,
should also be directly organised. There is no need of dilating
on this point.
The proof of the hypothesis that the universals such as gatoa etc, belong
to letters.
This is the sum and substance of the above discussion which
centres round the point that each letter is a member of a class.
Either one is to disregard the accepted hypothesis that the
members of a class have a common property and a particular
class is distinguished from another or one is to accept the hypo-
thesis that the universal of gatva belongs to the different g's as
the universal of cowness belongs to the different cows. If the
existence of the universal of gatva is admitted then the uni-
versal of atva cannot but be accepted. In other words, the
letter 'g' is not a single individual. But it is a member of a
class which consists of many g's. Similarly, the vowel 'a' is a
member of a class which subsumes many different a's under it-
self. All these a's have mutual distinction because some of them
are presented to our consciousness as short, some other a's as
long and still some other a's as prolated and so on. If one
subscribes to the view that a long vowel, viz., 'a' is recognised
as identical with the short vowel viz., ‘a' then he should also
recognise the vowel 'i' as identical with the vowel 'a' since
both of them are vowels. Though 'a' and 'i' are vowels yet
they are to be distinguished from each other. If this is the view
of the above person then he should not conceal the distinction
that separates the short vowel 'a' from the long vowel 'a'. If he
agrees with us then it will be sound to hold that the meaning
of the word 'aranya' is different from that of the word 'aranya'.
As the expert musicians follow the difference of the same
sound in the different notes of gamut so the expert grammarians
can only notice distinction in the same 'a' differently pronounc-
ed. It may be either accented or unaccented or as circum-
flexly accented. It may be pronounced either by the contract-
ed part or by the extended one and so on. Hence they hold
that the vowel 'a' admits of eighteen different kinds. The diffe-
rent a's possess a common character which is objectively real.
It is called atva. They also express the different kinds of a's as-460
Nyayamanjari
a group of similar a's. In other words, a's form a class. Every.
one also understands that this division applies to sound itself.
But men do not think that this division owes its existence to the
variety of winds which come in contact with our vocal chord
in order to utter a letter. Now, it may be contended that not
only letters but also the winds condition the communication
of meaning since there is an impression in the mind of the
people, that the winds are only responsible for the different
appearances of the same letter. If this is the contention then
this impression alone should condition the communication of
meaning but not letters since it is universally present whereas a
letter is not so. Let us have an end of this discussion here.
(The above criticism points to this that, the word 'araṇya' does
not contain the vowel 'a' but according to the impression 'a'
appears as 'a' under the influence of the wind. Owing to this
impression we make out the meaning of the word 'aranya'. The
impression is present whereas the letter is absent. The absent
letter cannot help to communicate the sense of a word. The
impression, being present, does it. Hence we should hold that the
impression alone conditions the communication of meaning).
J
In fine as the communication of the meaning of a word takes
place with the help of such universals as are gatva and others
so we should not assume that the letter 'g' is eternal.
Some other Mimāṁsakas hold that the genus viz. soundness
does not belong to the letters-not to speak of species belonging
to letters.
When we perceive a particular and remember another
particular we admit that these two particulars have an identical
element which constitutes the common property since the
recalling of another particular is at the root of the assumption
of the common property. As on the perception of the indivi-
dual cow, Śāvaleya by name, We remember another indivi-
dual cow named Båhuleya so on hearing the letter 'g' we do not
remember the letter 'v'. (The purport of this statement is that
the letters have no common property and that there is no scope
for imagination to assume such a common property).
Now, it may be contended that whenever we hear a particular
sound it is presented to our consciousness in its generic form
viz. 'this is sound', 'this is sound'. Such an experience does notApplication of Universals to Letters
invariably point to the existence of soundness as the common
property of all sounds. But, on the contray, the experience in-
volves a reference to the common property in the shape of
audibility. As each sound is audible so the common property
of audibility belongs to all words.
Such a contention is entertained by the unwise disputants.
since memory alone does not determine the existence of a
common property. The law of similarity is one of the guiding
factors of memory. When we perceive an individual of a parti-
cular species we remember an individual of a different species.
they are similar. Let us take an example. When we perceive a
gavaya we are reminded of a cow. Hence, the verbal expression
of a universal presupposes the uncontradicted awareness of
sameness. A universal, the common element of all individuals
of a class, is referred to by the awareness of the same. If an in-
dividual is cognized as possessed of a universal then such cogni-
tion does not necessarily provoke the memory of another
similar individual. It (the above cognition) sometimes produces
the memory in question but also fails to do so at some other
times. Therefore, the universal is not a condition of memory.
But similarity conditions memory. Suppose there are two
similar bodies. The head of one of them is cut off. If we see
the truncated body then we remember that it is similar to that.
body. The letters such as 'g' etc. are not similar to one ano-
ther. Owing to the absence of similarity one letter being heard
the memory of another letter is not awakened. It is not a
truism that the memory in question is not produced because the
letters do not possess a common universal.
461
The Samkhyists hold that similarity itself constitutes a uni-
versal and a universal is not a distinct object. This view is not
tenable since though cows and gavayas do not belong to the
same species yet they are similar. The Mîmāṁsakas take an
exception to the existence of soundness, a universal, and hold
that the common idea of soundness presupposes the common
property of audibility as its condition but does not refer to the
universal of soundness. The Naiyāyikas review this criticism
and point out that like the Buddhists, the Mīmāṁsakas should
also deny existence to the universal of cowness since the common
idea of cowness may presuppose the common property in the462
Nyayamanjari
shape of capacity for performing the same acts such as carrying
a load, milking etc. as its condition. But, really speaking, the
conclusion that a universal does not exist cannot be maintained.
Like the universal of cowness, the universal of soundness should
not also be set aside.
From the above remark the universal of Brahmanhood is
known to be established. It is perceived when the person per-
ceiving it gets the proper instruction. It is not to be considered
as super-sensuous because it receives the aid of instruction for its
perception. When a person difinitely perceives the universal
of cowness on hearing the statement "This is a cow", (he has
word-intertwined experience of a cow). It is noted that he
depends upon the instruction that the word 'cow' signifies the
universal of cowness for such perception. Somebody has said that
if a person ascending the peak of a hill sees an object then the
object is not taken as transcendental. (Nobody holds that diffi-
cult perception is not direct). It is not sound to hold that the
-determinate perception of Brahmanhood as belonging to the
Brahmins such as Paiṭhīnasi, Paippala, etc., is conditional
since it may be as well pointed out that the determinate
perception of cowness is also conditional (When we say that
such and such perception of the said universal is not direct, the
said universal is indicated by the knowledge of some signs
which are bound up with it). Some other thinkers hold that when
we see with our eyes, unaided by instructions, a person having
an amiable appearance we are able to distinguish him from a
Kşatriya and recognize him as a Brāhmaṇa, therefore we require
no further discussion about these side issues.
The refutation of the arguments in favour of the hypothesis
that sound is eternal. The relevant matter is now going to be
discussed. The sense of a word is communicated without any
difficulty if it is admitted that universals such as 'gatva' etc.,
belong to letters. With the aid of them a word conveys its
meaning without the least troubles. The Mīmāṁsakas hold that
a word is pronounced with the definite object of conveying its
sense to others. But if a letter, the constituent of the said
word, perishes in the moment just after its utterance then the
very object of pronouncing a word is defeated. Thus the
Mimamsakas arrive at the conclusion that sound is eternal.Application of Universals to Letters
463
This conclusion is not sound. They also hold that as a word
simultaneously conveys all the individuals so it is eternal. This
argument is also refuted by the above statement. The law that
the relation of significance holds between a word and its
meaning is established if it is admitted that the universals
belong to the different letters.
The Mimāṁsakas hold that a word being only one the suffix
*kṛtvasuc' is only attached to numeral words. (The suffix
"Krtvasuc' denotes the sense of-'times' in the English gram-
mar, e.g., three times, four times, five times etc.).
The Mimāmsakas mean to say: When one says that a word
has been five times uttered the sentence does not signify that
five distinct similar words have been uttered. It conveys
the sense that the word which is uttered is one and the same
but the acts of utterance are different. It points to the hypo-
thesis of the Mimāṁsakas that sound is eternal. The above in-
terpretation of kṛtvasuc as given by the Mimamsakas is not
universal since it faces exceptional cases.
The young lady of slender figure has cast side glance three
times at her lover, embraced him four times and kissed him
eight times. In this case each of these acts is many. Thus the
suffix 'kṛtvasuc' is used even when the repetition of one thing
is not conveyed by it. Now, the Mimãṁsakas may point out
that the above sentence purports to convey the repetition of
the acts of kissing, etc., as the male and the female partners
remain to be the same. The Naiyāyikas review the Mimāṁsā
view and hold that if a person feeds five Brahmins at a time,
another five Brahmins at another time and so on then does it
mean that he has fed the same five Brahmíns five times?
In a poem of a poet who displays an alliteration of the letter
"g' many ga's are noticed. The readers also say to this effect
that there are many ga's.
The Mimamsakas make mention of the recognition of the
letter 'g'. If this recognition is held to be true then it should
point to the universal of g.i.e. 'gatva' but not to the letter 'g'.
Moreover, if the recognition points to the letter 'g' then we
hardly notice any distinction between this recognition and
that which refers to the act of dancing or to the movementsi
466
Nyāyamanjari
gatva) which is shared by the subject and the predicate or to
such similarity as holds between the subject and the predicate.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend that the above negative
judgment points to the destruction (the non-existence) of the
manifestation of a letter but not to that of a letter. The Naiyāyi-
kas take an exception to this suggestion and hold that the above
negative judgment will be meaningless if it does not refer to the
negation of a letter. Therefore, let the judgment of recognition
- be contradicted. Let us take this judgment to be an erroneous
one. Or, the Mīmāṁsakas may urge that there is no crucial
evidence pointing to the destruction of a letter. Thus, there
may be room for doubt about the truth of the negative judg-
ment. In other words, the negative judgment may also be false.
Such a criticism is not tenable. The negative judgment that
a letter does not exist is also strengthened by the judgment of
otherness that this letter is not that letter. It is not reasonable
to hold that these two negative judgments may be otherwise
explained.
On the one hand, the judgment of recognition is dependent
but, on the other hand, the negative judgment is independent.
In other words, the judgment of recognition presupposes the
recollection of a letter for its very existence. But the negative
judgment referring to the negation of a letter is not conditioned
by such a recollection. Thus, of the two judgments about a
letter only the judgment of recognition is invalidated by the
negative one.
Moreover, a judgment of recognition does not invariably
point to the conclusion that the object recognized is eternal.
Let us cite examples of the recognition of non-eternal objects,
viz., an action. etc. We cannot pin our faith in the truth of the
hypothesis that sound is eternal since we definitely know that a
sound has passed away. It should also be noted in this connec-
tion that we do not mean to say that the evidence of recogni-
tion per se is unreliable. In other words, we do not suggest that
each and every object which is recognized is held to be eternal
on the strength of recognition.
But we mean to say that as the knowledge of the destruction
of a sound is true so the evidence, given by recognition about
the truth of the hypothesis that sound is eternal, becomes weak.Mimāṁsaka view that Sound is manifested-refuted
467
Though an action is recognized yet it is not proved that it is
eternal. Similarly, sound is not held to be eternal though it is
recognized.
The Mimamsakas put this question to the Naiyāyikas "Why
do you cite an example in order to bring home your point?"
In other words, they mean to say that the evidence of percep-
tion is final and as such a judgment of perception requires no
corroboration. The Naiyãyikas say in reply that there is much
truth in the objection but the Mimamsakas have missed the real
point of the Naiyāyikas. They generally cite examples in order
to convince the Mîmâmsakas of the truth of the hypothesis of
the Naiyāyikas since they (the Mimâmsakas) cannot follow the
trend of the abstract argument of the Nyaya school (their mind
being obsessed by prejudices). They have become impatient
to prove the hypothesis that sound is eternal). Out of impatience
they fail to draw a distinction between the argument which is
good and that which is bad. They behave like a thirsty person
who wants to drink everything but makes no distinction between
mobile and immobile things. Therefore, there is no need of dis-
cussing the hypothesis whether an action and a phenomenon of
consciousness are eternal since such a hypothesis owes its origin
to their excessive fondness for another particular hypothesis.
An Objection to the hypothesis that sound is Manifested but not Created
The Mimāṁsakas hold that as a letter is eternal so it is mani-
fested but not created. A possible objection to the hypothesis
is that the auditory perception of sound at a particular spot by
a particular person cannot be explained. They apprehend this
objection and give an answer to it. They hold that if an impro-
vement is made either upon the auditory sense-organ or upon
sound (i.e., the letter which is heard) or upon both of them
then the restricted perception of a letter is fairly explained. The
Naiyâyikas hold this explanation to severe criticism and point
out that the Mimāṁsakas simply deceive people by the explana-
tion. The objects which belong to the same locus and are sens-
ed by the same sense-organ are manifested by the same mani-
festor. There is no exception to this rule. But the Mimarsakas
have taken an exception to this rule and pointed out that various}
468
Nyayamanjari
accents, belonging to the same locus are manifested by the diffe-
rent manifestor. The Naiyāyikas review this criticism and hold
that these scents are grasped by the same sense-organ but do
not belong to the same locus.
Now, if the Mīmāṁsakas suggest that all the different scents
belong to the same locus as the earth is one then it should also
be accepted that the Himalayan range and the Vindhya range
belong to the same locus.
Though the earth is one and the same yet the earthen objects
are not one. The above scents belong to them. As the locus
of scents is not one so they are manifested by the different
manifestors.
It may be held that the letters are self-sufficient and as such
they stand upon no locus. Or, it may be stated that the letters
stand upon the sky as their locus. In any case, it. can never be
asserted that the letters belong to the different loci.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend thus :-The sky is an
indivisible single substance. But the Naiyāyikas divide it into
many parts by an act of imagination. The imaginary parts con-
stitute the different auditory sense-organ of the different per-
sons. With the help of imaginary parts they explain that each
person has a separate pair of ears. Similarly, we may impose
imaginary division on the sky and hold that letters will find
the distinct locii in the different parts of the sky. As they do
not belong to the same locus so they may be manifested by the
distinct manifestors.
The Naiyāyikas examine this contention and hold that the
solution of this sort is not sound. The word 'cow' may have
been heard in the sky which is enclosed either by the mouth of
the speaker or by the ear of the listener. In that very locus the
word 'horse' may be heard at present. (In other words the
Naiyāyikas point out an exception to the general law formulated
by the Mimāmsakas that a distinct word belongs to a separate
locus. In the above case, though the two words are different
yet their locus is one and the same). The scent which belongs
to the flower of the Madhavi creeper is not smelt in the flower
of the Bandhūka tree or in that of the Madhūka tree. (In other
words, the Naiyãyikas hold a brief for their hypothesis that each
scent has a distinct locus).Mimāṁsaka view that Sound is manifested-refuted
469
Thus, the Naiyãyikas reassert the objections raised by them
against the Mimamsa hypothesis of manifestation with greater
force. As all the letters belong to one and the same locus so it
cannot be held that a inct letter is manifested by a separate
manifestor,
If some Mimamsakas contend that an improvement may be
made either upon the letter itself by means of the air or upon
the auditory sense-organ or upon both even then they can-
not surely maintain the required hypothesis that a distinct
manifestor manifests a distinct letter.
They may argue that the invisible principle of merit and
demerit is only responsible for the above hypothesis of manifes-
tation. The Naiyāyikas record their protest against this solution
with the following note. If the hypothesis that all letters are
created is assumed then no reference to the invisible principle
of merit and demerit is necessary. Each letter is conditioned by
a distinct set of known conditions. No visible object is known
to stand in the way of the creation of a distinct letter. The fact
that a letter comes into being is experienced by all.
An improvement to be made upon the auditory sense-organ
is nothing but the evacuation of the slowly moving air. The
Naiyāyikas have already said that if the hypothesis is assumed
then the letters which are intended not to be heard will also be
heard. (In other words, all the letters should be simulta-
neously heard. No satisfactory answer to this objection is availa-
ble). Now, if the Mimāṁsakas revise their hypothesis and hold
that the suggested improvement is something else than the
evacuation of the slowly moving air then they assume something
which is a unique object.
Again, if the Mimāṁsakas hold that the letters are permanent,
an improvement is durable and the auditory sense-organ is even
lasting then the word 'cow' though unmanifest should be heard
since an improvement has been made upon it and the improve-
ment itself, the condition of perception, persists. But if the
Mimāṁsakas hold that the said improvement is transitory but
not persisting then the hypothesis that sound is transitory is a
better one since the transitoriness of sound is experienced.
Bhartṛmitra suggests that an improvement is made upon the
auditory sense-organ. By the suggestion he merely expresses his3
r
470
Nyāyamañjari
unprecedented scholarship! The hypothesis that an improve-
ment is made upon the auditory sense-organ is not sound. If
this improvement is permanent then an uproar should be heard
(i. e., all letters should be simultaneously heard). The hypothesis
will not be elaborately discussed since Kumārila himself, the
famous Mimāṁsaka, has rediculed Bhartṛmitra for it and subject-
ed it to severe criticism. There is no need of disputation over it.
Kumārila states that a hypothesis which is contrary to that
of the Naiyāyikas is to be resorted to by the Mīmāṁsakas. The
Mimāṁsakas should follow the teaching of the Vedas and hold
that the auditory sense-organ is constituted by space but not by
the sky. Such a hypothesis is not sound. Space is the only source
of knowledge of spatial proximity or remoteness. It has got
no other function to do. In all cases, the literal meaning of the
Vedic sentences should not be insisted upon since they suggest
something else. But a thinker who attaches too much importance
to himself assumes that space constitutes the auditory sense-
organ.
The hypothesis that all the sense-organs are elemental will
be proved later on. Space is not an element. Therefore, it
constitutes a sense-organ. Now, the Mimâmsakas may contend
that space is as all-pervasive as the sky is and that there is no
distinction between space and the sky so far as their ubiquity
is concerned. The trend of this contention is that there is no
bar to the hypothesis, "Space constitutes the auditory sense-
organ." A reply to his contention is this that as Time and the
Soul are equally all-pervasive so they might have as well cons-
tituted the auditory sense-organ. Now, the Mîmāṁsakas may
defend their position with the remark that Time and the
Soul do not constitute sense-organs since they have got some
other functions to do. The Naiyāyikas have an easy reply to
this contention. They will simply say that the same logic
applies to Space. The Vedic text which has been cited in sup-
port of the hypothesis that space constitutes the auditory
sense-organ purporis to suggest something else. As the Vedic
sentences "Let the eyes be united with the sun, and let the
ears be united with the space" run so the Vedic text "Let the
vital breath be united with the sky" is also real. The last
Vedic sentence cannot be set aside. On the strength of thisMimâmsaka view that Sound is
manifested-refuted
Vedic sentence we cannot hold that the sky constitutes the
vital breath which is constituted by the air. Therefore, the
Mimáṁsakas should give up the hypothesis that space consti-
tutes the ears. The sky, enclosed by the ear-drum, etc., consti-
tutes the auditory sense-organ. We enjoy pleasure or pain,
derived from words. The invisible principle of merit and
demerit accounts for such feelings. It is the cause that converts
the sky into the audítory sense-organ. We, the Naiyayikas,
have stated this hypothesis at an earlier section. Now, the
Mimåmsakas may turn up and contend in the following manner:
As the Naiyãyikas hold that the restriction is imposed upon
words by the invisible principle of merit and demerit so the
manifestation of sounds will be determined by the same princi-
ple. (In other words, the Naiyãyikas make an appeal to the
agency of the invisible principle of merit and demerit in order
to explain why one hears such words as produce the feeling of
pleasure or as produce the feeling of pain. The Mimāṁsakas
follow their foot-steps and hold that it is due to the working of
the same invisible principle that a particular letter is mani-
fested to the exclusion of others.) The Mimāṁsakas ask the
Naiyāyikas why do they object to the hypothesis of the Mimam-
sakas? They say, "If sound is eternal then there will be no law
of the manifestation of sound."
The Naiyāyikas try to substantiate their objection and hold
that the contention of the Mimāṁsakas is not sound. They
hold that sense-organs such as eyes, etc., are not capable of
grasping some possible objects and this incapacity is due to the
agency of the invisible principle of merit and demerit. It is for
this reason that the eyes cannot perceive darkness. But the
nature of objects does never change. A cold object e.g. ice does
never change its nature of being cold. We have stated before that
no manifestor has been noticed to make any selection in time
of manifestation. A letter is not a single unit. It is a class
name. Many individual letters of the same class are directly
perceived by us. (In other words, 'g' is a common noun but not
a proper noun.) All the letters are not simultaneously heard by
all in accordance with the empirical law of hearing. If a letter
is within the field of hearing of a listener then it is heard. If it
is not then it is not heard. This law is derived from experience.
471472
Nyāyamañjari
If an empirical law of hearing is available then why should the
Mimamsakas entrust the invisible of merit and demerit with
the burden of solving the problem?
The refutation of the hypothesis that a letter is manifested.
If it is held that a letter is manifested then how do you
distinguish between a letter which is loudly pronounced and
one which is lowly pronounced? For, let us now see whether
the property of being loud or that of being low belongs to a
letter or to the air. Now, if the Mīmāṁsakas hold that the said
properties belong to a letter then they should admit that a
letter which is loudly pronounced is distinct from that which is
lowly pronounced. In that case, they subscribe to the hypothesis
of the Naiyāyikas,
Now, if the Mimāṁsakas hold that the said properties be-
long to the air then the Naiyāyikas ask, "How are the properties
of being loud and low heard by us?" The reason behind this
objection is this that the property of the air can never be heard.
The Mimāṁsakas cite an example in order to prove their
hypothesis that the property of one object seems to belong to
another. They have illustrated that the properties of an in-
dividual, viz., fatness, thinness, etc., are attributed to the uni-
versal which inheres in the individual. The example, shown
by them is highly probable since the universal, the individual
and the property of an individual are sensed by the same sense-
organ. But, in the present context, the air is either sensed by
the organ of touch (according to the Naiyãyikas) or super-
sensuous (according to the Vaišeşikas). But it is strange to hold
that the property of the air seems to belong to a letter which
is grasped by the auditory sense-organ.
The Mimariisakas subscribe to an alternative hypothesis that
the property of being loud or low belongs to consciousness. But
it is absolutely unreasonable to hold such a hypothesis. An act
of consciousness is different from another because their objects
are different but not because they are intrinsically different.
There is another point to add to our criticism. The Mimamsakas
hold that consciousness is supersensuous because it is an act.
As the property of being loud etc., belongs to consciousness
so it is supersensuous. Thus, this hypothesis shares the same lotOn the hypothesis that sound is created
473
with the former one, viz., the said property belongs to the air.
Thus, the said property has no chance of being perceived.
The property of being loud or low has been carried away by the
terrible storm. It has no chance of escape. The said property
does not belong to the object which is perceived. It inheres in
such an object as transcends our sense-perception.
The Mimāṁsakas may contend that if the air which mani-
fests a particular letter is suppressed by some other air which
manifests another letter then the letter is not heard. The
Naiyāyikas subject this contention to severe criticism and ask
even if the air is suppressed, why is the letter not heard? The
Naiyāyikas refer to an illustration which confutes the hypothesis
of the Mimāṁsakas. If the light of a lamp is subdued by the
rays of the sun then is not the colour of an object perceived?
(Now, the Mimāṁsakas find fault with the above example
and point out that as a particular letter is manifested by the
particular air so a particular letter is not heard on the suppres-
sion of its manifestor.) The Naiyāyikas challenge the very
assumption of the Mimāṁsakas and say that experience does
not teach that the different airs manifest the distinct letters.
This point has been criticised at an earlier section.
In order to explain that the sound, manifested by the playing
on conch-shell, is somehow heard the Mimāṁsakas hold that
the universal which belongs to the sound is heard but not the
sound itself. The hypothesis is not sound.
The Naiyāyikas ask the Mimāṁsakas, "Oh Mimāṁsakas!
speak out the truth. Have you ever seen or heard that if an
object is imperceptible then its common property is perceived ?"
Again, the Mimāṁsakas hold that every sound is articulate.
But the sound which is manifested by a conch-shell is inarti.
culate. According to the Mimāṁsakas the universal of sound-
ness belongs only to the articulate sound (i.e., to letters). The
inarticulate sound of a conch-shell does not possess the uni-
versal. In that case, how do they perceive the universal of
soundness on the locus which is the sound of a conch-shell ?
The hypothesis that a sound is created obeys better the Law of parsimony
than the other one that a sound is manifested
There are two rival hypotheses about a letter. According toNyayamanjari
one a letter is created. According to the other a letter is mani-
fested. The superiority of the one to the other is to be deter-
mined. The Mimamsakas think that the law acts better in
grasping a word and its meaning and that the firstone is supe-
rior to the second. (In other words, if one frames such a hypo-
thesis regarding a letter as requires a smaller number of assum-
ptions in order to hear a word and understand its meaning then
the proposed hypothesis is superior. If one frames such a hypo-
thesis regarding a letter as requires a greater number of assum-
ptions in order to hear a word and grasp its meaning then the
other hypothesis is inferior.) The procedure of the Mimāṁsakas
is not sound. The Naiyāyikas say, "We should dive deep into
the very root of the problem."
"
474
If the permanence of a letter is established by an independent
proof then the hypothesis of the Mimāṁsakas is correct. But if
its impermanence is proved then their hypothesis is wrong. The
hypothesis of the Naiyāyikas is, however, correct. It is very
strange to imagine that the internal air, being extracted from
within the body, drives away all the stand-still airs from all
sides. Kaņāda, in his Vaiseșika Sūtra, holds that the fire
goes up, the air blows obliquely and the initial action of an
atom and that of the inner organ owe their origin to the invi-
sible force of merit and demerit of the individual souls. As the
air blows only in an oblique manner so it cannot be satisfac-
torily explained how a word is heard both upward and down-
ward.
The air does not give up its natural movement in an oblique
way so long as the air blowing from another direction collides
with it and makes it change its direction.
When a speaker pronounces a word with his head down the
word is heard even from an upper place. And when he pro-
nounces a word with his face turned up it is not a fact that it is
not heard from below. If a word generates similar words on
all sides in a circular manner like the pollens of a kadamba
flower then there is a possibility of hearing a word on all
sides without any reference to the place of occurrence of
the basic word. But the circular movement of the air is
never noticed in this world. (If the air manifests a word then475
On the hypothesis that sound is created
the hearing of such a word is not possible from an adverse
position).
If a speaker pronounces a word with his face covered up to
his throat by a non-porous skin then the word is heard. But in
that condition, it is not possible for the internal air to come
out.
The Mimamsakas also hold that the movement of the air is
impeded by an obstacle in the shape of a wall, etc. The air can-
not also move forward when its passage is obstructed by the
non-porous skin.
Moreover, when the nine appertures of a dispeptic person are
blocked the rumbling sound of the wind in the intestine is heard.
In his case, from which apperture does the internal air come
out? The Mimāṁsakas may contend that the inner air comes out
from the pores of the skin. The said air is very feeble. And as
such it cannot drive away the external air which stands still.
Again, even if the air outside blows gently, no word will be
heard since though the air outside blows gently yet how can it
be driven away by the inner air, being itself stronger than the
internal air? The Mimāṁsakas may contend that some other
kind of the imperceptible external air envelops a word but
the perceptible air which causes the Syâma grass (a species of
grass) to dance does not hide it. Such a contention is not tenable
since the existence of the imperceptible air cannot be proved.
Even if it is admitted that such an imperceptible air exists and
conceals a word then the more powerful air will be in a posi-
tion to conceal it with greater facility. (It is absurd to hold
that the imperceptible air covers a word but the perceptible air
does not.) Therefore, we arrive at the logical conclusion that a
sound generates a series of similar sounds. Let us cite similar
examples in its support. The attributes, like colour, etc., are
observed by us to produce same attributes. It is also experienced
that an event of consciousness which belongs to the all-pervasive
substance produces another event of consciousness, an event of
consciousness may occur at a particular space but it sometimes
produces another event of consciousness at another space. If
Devadatta takes his walk on the road then a particular event of
consciousness happens in his mind at a particular spot but the
resulting consciousness occurs at another spot because he moves474
Nyayamanjari
one a letter is created. According to the other a letter is mani-
fested. The superiority of the one to the other is to be deter-
mined. The Mimamsakas think that the law acts better in
grasping a word and its meaning and that the firstone is supe-
rior to the second. (In other words, if one frames such a hypo-
thesis regarding a letter as requires a smaller number of assum-
ptions in order to hear a word and understand its meaning then
the proposed hypothesis is superior. If one frames such a hypo-
thesis regarding a letter as requires a greater number of assum-
ptions in order to hear a word and grasp its meaning then the
other hypothesis is inferior.) The procedure of the Mimāṁsakas
is not sound. The Naiyãyikas say, "We should dive deep into
the very root of the problem."
If the permanence of a letter is established by an independent
proof then the hypothesis of the Mīmāmsakas is correct. But if
its impermanence is proved then their hypothesis is wrong. The
hypothesis of the Naiyāyikas is, however, correct. It is very
strange to imagine that the internal air, being extracted from
within the body, drives away all the stand-still airs from all
sides. Kaņāda, in his Vaišeșika Sūtra, holds that the fire
goes up, the air blows obliquely and the initial action of an
atom and that of the inner organ owe their origin to the invi-
sible force of merit and demerit of the individual souls. As the
air blows only in an oblique manner so it cannot be satisfac-
torily explained how a word is heard both upward and down-
ward.
The air does not give up its natural movement in an oblique
way so long as the air blowing from another direction collides.
with it and makes it change its direction.
When a speaker pronounces a word with his head down the
word is heard even from an upper place. And when he pro-
nounces a word with his face turned up it is not a fact that it is
not heard from below. If a word generates similar words on
all sides in a circular manner like the pollens of a kadamba
flower then there is a possibility of hearing a word on all
sides without any reference to the place of occurrence of
the basic word. But the circular movement of the air is
never noticed in this world. (If the air manifests a word thenOn the hypothesis that sound is created
the hearing of such a word is not possible from an adverse
position),
If a speaker pronounces a word with his face covered up to
his throat by a non-porous skin then the word is heard. But in
that condition, it is not possible for the internal air to come
out.
475
The Mimamsakas also hold that the movement of the air is
impeded by an obstacle in the shape of a wall, etc. The air can-
not also move forward when its passage is obstructed by the
non-porous skin.
Moreover, when the nine appertures of a dispeptic person are
blocked the rumbling sound of the wind in the intestine is heard.
In his case, from which apperture does the internal air come
out? The Mimāṁsakas may contend that the inner air comes out
from the pores of the skin. The said air is very feeble. And as
such it cannot drive away the external air which stands still.
Again, even if the air outside blows gently, no word will be
heard since though the air outside blows gently yet how can it
be driven away by the inner air, being itself stronger than the
internal air? The Mimamsakas may contend that some other
kind of the imperceptible external air envelops a word but
the perceptible air which causes the Syama grass (a species of
grass) to dance does not hide it. Such a contention is not tenable
since the existence of the imperceptible air cannot be proved.
Even if it is admitted that such an imperceptible air exists and
conceals a word then the more powerful air will be in a posi-
tion to conceal it with greater facility. (It is absurd to hold
that the imperceptible air covers a word but the perceptible air
does not.) Therefore, we arrive at the logical conclusion that a
sound generates a series of similar sounds. Let us cite similar
examples in its support. The attributes, like colour, etc., are
observed by us to produce same attributes. It is also experienced
that an event of consciousness which belongs to the all-pervasive
substance produces another event of consciousness, an event of
consciousness may occur at a particular space but it sometimes
produces another event of consciousness at another space. If
Devadatta takes his walk on the road then a particular event of
consciousness happens in his mind at a particular spot but the
resulting consciousness occurs at another spot because he moves476
Nyayamanjari
on. (The colour inhering in threads produces the same colour
in the cloth, produced by them. The threads constitute the
material cause of the colour. The colour which inheres in the
threads, the material cause, is also one of the causes. It is called
the non-material cause asamavāyikāraṇa. Some forms of consci-
ousness determine some other forms of consciousness. A judgment
presupposes the awareness of a predicate. The indeterminate
perception of an object conditions its determinate perception.
But one form of consciousness is the efficient cause of another
form of consciousness. It is technically called the Nimittakāraṇa.
A person, say Devedatta, starts for another village. He moves
on without any stop on the road. He has the indeterminate
perception of a cow on the road at a particular part of the
road. But as he moves on so the determinate perception of the
cow occurs in his mind at another part of the road).
These examples point to the conclusion of the Naiyāyikas that
a sound is created and it produces another similar sound. Now,
the Mīmāṁsakas may take an exception to this conclusion on
the ground that the series of the resulting sounds will be in-
finite, i. e., interminable. The Naiyãyikas anticipate this possible
objection and try to meet it. The series of the resulting sounds
terminates but does not continue ad infinitum. A sound is not
the only cause of another sound. It depends upon other concomi-
tant conditions in order to produce another sound. They do
not always regularly assemble to co-operate with the cause.
Their assemblage is controlled by the invisible principle of
merit and demerit.
If this law of causation is honoured then we explain how it
becomes possible that a violent sound produces a less violent
sound. As the conditions of a violent sound become weak so they
produce the less violent sound.
A series of waves has been cited running parallel to the series
of sounds. These two series are not equal in all fours. A sound
has no strength, velocity, etc. like those of a wave (Jayanta
means to say that when we draw a comparison the two objects
which are compared do not agree in all respects.)
The Naiyāyikas hold that if the sky is partitioned by a wall,
etc. then a sound does not produce another similar sound and
so on. But why does it not produce its effect? But such an ob-Proof of the hypothesis that sound is an attribute
477
jection does not affect our hypothesis. The unpartitioned sky is
the material cause of a sound but not the partitioned one. The
hypothesis in question is based upon sound observation. Thus,
the sky under all conditions is not the material cause of
a sound.
The Proof of the Hypothesis that a Sound is an Attribute
The Mimamsakas hold that the hypothesis "A sound is an
attribute" has not been proved. Some Naiyāyikas hold a brief
for it and argue that a sound is an attribute because it depends
upon a locus. The argument is not tenable. The generalisation
that an object which depends upon a locus is an attribute, is
not materially valid since the six types of reality may require
a locus to stand upon. Kaṇāda accepts the hypothesis that all
reals which are subsumed under six different types stand upon
a locus with the exception of some self-sufficient substance such
as space, time, atoms, etc. No body can perceive that a sound
being an attribute of the sky, inheres in it. The sky being super-
sensuous, the attribute which belongs to it is also imperceptible
If the Mīmāṁsakas argue, "How is it that a sound is per-
ceptible because its locus is imperceptible?" then the Naiyāyikas
meet it by means of an analogical argument, "As consciousness
and some other attributes of the soul are intuited through the
soul, their locus, is supersensuous so a sound is perceptible".
If the Mimamsakas contend that the above analogy is in-
correct then Jayanta replies that there is no need of digression
since the hypothesis of the Naiyāyikas will be conclusively prov
ed at the subsequent chapter of this work.
Now, the Mīmāmsakas may ask, “What is the proof in favour
of the hypothesis that a sound is an attribute?" The Naiyãyikas
may in reply hold that it is an inference based upon the
method of residual. If a sound is not an attribute then there are
two other possible alternatives. It is either a substance or an
action. If these two alternatives are eliminated then it remains
only to be subsumed under the class of an attribute since if it is
not an attribute, it is impossible for it to have a universal, etc.
Why is not sound a substance? Because a sound is effectuated
by a single substance. A substance is either self-sufficient, i. e.,
caused by no substance or an effect of many substances. The478
Nyayamanjari
sky, atoms, etc. come under the former type. The dyads, etc.
are included in the latter type. A sound is an effect of a single
substance because it inheres only in the sky. Hence, it is not a
substance. It is not an action because it produces another sound.
No action produces an effect which is subsumed under the class
of an action. No body imagines that a sound is either a univer-
sal or the relation of inherence or the positive difference because
the universals of being, soundness, etc. inhere in it. Hence, by
the process of elimination a sound remains only to be an attri-
bute. Thus, by an indirect method, it is proved that a sound is
an attribute.
The Mimāṁsakas contend that if a sound is proved to be an
attribute then it inheres in the sky since no such attribute is
seen as does not inhere in a substance and it cannot be proved
that a sound inheres in the earth and such other substance.
Thus, we see that if it is an attribute then it is an attribute.
Hence, it is a glaring instance of the fallacy of a vicious circle.
The Naiyāyikas advance the following argument in order to
strengthen their hypothesis. As a sound produces a similar
effect so it is an attribute. Again, it being an attribute inheres
only in the sky. So, it is heard only by the ears which are
constituted by the sky. The sound which is produced by conjun-
tion and disjunction at a place far away from the ears cannot
be heard because it is beyond the reach of the ears. In order
to hear it, a series of similar sounds should be assumed. If it is
proved to be an attribute then a series of sounds is assumed. If
a series of sounds is assumed then a sound is proved to be an
attribute since as it produces a similar effect so it excludes itself
from being an action. Thus, this proof involves the fallacy of a
vicious circle.
The Naiyāyikas give a rejoinder to the above objections.
They hold that the above two hypotheses do not involve the
fallacy of a vicious circle. A sound is assumed to stand upon
the sky since it is sensed only by the auditory sense-organ. As
it is an attribute so it produces a similar effect. It has also been
conclusively proved that the auditory sense-organ is a part of
the sky. We, the Naiyâyikas, shall also prove that all sense-
organs grasp only those objects with which they come in
contact. Again, if a sound does not inhere in the sky then itProof of the hypothesis that sound is an attribute
479
cannot come in contact with the auditory sense-organ. As an
object which is not united with the sense-organ is not perceived
so we infer that a sound inheres in the sky. A remote sound is
not heard. In order to explain that it is somehow heard we
assume that a sound produces another similar one. We do not
hold that a sound produces a similar effect because it is merely
an attribute. Thus the fallacy of a vicious circle does not vitiate
our hypothesis.
Some hold that a sound is assumed to rest upon the sky
because it is an effect of the sky. Again, if it is assumed that
sound inheres in the sky because it is an effect of the sky then
this hypothesis involves the fallacy of a vicious circle as stated
before.
Some logicians hold that a sound stands upon the sky because
it is an effect. The Mimamsakas subject this view to severe
criticism. They hold that if it is assumed that a sound rests
upon the sky because it is an effect then this hypothesis just
like the above one involves the fallacy of a vicious circle. A
sound stands upon the sky because it is an effect. It is an effect
because it rests upon the sky. If it rests upon the sky why is it
an effect of the sky? A sound which inheres in the ears is only
heard? For this reason, a series of sounds is to be assumed.
(A series of sounds implies that the first sound produces a second
one and the second one generates a third one and so on. These
sounds constitute a series. We hear some sound when a remote
one is at the basis of it. In order to explain this perception it
is assumed that a sound produces another sound. A remote
sound does not inhere in the ears and a sound which does not
inhere in the ears is never heard). The Naiyāyikas give a reply
to the above objection. They say that the conclusion that a sound
is an effect is not arrived at by the above process of reasoning.
A sound is determined to be an effect because the difference
of a sound from another and its destruction are direct and in
a determinate manner fit in well with the hypothesis that a sound
is an effect. The Naiyāyikas lay emphasis on this point only
but one should not think that they use it as a logical ground of
the said hypothesis. There is no need of subtle discussions on
this point.
Some other logicians hold that a sound is other than an478
Nyāyamanjari
sky, atoms, etc. come under the former type. The dyads, etc.
are included in the latter type. A sound is an effect of a single
substance because it inheres only in the sky. Hence, it is not a
substance. It is not an action because it produces another sound.
No action produces an effect which is subsumed under the class
of an action. No body imagines that a sound is either a univer-
sal or the relation of inherence or the positive difference because
the universals of being, soundness, etc. inhere in it. Hence, by
the process of elimination a sound remains only to be an attri-
bute. Thus, by an indirect method, it is proved that a sound is
an attribute.
The Mimāṁsakas contend that if a sound is proved to be an
attribute then it inheres in the sky since no such attribute is
seen as does not inhere in a substance and it cannot be proved
that a sound inheres in the earth and such other substance.
Thus, we see that if it is an attribute then it is an attribute.
Hence, it is a glaring instance of the fallacy of a vicious circle.
The Naiyāyikas advance the following argument in order to
strengthen their hypothesis. As a sound produces a similar
effect so it is an attribute. Again, it being an attribute inheres
only in the sky. So, it is heard only by the ears which are
constituted by the sky. The sound which is produced by conjun-
tion and disjunction at a place far away from the ears cannot
be heard because it is beyond the reach of the ears. In order
to hear it, a series of similar sounds should be assumed. If it is
proved to be an attribute then a series of sounds is assumed. If
a series of sounds is assumed then a sound is proved to be an
attribute since as it produces a similar effect so it excludes itself
from being an action. Thus, this proof involves the fallacy of a
vicious circle.
The Naiyayikas give a rejoinder to the above objections.
They hold that the above two hypotheses do not involve the
fallacy of a vicious circle. A sound is assumed to stand upon
the sky since it is sensed only by the auditory sense-organ. As
it is an attribute so it produces a similar effect. It has also been
conclusively proved that the auditory sense-organ is a part of
the sky. We, the Naiyãyikas, shall also prove that all sense-
organs grasp only those objects with which they come in
contact. Again, if a sound does not inhere in the sky then it479
Proof of the hypothesis that sound is an attribute
cannot come in contact with the auditory sense-organ. As an
object which is not united with the sense-organ is not perceived
so we infer that a sound inheres in the sky. A remote sound is
not heard. In order to explain that it is somehow heard we
assume that a sound produces another similar one. We do not
hold that a sound produces a similar effect because it is merely
an attribute. Thus the fallacy of a vicious circle does not vitiate
our hypothesis.
Some hold that a sound is assumed to rest upon the sky
because it is an effect of the sky. Again, if it is assumed that
sound inheres in the sky because it is an effect of the sky then
this hypothesis involves the fallacy of a vicious circle as stated
before.
upon the sky because
Some logicians hold that a sound stands
it is an effect. The Mimamsakas subject this view to severe
criticism. They hold that if it is assumed that a sound rests
upon the sky because it is an effect then this hypothesis just
like the above one involves the fallacy of a vicious circle. A
sound stands upon the sky because it is an effect. It is an effect
because it rests upon the sky. If it rests upon the sky why is it
an effect of the sky? A sound which inheres in the ears is only
heard? For this reason, a series of sounds is to be assumed.
(A series of sounds implies that the first sound produces a second
one and the second one generates a third one and so on. These
sounds constitute a series. We hear some sound when a remote
one is at the basis of it. In order to explain this perception it
is assumed that a sound produces another sound. A remote
sound does not inhere in the ears and a sound which does not
inhere in the ears is never heard). The Naiyāyikas give a reply
to the above objection. They say that the conclusion that a sound
is an effect is not arrived at by the above process of reasoning.
A sound is determined to be an effect because the difference
of a sound from another and its destruction are direct and in
a determinate manner fit in well with the hypothesis that a sound
is an effect. The Naiyāyikas lay emphasis on this point only
but one should not think that they use it as a logical ground of
the said hypothesis. There is no need of subtle discussions on
this point.
Some other logicians hold that a sound is other than an482
Nyāyamanjari
that a sound is impermanent since it as a member of a class is
perceived by the external sense-organ like a jar.
The Mimāṁsakas point out a fallacy in the above argument.
They hold that all universals are characterized by universals.
As two universals co-exist in the same locus so one is charac-
terized by another. The argument of the critics is absolutely
unreasonable since it is well-known that the universals and
some other objects do never possess a universal. The two
universals, viz.,. pṛthivítva, ghaṭatva (a universal belonging
only to earth and another belonging to all earthen jars) co-
exist in a jar. But it cannot be held that the universal of
ghatatva is characterized by the universal of pṛthivitva. There-
fore, the argument, put forward by Uddyotakara, is free from
all defects.
The criticism, directed by Kumārila against the thesis of the
Naiyāyikas, is as follows: He holds that the marks, viz., the
possession of a universal, perceptibility, etc., indicate alike
both eternal and non-eternal objects. But he who puts forward
the above marks to establish the thesis that a sound is non-
eternal is not adept in the art of logic. This is the statement of
one who is not conversant with the rules of Nyāya logic.
Kumārila himself advances some reasons in order to prove
his thesis that a sound is eternal. But the reasons are not
conducive to the above conclusion. The word 'cow' which
was uttered yesterday is identical with the word 'cow' which
has been uttered to-day since the awareness of the word 'cow'
reveals one and the same word 'cow'.
An act of awareness has, however, competence only to reveal
a real object. But it has no such power as to reveal an object
as eternal or non-eternal.
Kumārila holds that some reasons are not competent enough
to prove the thesis that a sound is non-eternal. But he himself
advances similar reasons to draw the conclusion that a sound
is eternal. But is it not strange to do so ?
The reasons which have been advanced in support of the
thesis that a sound is eternal are very weak. Therefore, the
Mimamsakas cannot but hold that a sound is an effect, i. c.,
non-eternal. The Mīmāṁsakas have shown eloquence, repeat-Proof of the hypothesis that a sound is an attribute
483
ing the words of the Vedas. But such eloquence has no scope
in the sphere of logic.
We, do not subscribe to the view that every existent object
is transient. Therefore, we cannot say that a sound has only
instantaneous being. The Mimämsakas hold that gross objects
are only destructible. They mean to say that composite subs-
tances are only gross objects and imply that a sound is not
destructible, not being a gross object. This view also stands
cancelled.
The objects such as a jar, etc. are gross and stable. Their
destruction depends upon that of their minute parts. A sound is
unstable by nature. Hence, its destruction takes place. Again,
it is a gross object.
If the Mimåmsakas revise their thesis and hold that a sound
is transient then how should they previously assert that a sound
is eternal? If they hold that the former opinion is based upon
some other argument then that argument must be found out.
But it is useless on their part to stick to the dogmatic tradi-
tional view with high regard for it.
There is no need of elaborately discussing this topic. Discard
the hypothesis that a sound is eternal. One who is conversant
with the rules of logic should accept that a sound is non-eternal.
A sound is an effect since the omnipotent and omniscient god
Šiva, having moon on his forehead, is the author of all letters.
The end of the third chapter of Nyāyamañjari.ÄHNIKA IV.
The Vedas are the work of a person
Thus we have proved that all letters partake of the character
of an effect. Anything articulate, viz., a word, constituted by
letters, a sentence, etc.; owes its origin to a person who is its
author. Thus the authorship of a person with regard to words,
sentences, etc., is established.
Even if we admit that the words are eternal then it seems to
us to be highly probable that a sentence is composed by a
person since it is a combination of words. Hence how can we
say that the Vedas are eternal, i.e., they have not been com-
posed by a person?
All the orderly arrangements are composed by an agent. The
Vedic sentences are such an orderly arrangement. Therefore
they are composed by an agent. The major premise is materially
valid. The sentences of Classical Sanskrit Literature are com-
posed by an agent. They serve as a positive instance. The
reason, put forward by us, possesses all the five conditions
requisite for a sound reason. The above reason is also streng-
thened by an ancillary argument. Hence it should not be held
that the reason in question does not belong to the subject of
inference. Let us cite a few Vedic sentences, viz. Śanno devira-
bhiṣṭaye, etc., and examine them. Each of these sentences is
an orderly arrangement of words containing accents properly
distributed and other signs of arrangement. We directly know
that the reason in question belongs to the Vedic sentences
referred to.
The reason in question is not contradictorily related to the
major term since it belongs to the positive instances such as the
epic Kumāra-sambhava. It is a truism that the said epic is the
work of an author and that it contains the orderly arrangement
of words. The reason in question is not doubtful since an
orderly arrangement does not belong both to the objects which
have an author and to the objects which have no author. No
orderly arrangement is noticed in the sky which has no author
or in the sky-flower, etc. having no author.On the authorship of the Vedas
The presence of the reason in question is not contradicted
by some other sources of true knowledge. It has not been defi-
nitely proved either by perception or by the Vedas that the
Vedas have no author.
485
The reason in question is not suspended by a forceful counter-
argument. Just as when we perceive the common property of
the two things but not their distinctive marks a doubt arises in
our mind in the form "Is it a man or a post ?". If one puts for-
ward a reason to prove that the Vedas have an author and
another person advances a counter-reason to prove that the
Vedas have no author then no decision is reached. But no such
counter-argument has been stated.
In order to prove that atoms are non-eternal if one argues
because it has limited extension then the generalisation is
wrong. There is no relation of invariable concomitance holding
between the middle and the major terms. Such an objection
does not apply to the syllogism in question. An arrangement
is invariably effectuated by an author. As smoke owes its exis-
tence to fire and points to it so an arrangement owes its exis-
tence to an agent and indicates its existence. Therefore, the
reason in question is sound and conducive to the conclusion.
The refutation of the thesis that the Vedas are eternal
The Mimāṁsakas appear on the field and oppose the thesis
of the Naiyāyikas. They hold that the argument of the Naiya-
yikas is counteracted by another argument. Therefore, the
above mark is not convincing. The counter-argument, put for-
ward by the Naiyāyikas, is as follows:
When one studies the Vedas he sits at the feet of his precep
tor in order to learn them as we do now. The very phrase "The
study of the Vedas" denotes the learning of the Vedas from a
preceptor by a pupil (who receives all the words of the Vedas
in their proper order from the mouth of the preceptor and gets
them by heart). The learning of the Vedas in such a manner
is called Vedādhyayana. The very word 'Vedādhyayana' points
to the thesis that the Vedas are eternal. (If somebody is the
author of the Vedas he has not learnt them from his preceptor.
If he does not learn them from his preceptor then he is not a
competent teacher. In order to make the study of the VedasNyayamanjarī
possible the series of the teachers of the Vedas must remain
uninterrupted i.e., beginningless. Thus there is no author of the
Vedas).
The argument is not sound. An argument like the above one
does not draw a conclusion. Only from the meaning of the
word 'adhyayana' it is not reasonable to arrive at the conclu-
sion that the Vedas are eternal. The above reason is fallacious.
We can also hold like-wise that the Mahābhārata has no author
i.e. it is also eternal. He who studies the great epic of Bhārata
learns it from his teacher. He has also learnt it from his
teacher and so on ad infinitum. The study of the Mahābhārata
implies the learning of it from a competent teacher like the
study of the same epic at the modern age.
486
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend that there is a piece of
uncontradicted recollection that the Mahabharata has an
author. If this is their contention then it may also be held that
the lord of all beings (Prajāpati) is truly remembered by all
as the author of the Vedas. Now, the Mimāṁsakas may defend
their case with the remark that the Vedic mantra which refers
to the authorship of Prajapati has no literal meaning. It repre-
sents an allegory since the literal meaning involves contradic-
tion. In the above mantra it has been stated that the four
Vedas, the four castes and the four stages of life have been
created by Prajāpati.
The Naiyāyikas say in reply to the above contention that the
reference to the authorship of the son of Parāśara contained in
the Mahābhārata may have as well some other purpose to
serve. It does not purport to convey that Vyāsa has composed
the Mahābhārata.
As the Mimamsakas hold that the Lord of all beings is extoll-
ed in the Vedic mantras which involve references to him so the
Naiyāyikas may as well say that the son of Satyavatī, i.e.,
Vyāsa, has been eulogised in the verses which refer to him.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend that no body has direct
acquaintance with the fact that God has composed the Vedas.
In reply to this it may be pointed out "Have your ancestors
seen Dvaipayana Vyāṣa who was born in an island with their
own eyes?"On the authorship of the Vedas
If the Mimāṁsakas press their point saying that they possess
unmistaken memory of tradition that the son of Satyavati has
composed the Mahabharata then the Naiyãyikas may argue
that there is a popular and unflinching belief which is widely
accepted that Prajāpati is the author of the Vedas.
The Mimāṁsakas continue to argue. They say "Oh Sir; why
do you deflect from the right path, being deceived by the
rumour current in the circle of carters and such other persons
who are devoid of the power of discretion?" The Naiyāyikas
may retort that when one is advised by his parents to do some-
thing small he undertakes it out of his implicit confidence in
their advice. But if one performs a Vedic rite which entails an
expenditure of a huge sum and demands a lot of troubles to
undergo without remembering the advisor then he surely
commits a great blunder. One cannot reasonably take action
upon the words of the Vedas if the author of the Vedas is not
remembered by him just as one cannot attach any importance
to a mutilated book containing poems of great and small poets.
In any case the author should be recollected. One cannot
suggest that the continuity of the Vedic tradition might have
been broken in the past so the author of the Vedas could not
be remembered. Just as we cannot remember the name of the
founder of a deserted old well as well as a garden not visited by
persons. Therefore, the author of the Vedas must be remembered.
The Mimāṁsakas join issue with the Naiyāyikas and hold that
the author of the Vedas is not only remembered but also cannot
be recollected. Memory is always based upon experience.
Nobody has an experience of the author of the Vedas since
there is no creation of the world. Even if it is admitted that the
author of the Vedas exists and that He is not visible as He is
incorporeal.
Even though we assume that God is corporeal and that He
is visible in the beginning of creation yet nobody sees Him
compose the Vedas,
Though we admit that the people see Him reap the Vedas
yet a doubt arises in their mind whether or not He has compos-
ed the Vedas or He reads the Vedas composed by somebody else.
Or, if we hold that God reads the Vedas written by some-
body else then a fresh doubt appears in our mind whether or
487488
Nyāyamanjari
not he has really composed the Vedas. Such a doubt points to
the suggestion that the Vedas are eternal.
If nobody directly knows that God has composed the Vedas
and everybody makes an appeal to memory as the source of the
knowledge of God, then the series of recollections, handed down
from one generation to another, is really unfounded. It looks
like a row of blind men in which one blind man is following
another.
One holds that the sages have mystic intuition of God as the
author of the Vedas. But we, the Mimāṁsakas, do not subscribe
to this view. How can we follow the steps of the Naiyāyikas
since we do not place our confidence in their assumption?
If it is held that the Vedas themselves declare that God is
the author of them then it is a glaring instance of circular
reasoning. The Vedas are the source of true knowledge because
God is their author. Again, we truly know that God is their
author since the Vedas are the source of true knowledge.
(Now, the Mimāṁsakas assert their conclusion in the light of
the above negative criticisms). The Naiyāyikas have arrived at
an erroneous conclusion since they have based their view upon
the Arthavada portion of the Vedas. They have failed to distin-
guish the arthavādas from the mantras which are an embodi-
ment of injunction since they have failed to study the Vedas in
their proper order. They have not dived deep into the character
of the Vedic mantra. They have taken only a superficial view of
the mantras. Nobody really recollects the author of the Vedas.
Thus we hold that the Vedas have not been composed since we
do not remember the author of the Vedas who must have been
remembered by us. We do not put our reason in the proper
syllogistic language. Hence, the charge that the middle term
does not belong to the minor term should not be levelled
against the above argument. The exact middle term is that it is
that the author of which is not remembered (The syllogism
runs thus: All the works the author of which is not remem-
bered are such as have no author. The Vedas are such a work.
Therefore the Vedas are such as have no author).
A review of the above thesis is as follows: The Mimamsakas
have recourse to such a path as does not obey the rules of logi-
cal discipline. They have abandoned the reason which was putOn the authorship of the Vedas
489
forward at the outset. They have at first tried to establish that
the study of the Vedas pre-supposes an instruction from a pre-
ceptor by means of a reason. The implication of this argument
is that the Vedas are eternal. Now, they advance another
reason "being a work the author of which is not remembered".
Let this reason be accepted. We shall not take the Mimāṁsakas
to task because they have recourse to another reason. The
Mimāṁsakas have raised an important point which is not to be
set aside as a minor one. Do they intend to establish the con-
clusion that the Vedas have not been composed by means of an
independent reason "being a work the author of which is not
remembered?" Or, do they intend to counteract the reason "be-
ing an arrangement of words", put forward by us? It is not logi-
cal to hold that a syllogistic argument supersedes another such
argument. It cannot be proved that like perception and verbal
testimony an inference sets aside another inference. If two
syllogistic arguments are equal in strength then they will con-
tradict each other because of their equal strength. If they are of
unequal strength then that which makes an argument weak will
also invalidate it. In that case it is superflous to assume that
an inference is set aside by another inference. The Mimāṁsakas
may hold that they have put forward the counter-argument
in order to set aside the reason offered by the Naiyāyikas. But
such a statement is contrary to reasoning. The two reasons
which point to the two properties contradictorily opposed to
each other cannot be simultaneously applied to the same sub-
stratum-the subject of inference. Therefore, in this case, one
of them is surely fallacious. All the objects of the world can-
not have two such parts as remain incompatible with each
other. Therefore one of these two reasons is surely fallacious.
As it fallacious so it cannot draw the conclusion, which is
expected of it. Therefore, no purpose will be served if the
opponents put forward a reason to cancel another reason. If a
counter reason is simply advanced the syllogistic argument
which it intends to contradict does not come out to be fallacious.
There is no such fallacy as is called "Viruddha-avyabhicări".
(The term in question denotes that syllogistic argument is falla-
cious if another true reason being advanced, contradicts the
conclusion of the above syllogistic argument). We shall prove490
Nyayamanjari
the absence of such a fallacy in the subsequent section. We
shall also show that whenever a counter argument is put forward
in order to contradict a syllogistic argument the fallacy of Pra-
karaṇa-sama is not committed. But the fallacy of Prakaraṇa-
sama takes place if the reason which is really a source of doubt,
the marks of its distinction remaining unobserved, is advanced.
Hence, if one intends to find fault with the reason advanced by
his rival then he should take the trouble of examining whether
or not the said reason belongs to the subject of inference, i.e.
the minor premise is materially valid. He should not make wild
conjectures to find out the counter-reason.
Now, let us see which of the above two reasons fails to draw
the conclusion. The two reasons are as follows:- (1) being an
arrangement of words and (2) being that the author of which
is not remembered. The decision on this point is this. The reason
"being an arrangement of words" is competent to draw the
conclusion since nobody has ever seen that the words arrange
themselves without being arranged by a person.
Oh revered sirs: Oh great men who move in the circle of
experienced persons ! have you ever seen or heard in this world
that the words in a sentence combine themselves by their in-
herent power? If it is held that the words contained in the
Vedas get themselves combined by their innate nature then
why do not the threads which make up a cloth spontaneously
combine themselves?
In the sentences, viz., "San no devīrabhiştaye", "Nārāyaṇam
namaskṛtya", "Astyuttarasyāṁ diši devatātmā" etc., the
arrangement of words is the same. But if we hold that in some of
these sentences the words have been arranged by a person and
that in other sentences they have been arranged by no person
then the source of such a differential treatment is only traced to
a great confusion of mind. Those who indulge in such a conjec-
ture should have also held that smoke is sometimes produced by
fire and that it is not also sometimes produced by fire.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas make the following ironical remarks,
viz. “The Vedas have become equal in rank with the Kumāra-
sambhava of Kālidāsa ! Alas the Naiyāyikas, the foremost be-
lievers, have established the authority of the Vedas !"On the authorship of the Vedas
"No need of derision", "Say the Naiyãyikas in reply to the
above remarks. The Vedas resemble the epic 'Kumāra-sambhava'
only in the arrangement of words but in nothing else. If we
(the Naiyãyikas) say this much then they do not deserve to be
laughed at for this only. Does not soundness belong to the
Vedas alike as it does to the sound produced by conch-shell?
Does not existence inhere in the Vedas as it does in all the ob-
jects? The works of the poets like Kālidāsa etc. bear the stamp
of their author on their face. But the Vedic works are entirely
different from them. When the Vedic works are learnt by us
we discover the marks of uniqueness inherent in them.
There are uses of words, verbs, prepositions etc. in the Vedic
literature. But there is much novelty in their use. The Vedic
works contain laudation, condemnation, the story narrated by
a single person, the story narrated by two or more persons and
other matters not to be found in Classical Sanskrit Literature.
491
Each Vedic Samhità (a collection of Vedic verses) admits of
various recensions. The matter which has been discussed in one
recension of a particular Vedas is not to be found in another
recension of the same Veda. Such a diversity of forms and mat-
ters is not to be found in Classical Sanskrit literature.
Thus, the students of Vedic Literature form their opinion
from its uncommon character about the Vedas that the Vedic
works have not been composed by an author. Therefore, the
Mimāmsakas drink the cup of glory in this world.
We, the Naiyāyikas, join issue with the Mimāṁsakas and
refute their hypothesis. Let the Mīmāṁsakas drink the cup of
glory or a cup of milk or medicated clarified butter in order to
remove the dullness of their intellect. But there is no mistake in
our hypothesis that the Vedas have been composed by an
author.
The combination of parts of a jar is different from that of
parts of a mountain. Still the combination of parts is due to the
activity of an agent, i.e., it presupposes the existence of a per-
son who combines the parts. Similarly, the arrangement of
words, etc., in the Vedas is different from that of words etc. in
book of the classical period. Though the arrangement is
different yet there is no doubt about the fact that it is due to
the activity of an author.492
Nyayamanjari
We have got something to say regarding this matter. We have
elaborately stated it at an earlier section. Now we say this
much only that as the arrangement of words in the Vedas is a
class by itself so one should infer that the author of the Vedas
is necessarily an extra-ordinary person. But it becomes absurd
to deny the existence of God. We have already stated this view.
Nobody disputes to admit that the great works of Kālidāsa and
other great poets which have an aesthetic appeal have been
composed by an author. It is also experienced that each of these
works has its distinctive mark.
The poetic expressions of Kälidāsa are as if dipped by nectar,
besmeared by sandal paste and polished by the moonbeams.
Though the sentences of Bāņa Bhaṭṭa consist of long compounds
yet they have charmed the circle of poets, rousing emotions as
they do. Similarly, in each literary work some diversities are
noticed. The very nature of the Vedas suggests that the Vedas have
no author because nouns, verbs etc., have been strangely used
in them. It is indeed a novel argument which has merely verbal
significance. If you have implicit confidence in the characteristic
feature of the Vedas then why do you not apply your attention to
examine the other characteristic feature of them, viz., the narra-
tion of the created objects? The Vedic sentences which involve
references to the created objects run thus:-"Babara, the son of
Pravahaņa desired", "Kusura Vinda, the son of Uddâlaka, desir-
ed, Oh Pūruravas! do not give up your life" etc. Now, the
Mīmāmsakas may contend that they are created in each cycle of
new world. Hence they are eternal in this sense. Then, the
Naiyáyikas may as well say that the Vedas are different in each
emergence of the new world. It has been stated that after the
expiry of each Manu era the fresh Vedas are composed.
If we frame the hypothesis that the Vedas are eternal seeing
the characteristic features of the Vedas then the said hypothe-
sis is only based upon pure imagination but is not established
by a proof.
If we try to explain away the created objects mentioned in
the Vedas then the explanation is not reliable. The students
of Vedic literature in course of its study come across many
terms which denote created objects. Therefore, the Vedas are
not eternal. Therefore, the reason being an arrangement ofOn the authorship of the Vedas
words' is not impotent to draw a true conclusion. But the
counter-reason 'non-remembrance of an author' is incapable of
drawing the conclusion since it has not been proved that the
author of the Vedas is not remembered. Even if it is admitted
that no author of the Vedas is remembered then the non-
remembrance of such an author does not necessarily point to
the absence of an author since it may be otherwise explained.
The composition of the Vedas having taken place in the remote
past the author of the Vedas is not remembered. As the author
of the Vedas is distinct from all other persons so he has no
definite body. Consequently, nobody can remember Him as
that particular person who has composed the Vedas as we do
remember Păņini or Pingala as an author of a particular work.
It is not true that God does not exist since inferential and
verbal knowledge point to His existence. The Mīmāṁsakas
argue that the Vedas are eternal because the Vedas have such
an author as is not remembered. The rule of inference is that
the reason must belong to the subject of inference. The reason
in question is definitely subjective. In other words, the person
who is going to infer can only know whether or not the reason
belongs to the subject of inference. It is impossible for all
persons to determine whether or not the reason in question
belongs to the subject of inference. How do you know that all
persons do not remember the author of the Vedas? You do not
intuit the mind of all persons. If you had done so you would
have been omniscient. You cannot arrive at a generalisation
based upon an analogical argument, viz. “As I do not remem-
ber such an author so all other persons do not remember him."
Thus, such a generalisation is too wide. Therefore the reason
"Being that the author of which is not remembered" is truly
unknowable. Again, if we do not remember the author of the
Vedas then the zeal for performing the Vedic rites on the part
of the intelligent persons will gradually fade away since an
advice without an advisor is impossible. Even if we admit that
such an advice is a possibility then we cannot place our confi-
dence in it since the source of its validity has not been deter-
mined. (We have rather positive apathy for sentence which is
self-caused, i.e., which does not come from the lips of a speaker,
not to speak of any regard for it). We have stated before that
493494
Nyāyamanjari
the truth of a sentence is not asserted if it does not merely
involve self-contradiction. As the respectable persons have
absolute reliance upon the trustworthy persons so it is possible
that they unhesitatingly observe the Vedic rites. Thus the non-
remembrance of an author cannot be logically taken as a
counter-reason of being an arrangement of words.
The said reason advanced by the Mimamsakas does not
independently prove that the author of the Vedas does not
exist. It really amounts to the non-apprehension of the author
of the Vedas. Such a view is not tenable since the author of the
Vedas is an inference. What is inferred is also known. The
Mimāṁsakas may contend that the inferential knowledge of
the author of the Vedas is not logically tenable because it has
been contradicted by the non-remembrance of the author of
the Vedas. But such a contention is a glaring instance of vicious
circle since if the said non-remembrance is established then the
said inference is contradicted and if the said inference is con-
tradicted then the said non-remembrance is established. The
Mīmāṁsakas may point out that the establishment of the truth
of the said inference suffers from the same defect. The truth of
the deduction depends upon the truth of the major premise in
question, i.e., induction. The truth of the said inference does
not depend upon the contradiction of the truth of the said non-
remembrance.
The Mimāṁsakas say that the above reason does not directly
prove the absence of authorship of the Vedas. But they do not
believe in the existence of transcendental objects like god, etc.
They ask their opponents to furnish them with the proof with
regard to the hypothesis that the Vedas have been composed
by a person. As the opponents cannot supply with such a proof
so non-remembrance enforces on our mind its resultant know-
ledge that the author of the Vedas does not exist. The Naiyã-
yikas say in reply to this argument that such a conclusion
might have been accepted if there had been no inference. We
have already stated that the Vedas have an author because
they possess an arrangement of words.
The Mimamsakas have said that the origin of the Vedas can-
not be traced to a person. Such a statement is not fair. WhenOn the authorship of the Vedas
we perceive a new curtain, etc. how do we determine the exis-
tence of a weaver who is beyond the ken of our vision ?
We infer the existence of a weaver who has made a cloth, etc.
from the object which has been created by him. Similarly, we
infer the existence of the author of the Vedas from the arrange-
ment of words contained in them (the Vedas).
A soul cannot advise others if he does not possess a body.
Hence we can assume that God sometimes has a body. As He
has no permanent body so He is not remembered like the other
authors, viz., Vyasa etc.
As a poet who belongs to our age is known as the author of
a particular poem by his contemporary fellows so God will also
be known as the author of the Vedas by his contemporary
fellows.
495
As the misapprehension regarding the poem that it has been
composed by some body else but not by the said poet is remov-
ed so the erroneous knowledge about the authorship of the
Vedas will be also dispelled.
It has been stated in connection with the definition of per-
ception that a transcendental object which is inferred by us is
perceived by the sages.
Thus we see that perception and inference are the two main
sources of knowledge about the authorship of the Vedas. I
memory is held to be the source of such knowledge then it has
the chance of being discredited.
Hence, in order to repudiate the hypothesis that God is the
author of the Vedas, memory which has been taken as the only
source of such authorship by the opponents has been discredited
on the ground that it is based upon the Arthavada section of
the Vedas. Such a criticism is pointless. We have already indi-
cated how perception and inference threw light on the author-
ship of the Vedas.
The Mimāṁsakas have stated that the hypothesis of the
Naiyāyikas involves circular reasoning. The Vedas are the
source of true knowledge because they have been composed by
omniscient God and God exists because the Vedas point to His
existence. But the critics misrepresent the hypothesis of the
Naiyāyikas. The objection raised by them, is not fair. The
Naiyāyikas have given an answer to this charge at an earlier496
Nyāyamanjari
section. God as the creator of the universe is an inference. The
Vedas simply strengthen the said conclusion. The Naiyãyikas
do not hold that the Vedas are the only source of God, the
creator of the universe. It has been stated before that the crea-
tor of the universe is inferred from the earth, etc.-the created
objects.
The author of the Vedas is the creator of the earth and such other objects
Does the creator who has fashioned this earth compose the
Vedas? If this question is put to us then we answer this ques-
tion with the remark "Oh yes". Now the opponents may urge
"What is your proof?" Our answer to this question is as
follows:
Omniscient. God is competent to construct such a huge
universe full of diversities a universe where the different
sorts of beings enjoy the fruits of their action.
---
The person who knows each action of each being and the
fruit of such an action can only compose the Vedas which are
nothing but an embodiment of instructions regarding actions
and their results. Hence we
assume that nobody but God
composes the Vedas.
If the assumption of a single person serves our purpose then
why shall we assume a second person as the author of the
Vedas? We find no sufficient reason for assuming many persons,
entrusted with the different functions.
In the matter of the creation of the universe we subscribe
to the hypothesis that there is only one God. No purpose is
served if we hold that there are two or more creators of the
universe. Suppose there are two Gods. Now, if their will is
concordant then one of them is redundant. Again if their will
is discordant then one of them is sure to undermine the work
of the other creator. In that case, one of them ceases to be God.
The hypothesis of the plurality of Gods is not at all satisfac-
tory. If the will of many gods is perfectly concordant then the
hypothesis of the plurality of gods is absolutely meaningless.
He whose will is inviolable makes up his mind to reward or to
punish a being. What He desires turns out to be true by meansOn the authorship of the Vedas
497
of His majesty. How can the other Gods help in this matter of
inflicting punishment or awarding a reward?
Let us assume many gods. If their will is discordant then two
opposite wills cannot simultaneously materialise. Hence, he
whose will is frustrated cannot be God. If one God desires that
a particular person shall be a king and another God desires
that he shall be killed then how can these two conflicting
desires simultaneously take an effect?
If the first desire of making one a king is fruitful then the
second one of killing him will be frustrated. If the second one
materialises then the first one will be baffled.
Thus we have established that there is only one God who
creates the universe full of diversity.
All the Vedas have been composed by one and the same author
As the creator of the universe full of diversity is one so the
author of all the Vedas is God who is one. No proof can be put
forward in support of the hypothesis that many gods have
written the Vedas. The assumption of many gods simply violates
the law of parsimony.
Now, an objection is raised against this hypothesis. How do
you arrive at the conclusion that one God has composed all the
Vedic works? Why have not many treatises been composed by
the different authors ?
The above objections, raised by the opponents, against the
said hypothesis, have been met thus.
All the Vedas have the same author because the same well-
connected subject-matter has been taught in all the Vedas.
Suppose a principal rite has been enjoined. All its relevant
accessory rites have been advised by the Rg-Veda, the Yajur-
Veda, the Sama Veda and the Atharva-Veda. As all these
accessory rites contribute towards the completion of the princi-
(To perform
pal rite so they are held to be connected with it.
any Vedic rite the assistance of the four different priests is
absolutely necessary. The priest who exclusively follows the
Rg-Veda is called 'hotr'. The priest, following only the Yajur-
Veda, is called 'adhvaryu'. The priest who is only in concern
with the Sama-Veda is designated 'udgātṛ'. The priest who
deals only with the subject-matter of the Atharva-Veda is498
Nyayamanjari
called 'brahma'). The priests perform the duties of a hotr
according to the Rg-Veda. The priests discharge the duties of
an adhvaryu-priest in accordance with the Yajur Veda. The
priests execute the duties of an udgătṛ according to the Sama-
Veda. The priests complete the duties of a brahmå according
to the Atharva-Veda. The subsidiary actions which have been
stated in the different recensions of the Vedas such as Paippala
etc., are necessarily implied for the completion of the main
action. They say that all the minor actions, taught by the
different recensions of the Vedas, point to one and the same
main action. We shall decide this matter at subsequent section
not far off.
As the subject-matter of Vedic literature indicates that it
represents an inter-related system united by a common purpose
so how can the Vedic literature be composed by the different
persons having cross-purposes?
If this is the argument of the Naiyãyikas then how is it that
a foot of a verse is composed by a single poet and the
other feet are composed by the other poets? (The main
point in this objection is this that a single poem represents a
whole the different parts of which are composed by the
different poets. In spite of the diversity of authors the
poem maintains the unity of an idea. Similarly, the Vedic
literature may represent a single system of ideas or actions
though it has been composed by the different authors).
An answer to this objection is as follows. The second poet
reading the foot of a poem composed by the first poet grasps
the intention of the first poet and composes the other feet
following the idea of the initial poet. Otherwise if the idea
of some portion of a poem composed by a poet does not agree
with that of the other portions of the same poem then it
becomes an incongruous poem like the literary product of
Viśva Vasu. But if the ideas, expressed by the complete poem
form a consistent whole then it is a piece of certainty that the
idea of the first poet has been realised by the poem.
Now, in case of the Vedas if we hold that there are other
gods who follow the intention of the first god then the
intention of one god constitutes the key-note of the Vedas
and there is no need of assuming other gods. Thus, we arriveRelation between a Word and its Meaning
499
at the conclusion that God is the author of all the different
recensions of the Vedas. The opponents also admit that the
naming of the different recensions such a Kathaka, etc. may
have been after the name of the celebrated teachers of the
particular subject. Moreover, the various branches of a tree
spread out in the different directions. All leaves, flowers and
fruits do not belong to a single branch. But they belong to a
few branches. Similarly, the Vedas which teach the details of
the subsidiary rites branch off in different recensions.
As all those branches of a tree develop from a single tree so
the origin of all the recensions of the Vedas is traced to God,
the best of all persons.
The creator of the universe who has immediate knowledge
of merits and demerits of each soul and of the various degree
of their maturity has given a code of instructions which has
universal applications. It is reasonable to hold that He has
composed the Vedas.
All persons pin their faith in the words of the Vedas
because they believe that the Vedas have been composed by
eternal and trustworthy God who is possessed of all excellent
virtues. No intelligent person will place his confidence in the
veracity of the Vedas because they have been composed by no
author. We have discussed this point at an earlier section.
Thus, the hypothesis that the Vedas presuppose an author
as they contain an arrangement of words and sentences has
been proved.
The determination of the relation holding between a word and its
meaning
The Mimāṁsakas hold that the man-made relation of denotation
does not hold between a word and its meaning. They strongly
assert that a word has an innate power of conveying an object
just as the power of burning is inherent in fire. A person simply
learns that this word has the power of conveying this object
from the use of an experienced old man.
What will a person
do in this matter? Such a view is not logically tenable. If a
convention that this word denotes this object is not set up by
a person then a word cannot convey its meaning.Nyayamanjari
Now, the Mimāṁsakas contend that as no relation subsists
between a word and its meaning so why is it discussed at all
whether or not the said relation is dependent or independent
of a person? The relation holding between a word and its
meaning is not that of conjunction which obtains between a
plum and a small reservoir of water. The said relation is not
that of inherence which subsists between threads and a piece
of cloth. The said relation is not also perceived to be either
of them. No other relations which are based upon any
one of these two relations are also possible. It has been
stated that a word is heard as belonging to the mouth but an
object is seen on the ground. The relation between a word
and an object is not an inference. When we
utter the
words "razor, a sweet ball, etc." neither we experience a cut in
our mouth by a razor nor the filling up of our mouth by a
sweet ball. An object, denoted by a word, does not belong to
the place where a word is uttered. Similarly, a word does
not belong to the place where an object exists. The word and
the object, denoted by it, do not co-exist because the locus,
the instrumental cause and efforts, the conditions of a sound,
are not perceived where the objects such as a jar, etc., exist. The
Mimāṁsakas also point out that the Naiyāyikas themselves deny
the truth of the hypothesis that a word is more pervasive
than the object conveyed by it.
The Naiyāyikas give a reply to the above objections.
They say "We do not admit that the relation of conjunction
holds between a word and the object meant by it". The
Mímāṁsakas put the following question to the Naiyãyikas: Is
the above relation that which obtains between a cause and an
effect or that which holds between the conditions and the
conditioned or that which subsists between the locus and the
object located?" "None of these relations holds between
them", is the reply given by the Naiyãyikas, The Mimamsakas
remark that this admission amounts to this that there is no
relation whatsoever between a word and the object meant by
it. The Naiyãyikas reply that it is not a truism that there is
no relation between a word and the object denoted by it'
since a word invariably expresses an object as smoke points to
fire. The Mimāṁsakas question "Does the relation of the
500501
Relation between a Word and its Meaning
pervaded hold between a word and the object? The Naiyayi-
kas reply "No. If we subscribe to the view then verbal
knowledge will be inferential". The Mimāṁsakas ask "What
is this relation that holds between a word and the object
denoted by it?" The rejoinder of the Naiyãyikas is that this
relation is a conventional one. The Mimâmsakas question,
"What is a convention?" The Naiyāyikas answer that
convention is an act of will which determines that this word
will denote this object. In other words, a relation between a
word and an object is fashioned by an act of will. Such a
relation is called a conventional one.
a
The Mimāṁsakas raise another question viz., "If the Naiya-
yikas subscribe to the hypothesis of convention then why do
they refer to the hypothesis of the relation of conjunction hold-
ing between word and its meaning and refute it ?" They further
point out that the hypothesis of such conjunction is highly
reasonable from the stand-point of the grammarians since they
hold that the relation of identity in difference holds between a
word and its meaning. (But the Naiyãyikas have no reasonable
ground for suggesting such a hypothesis in order to criticize it).
The Naiyāyikas hold that the meaning of a word is conven-
tional. Such a view is not tenable since the convention is set
up by a human being and no law is imposed upon the external
objects by the mere will of a person. The Naiyâyikas may con-
tend that God's will being inviolable, the conventional meaning
of a word is possible. If this is their contention then why should
not an object convey meaning just like a word). But the will
of a person cannot upset the law of nature. Let us take a
crete example. A person has no desire for knowing fire. He sees
smoke. Though he has desire for knowing water yet he cannot
but infer fire in spite of his adverse desire. In case of smoke
and fire the relation of concomitance holding between smoke
and fire is natural. But in order to discover this relation repeat-
ed observations of the co-existence of smoke and fire are neces-
sary. Similarly, the relation of denotation, (technically called
meaning) holding
the power of communicating the exact
between a word and its meaning, is a natural one but is not
made by any person. But in order to ascertain the power of
communication of a word we are to depend upon the usages of
con-502
Nyayamanjari
the experienced senior persons or upon the traditional meaning
of the adjacent word. Now, a question arises in our mind with
regard to the hypothesis of this natural relation. The relation
which obtains between light, the illuminator, and the object,
illuminated by it, is natural. No body is conscious of this
relation when he sees an object illuminated by light.
If this is the case, what is the necessity of knowing the rela-
tion of denotation through the usage of the experienced persons?
In other words, whenever a word is heard why does it not
directly convey its meaning? Such an objection does not affect
the above hypothesis. A word is merely an indicator. The nature
of an indicator like smoke is this that it (an indicator) reveals the
object to be indicated by it to a person only when he knows the
relation obtaining between them (the indicator and the indicat-
ed). The competence of this relation and such other factors are
included in the conditions of perception. They are not neces-
sary factors of verbal knowledge. The power of communication
belonging to a word is as natural as is the power of revealing
which belongs to a lamp. A word conveys its meaning by
means of this power. It does not communicate its meaning by
means of its conventional relation.
The Mimāṁsakas contend that a convention is nothing but
the determination of a particular relation holding between a
word and an object meant by it. In other words, a convention
implies that this word denotes this object but nothing else. Thus
a convention is only a piece of knowledge. A piece of knowledge
belongs to the soul. It does neither belong to word nor to an
object denoted by the word. Hence, it cannot constitute a rela-
tion obtaining between a word and its meaning. The Naiyāyikas
hold that the said convention has been set up by God. Does
God bestow such authority upon the senior persons or upon the
traditional meaning of the adjacent word? Now, a question
arises in our mind with regard to the hypothesis of this natural
relation. The relation which obtains between light, the illumi-
nator, and the object, illuminated by it, is natural. No body is
conscious of this relation when he sees an object illuminated by
light.
If this is the case, what is the necessity of knowing the rela-
tion of denotation through the usage of the experienced persons?Relation between a Word and its Meaning
In other words, whenever a word is heard why does it not
directly convey its meaning? Such an objection does not affect
the above hypothesis. A word is merely an indicator. The nature
of an indicator like smoke is this that it (an indicator) reveals
the object to be indicated by it to a person, only when he knows
the relation obtaining between them (the indicator and the
indicated). The competence of this relation and such other
factors are included in the conditions of perception. They are
not necessary factors of verbal knowledge. The power of com-
munication belonging to a word is as natural as is the power of
revealing which belongs to a lamp. A word conveys its meaning
by means of this power. It does not communicate its meaning
by means of its conventional relation.
503
The Mimämsakas contend that a convention is nothing but the
determination of a particular relation holding between a word
and an object meant by it. In other words, a convention implies
that the word denotes this object but nothing else. Thus a con-
vention is only a piece of knowledge. A piece of knowledge be-
longs to the soul. It does neither belong to a word nor to an
object denoted by the word. Hence, it cannot constitute a rela-
tion obtaining between a word and its meaning. The Naiyāyikas
hold that the said convention has been set up by God. Does God
repeatedly make it at the dawn of creation for each person
wherever each person utters it? Or, does He frame it once for
all persons in the beginning of this world? Even if it is admitt-
ed that the said convention is repeatedly created for each per-
son then does the convention which is repeatedly set up become
a new one or remain the old one at all instances of utterance?
If it is held that a new convention is set up each time then how
do we know that a convention helps to communicate the
meaning of a word? If the power of communication is transcen-
dental then what is the good of setting up a new convention?
That which has been done before is being done again. It is not
reasonable to repeat again what has been done.
An object may be made known again and again but it cannot
be created more than once. A word may be uttered by the diffe-
rent persons. Is the relation obtaining between a word and its
meaning in each case made different or identical? If the rela-
tion is made 'distinct in each case, how does a word communi-1
7
504
Nyāyamanjari
cate the same meaning? How does the word 'cow' signify an
animal having dewlap? How does the word 'horse' mean an
animal having manes? If the relation is held to be one and the
same then the relation which has been created cannot be re-
created. The relation is brought to light but not created. The
Naiyāyikas may hold that the relation between a word and its
meaning has been once created by God in the beginning of the
creation of the world.
Such a contention is not sound. It is highly improbable to
imagine such a period of time since it is illogical to cherish a be-
lief in the existence of an age when there is no verbal transac-
tion. Thus we arrive at the conclusion that the relation holding
between a word and its meaning is eternal and is learnt from
the people. But the said relation cannot be created. The defect
which undermines the hypothesis that the relation is created
does not affect the hypothesis that the eternal relation is learnt
since the second one is based upon sound reasoning. It is with-
in the range of our experience that the inexperienced boys
learn from the use of the experienced old persons that this word
signifies this object and so on. These experienced old persons
were also young. They learnt the meanings of words from the
other old persons. These old persons learnt it from the other old
persons at their young age and so on ad infinitum. Thus there is
no beginning of this world.
Moreover, if the hypothesis that a word is eternally related to
its meaning is denied then how may it be distinguished from
winking or signalling by hand, since it depends only upon con-
vention and lacks intrinsic power of expression? In that case, a
word will be as good as the lashings of a whip or piercing with a
hook or beating with a sharp instrument. The popular view is
that a meaning follows from a convention. If we subscribe
to the hypothesis that a convention determines the meaning of
a word then all words would be reduced to the state of arbitrary
ones, coined by us just like the word 'Yadṛcchã'. If we go so far
as to accept this hypothesis then the words like cow, horse,
etc., will have no definite meaning.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas anticipate the possible objections to
be raised by the Naiyãyikas and meet them thus. The relation
between a word and its meaning is established only by conven-505
Relation between a Word and its Meaning not eternal
tion because a word does not uniformly signify the same mean-
ing in all countries. In the Sanskrit text the word 'jati' has
been used. It purports to convey a country. In a particular
country a word conveys a definite meaning. In some other coun-
tries that very word does not convey the above meaning. But
it signifies something else. Let us take an example. The word
'caura' signifies a thief. It has been employed by the people of
the southern countries to denote rice. Such different meanings
of the same word speak in favour of the hypothesis that the
relation obtaining between a word and its meaning is set up by
our convention. If the said relation were eternal then such a
change in the meaning of a word would have not been possible.
The above objection is not tenable. Each word has power of
expressing all possible meanings, i.e. is competent to denote
all objects. In a particular country a particular word is employ-
ed to denote a particular object. When we bear a word the
relation of which to an object is not known we cannot make
out its meaning since a doubt about its denotation arises in our
mind. We are at a loss to determine the exact meaning which
it purports to convey. Again if we hold that a word has no
power of expressing its meaning then, on hearing a word, no
doubt as to its meaning should arise in our mind since a con-
ventional relation has not been established between it and its
meaning. The meaning of a word which has been accepted by
the Aryans should be accepted by us but the meaning of a word
which has been accepted by the non-Aryans should be disregard-
ed by us. Therefore, the relation subsisting between a word and
its meaning has not been created by human beings. It is eternal.
The hypothesis that a relation between a word and its meaning
is established by convention is not based upon strong reasons.
Hence, a human being has no hand in fashioning this relation.
The refutation of the hypothesis that the relation between a Word and its
Meaning is eternal
The refutation of the above hypothesis is as follows. It is
unreasonable to hold that the relation between a word and its
meaning is eternal. A word and its meaning are within the
reach of valid source of knowledge such as perception, etc., but506
Nyayamanjarî
their relation as a distinct entity is not cognized in a similar
manner by any proof.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend that the very power of
expressing a meaning has been stated as constituting the relation
between a word and its meaning. This being the nature of this
power it has only a dependant existence. Having such existence
how can it be cognized like an independant whole? Such a
contention does not hold good since the existence of a subtle
power apart from a cause and its auxiliary conditions has been
refuted. This power is not perceptible since it is not cognized
like a substance. It is not also an inference. It is a truism that
a cause is inferred from an effect. But if one tries to infer the
above power from an effect then it may be pointed out that the
said effect may be brought about by a cause other than the
power in question. On the contrary, though one assumes the
hypothesis of power yet the hypothesis of the said relation
remains unavoidable. If the relation between a word and its
meaning had not existed then the meaning of a word would
not have been ascertained. If the said relation is established
then the meaning of a word is determined only by means of
it. Thus the assumption of an eternal relation becomes redun-
dant. Now the Mimāṁsakas raise an objection against the hypo-
thesis of conventional relation. They say, "As convention is a
creation of human will and the force of will is irresistible so the
converse of the relation should have held between a word and
its meaning." Such an objection is not reasonable. If the hypo-
thesis that a word has the power of expressing a meaning is
denied then can a word be competent to denote a meaning?
Now, the Mimāṁsakas raise another question, viz., "If the
power of expressing a meaning is denied to a word then how is
a word competent to signify a meaning?" An answer to it is as
follows. The word 'ga' which contains the universals such as
gatva, autva, etc., in proper succession is entitled to be deno-
tative. But the object which is meant by it is expressible. Let
us make our point clear by means of an illustration.
A Viraņa (a kind of grass) is a substance. There are also
substances which do not belong to the class of Viraņa. Of all
substances Viraņas alone produce a mat because the universal
of viraṇatva inheres in them. The other substances cannotRelation between a Word and its Meaning not eternal
produce it. It has been stated that the power of producing an
effect does not belong to it. The Samkhyists hold that an effect
in its potential form belongs to its cause. Thus an effect has
pre-natal existence. But you do not subscribe to this view.
Though the Naiyāyikas do not subscribe to the hypothesis of
Sakti (the power of producing an effect) yet the inherence of
a particular universal being the determinant of naming the
relation of denotation will never change its direction. In other
words, the object which is named will never play the part of a
name. Therefore, the relation which holds between a word and
the object denoted by it is other than the power of expression.
The said relation is not that of universal concomitance holding
between smoke and fire. Whenever the relation of universal
concomitance holding between smoke and fire is cognized we
also know that smoke does not exist at a spot where fire is
absent. But whenever the relation of denotation holding between
a word and its meaning is apprehended we also come to know
that this object is known from this word. This is the final lesson
on the relation of denotation which we learn from experience.
We have already stated that verbal knowledge is different
from the inferential one because the former one pre-supposes
the knowledge of the relation of denotation. There would be
no doubt about the truth of the hypothesis that a word reveals
an object by its power innate in it, if the word is not uttered
either by a mistake or negligence it reveals the intended object
just as a lamp illuminates an object.
The Mîmāmsakas hold that though the power of revealing an
object is innate in a word yet the word reveals its meaning only
when the relation between them like that between smoke and
fire is known. The Naiyãyikas remark that as these two case
are not parallel the illustration is not exact. Smoke has no
inherent power of revealing fire though it is by nature an inva-
riable concomitant of fire. Thus if such relation obtaining
between smoke and fire is not known the knowledge of fire
does not follow from the perception of smoke. But the Mîmām-
sakas assume that a word has an inborn power of revealing its
meaning. If this power is natural then why should verbal
knowledge depend upon the relation of denotation holding
507508
Nyayamanjari
between a word and its meaning. The Mīmāṁsakas say "We
know a word to be a revealer only when we understand that a
word produces knowledge. But we fail to make out this charac-
ter of a word only on hearing it". The Naiyayikas give a reply
to this contention. As many times as we hear a word and know
that this is a name and this is the object named so many times
we make out the meaning of a word heard by us. Thus the
efficacy of the relation of denotation has been stated by it.
Without the efficacy of the relation of denotation a word can-
not convey its meaning. The power of expressing a meaning is
not inherent in a word.
The Mimāṁsakas have taken an exception to the hypothesis
of the Naiyāyikas on the ground that a conventional relation
partaking of the nature of consciousness, belongs to the soul
but does neither belong to a word nor to an object meant by it.
Such a criticism is not sound. Though consciousness does not
find a locus in them (a word and its meaning) yet they may be
related to it as an object.
The Mīmāmsakas have criticised the hypothesis of the Naiya-
yikas thus: If a word communicates its meaning only by
means of its conventional relation then a word will be better in
no way than the piercing of a hook or the lashings of a whip.
It that case, a word is redundant. Such a criticism is only super-
ficial. If the power of conveying a power in itself conveys a
meaning, why does not the word do? If the power of conveying
a meaning were inherent in a word then we should have held
that the power itself conveys a meaning but not the word. If
the Mimamsakas argue that the power is merely a condition of
conveying a meaning whereas a word is the cause of such con-
veying then the Naiyãyikas will also simply meet the objection
with the remark that the same logic applies to the hypothesis
of the Naiyãyikas. In other words, a word is the cause of com-
municating its meaning but the conventional relation is merely
the condition of such communication.
As smoke depends upon the knowledge of universal concomi-
tance in order to indicate fire so a word depends upon the
knowledge of the relation of denotation in order to communi-
cate its meaning. In spite of this dependence none of them
(smoke and a word) ceases to be a cause.Relation between a Word and its Meaning not eternal
Moreover, popular usage bears an evidence to the truth of
the hypothesis of conventional relation e.g. Devadatta has said
'Learn this meaning from this word'. An ordinary person talks
like this. Therefore, the hypothesis of conventional relation
should be accepted. It is the conventional relation which alone
explains why a particular word conveys a different meaning in
another country.
509
The Mimāṁsakas hold that each word is capable of conveying
all sorts of meanings. In different countries some words are
restricted to particular meanings by usage. Such a hypothesis
does not convince one that a word communicates its meaning
since the dilemma whether or not a word is identical with its
meaning cannot be solved. We cannot hold that the said power
is different from a word because the former is never cognized
as different from the latter. If we admit that the said power is
identical with a word then all the different powers belonging to
a word should also be identical. Now, the Mimāṁsakas may
contend that the different powers are inferred from the different
effects. Such a contention is not tenable. How can one account
for the diversity of effects as due to the difference in powers?
The variety of effects may also be otherwise explained. The
different conditions may explain the diverse effects. If it is held
that all words are capable of conveying all meanings than a
word should communicate different meanings. The Mimamsakas
may contend that though each word admits of different meanings
yet a word is restricted to a particular meaning by means of
conventional relation. That is why a word does not simultane-
ously convey all meanings. If this is the contention of the
Mimāṁsakas then the hypothesis of power inherent in a word
should yield place to that of conventional relation. There is no
need of assuming so many powers.
The Mimämisakas hold that when a word is heard the listener
is at a loss to ascertain the exact meaning since many meanings
flash in his mind. Such a doubtful state of mind leads one to
assume that a word has various powers. Such a view is not
sound since many powers inhering in a word cannot explain
the above doubt. The above doubt arises in one's mind because
universals belonging to letters, the constituents of a word, play
an important part. Let this view be discussed. A word is consti-}
510
Nyayamanjari
tuted by many letters each of which has a particular universal.
It signifies a meaning. But if none of its constituents conveys a
meaning then how can a word, an aggregate of letters having
no meaning, convey a meaning? This question, remaining
unsolved in our mind, raises the above doubt.
The Mimāṁsakas have also said that the meaning of a word
is that which is conveyed by it used by the Aryans but the
meaning of a word which has been accepted by the non-Aryans
is not a real one. They will simply take an oath to prove their
thesis. In other words, the thesis is not based upon sound logic.
It is not a fact that a word which has a peculiar meaning in the
non-Aryan country communicated no meaning. It is not a
truism that the meaning of a word which has been accepted by
the non-Aryans is contradicted. It is also not true that the
meaning of a word, accepted by them, produces doubt in the
mind of the people.
Why will the meaning be not a real one? The Mimāṁsakas
may argue that the meaning of a word current in the Aryan
country contradicts its meaning, current in the non-Aryan
country. Then we ask them "Why does not the latter contra-
dict the former ?" In order to solve the above difficulty we
shall rather hold that some words like the word "akşa" admit
of alternative meanings. The scope of the concurrent alter-
native meanings will be cut down by the delimitation of areas.
In one province one of the alternative meanings will be fixed
up. Another meaning will hold good in another province and
so on. In other words, the scope of each of the alternative
meanings will be well defined and fixed up. The Mimāṁsakas
themselves have learnt the meanings of the words 'pika',
'tamarasa', etc., from the non-Aryans. In the section of Aveşti,
i. c., Rajasuya they have explained the word 'rajya' following
the footsteps of the non-Aryans. We shall refrain from discus-
sing minor details. Let us turn our attention to the point at
issue. The relation of denotation i.e., the relation holding
between a word and its meaning, is constituted by convention.
It is reasonable to subscribe to this view. We should also bear
in mind that a word denoting a universal has no fixed meaning.
The word 'cow-ness' does not invariably signify the universal
belonging to all cows. It may mean something else.Relation between a Word and its Meaning not eternal
The Mimamsakas take an exception to our hypothesis on the
ground that whenever a person utters a word he establishes
each time a new convention. But they have missed our point.
They have criticized such a hypothesis as has not been accept-
ed by us. We hold that God has created a convention once
for all in the beginning of creation. The meaning of all words
has not been arbitrarily determined like the word 'yadṛcchâ'.
The meanings of some words have been fixed up by us accor-
ding to our sweet will. These words bear a close resemblance
to the word 'yadṛcchã'. We have proved that the creation of
this universe has a beginning. We have also put forward irrefu-
table syllogistic proof in support of the thesis that God exists.
We two (the Naiyāyikas and the Mimáṁsakas) differ in this
that on the one hand you (the Mîmāṁsakas) hold that the
relation of denotation is eternal but on the other hand we (the
Naiyãyikas) hold that the said relation as fixed by God is the
same till now. But you hold that not only the relation of
denotation is ascertained but also the power of expression
inherent in a word. We hold that the relation of denotation
is exclusively grasped. As a meaning is conveyed by this word,
this is a denotative word but no information about the innate
power of a word has been received. We shall also cite that their
relation is specifically mentioned. This much may be admitted
that as a meaning is conveyed by a word, this is a denotative
word. When a person learns the use of words from the usage
of persons adept in the use of words he knows only this that
this word conveys this meaning. But he knows nothing about
the innate power of a word.
511
With this much knowledge about a word we are in a position
to say that a word communicates its meaning to one. The
knowledge of the relation of denotation, being the invariable
condition of verbal knowledge, we are not justified in assuming
the inherent power of a word. Hence, the relation holding
between a word and its meaning is not eternal. Therefore, the
thesis of the Mimāṁsakas that the denotative relation is esta-
blished by three kinds of proof is not accepted by the Naiya-
yikas.
It is a truism that the meaning of a word is learnt from
the behaviour of an experienced person who commands and512
Nyayamanjari
that of another such person who carries out the same from the
knowledge of the object denoted by it when it is brought and per-
ceived. It is also true that a listener rightly infers from the move-
ment of the experienced person who has been employed that he
has obeyed the command of his employer. But it is not true that
the power of expression which rests upon a word and its
meaning is a presumption. We have already stated that the
knowledge of the power of expression is not necessary for the
communication of the meaning of a word. Therefore, the
determination of the relation of denotation is due to two kinds
of proof but not three. Therefore, as a word has no innate
power of expression and lacks eternal relation to its meaning
so the verbal usage has been introduced by God who has
established a relation between a word and its meaning by
His sweet will. The use of words is not beginningless. It owes
its existence to God.
Now the Mimamsakas raise an interesting problem. If God
sets up the relation between a word and its meaning and commu-
nicates it to men then He does it by means of sentences. These
sentences consist of words. These words should also be signi-
ficant. How are they known to be related to meaning? if they
are so related then how is their meaning communicated to
others by means of a different set of words? The meaning of
these words is not known to persons whom God teaches. Hence
if we hold that God has connected words with their meanings
then there will be a regressus ad infinitum to communicate the
meaning of a word by means of a never-ending series of sen-
tences consisting of words of unknown meanings. Thus even if we
admit that God has created the relation of denotation between a
word and its meaning we must hold in order to render its
communication possible that He teaches men by means of such
words as have been known to be significant by the usage of the
experienced predecessors. If a word is known to be significant
by means of usage then what is the good of admitting the
existence of God or of admitting the relation of denotation as
created by God? Thus, the hypothesis that the relation of
denotation is eternal is better. A reply to these objections is as
follows:-513
Vedas as a source of valid knowledge
The good self has learnt to discharge his weapon but does not
know the target to be aimed at. These objections are applicable
to us if we create the said relation. But they do not apply to
God, the omniscient being. God who has created the infinite
universe by His mere will for the fruition of the diverse unre-
quitted actions has superexcellent skill in teaching which lies
beyond the ken of our imagination.
Our imagination fails to conceive of the creation of this Earth
and such other objects by a mere act of will. God does so.
Therefore it is not at all difficult for God to create the relation
of denotation and to communicate it. There may be counter-
arguments which disprove the existence of God. If the existence
of God is once established then the counter-arguments regarding
the relation of denotation have no scope. We have already put
the existence of
prove
forward irrefutable arguments which
God. As we do not create the relation of denotation so we
should not be taken to task.
Men like us, i. e., imperfect beings having limited knowledge,
initiate little boys into words, their meanings and their mutual
relation by pointing their finger-ends to the yonder objects.
Hence, the verbal transactions of the old persons constitute
the means of throwing light upon the relation of denotation
introduced by God. Thus when one learns the relation of denota-
tion noticing the transaction of the experienced persons he
understands the meaning of words, i. e., these words communi-
cate these ideas. Though the relation between a word and an
object denoted by it is not eternal yet the former does not
remain unrelated to the latter. On the strength of the relation
of denotation set up by God the uncontradicted knowledge of
the meaning of a word follows from a word. We have already
discussed this point. There is no need of dilating upon it.
Therefore, as it is reasonable to hold that God has created
the relation of denotation which subsists between a word and
its meaning and between a sentence and its meaning so the
hypothesis that God is the author of the Vedas is sound.
The Vedas are a source of valid knowledge because they have been
composed by God
The Mīmāṁsakas take an exception to the above hypothesis.514
Nyayamañjari
They object to it with the following remark. The Vedas are a
source of valid knowledge because they have been uttered by a
trustworthy person but not because they are eternal. If the
Naiyāyikas argue that the Vedas are a source of valid knowledge
because they have been uttered by a trustworthy person then
how do they know that the reason belongs to the subject of
inference, i.e., the minor premise is materially valid? When
one infers that the hill is fiery because it is smoky he perceives
smoke to be present in the hill. Similarly, we cannot perceive
the character of being uttered by a trustworthy person to be
present in the Vedas. As the Vedas consist only of words so
they can be only perceived with our ears. The proportions of
letters having 'probateness' etc., are sensed with ears. They
are perceived as proportion of a letter. But the character of
being uttered by a trustworthy person is never perceived as
the property of a letter. We cannot also establish by means of
an inference that the said property belongs to the Vedas since
there is no mark which points to the conclusion. The Vedas
are held to be a source of valid knowledge because they have
been uttered by a trustworthy person. But one fails to prove
that the Vedas have been uttered by a trustworthy person since
no reason is available. Such being the state of our knowledge
how can we say that the Vedas have been uttered by a trust-
worthy person. This is the sum and substance of the objections,
raised by the Mimāṁsakas against the Nyaya-hypothesis. A
reply to the above objection is as follows. There is no need
of twisting sentences. We have already shown the way by
means of which it has been proved that the said reason belongs
to the subject of inference.
It has been elaborately proved that a sound is not eternal
and that every arrangement of letters presupposes an author
since it partakes of the nature of an arrangement of letters.
It has also been proved that there is an omniscient creator
of all effects. We should assume such a cause as satisfactorily
explains an effect. We shall also show that the Vedas contain
no such theme as is contradicted by perception. The defects
pointed out by the critics such as mutual contradiction, tauto-
logy, etc, will be answered.
The efficacy of injunctions, praises, condemnations, VedicVedas as a source of valid knowledge
mythology and incantations will be shown. No iota of the con-
tents of the Vedas is superfluous.
All such assumptions, viz., the Vedas are the evolute of Sabda
Brahman, etc., as oppose the hypothesis that the Vedas have
been composed will be refuted.
If all matters which we intend to prove are proved to the hilt
then what else remains to determine that the Vedas have been
composed by a trustworthy person (an omniscient being). If
all the contents of the Vedas are proved to be true then it may
be boldly asserted that the Vedas have been composed by a
trustworthy person.
515
The Mimamsakas raise a dilemma whether or not the above
hypothesis is established by perception or by an inference. The
Naíyāyikas meet it with the remark that the above hypothesis
is established by perception. All the syllogistic arguments, viz.,
"All arrangements of letters are composition" "The Vedas are
arrangements of letters. Therefore the Vedas are composi-
tion" and the negative criticisms which refute the hypothesis of
the rival schools discharge the function of an accessory condi-
tion. They have contribution towards the framing of the pre-
mise that the Vedas have been uttered by a trustworthy person.
The major premise that all true sentences are uttered by a trust-
worthy person is based upon sound observation. We can cite the
sentences of the Ayur-Veda (the science of life) as a positive
instance. Observing the works we arrive at the generalisation,
viz., "What is stated by a trustworthy person is true". The
efficacy of some medicinal herbs and roots, viz., pippali, patola,
mula, etc., has been narrated in the Ayur-Veda. When they are
used by a diseased person the desired result follows from them.
The drinking of milk and churned sour milk has been prohibited
in order to ameliorate the diseased condition of the person by
the science of life. The truth of such statements is directly ob-
served by us. We know that there is perfect accordance of these
statements with facts. But these statements are true because they
have been uttered by a trustworthy person. The truth of the
generalization "What is stated by a trust-worthy person is true"
is directly grasped by us. Similarly, the truth of mantras is
cognized by us. In cases of scorpion-bites or snake-bites or the
taking of poison some mantras (magic formulas) are recited to516
Nyayamanjari
heal the persons. The persons affected get themselves immune
from poison. When a person is seized by an attack of epilepsy
-a dreadful demon, he is cured of this disease by an applica-
tion of magic formulas. When evil clouds which hurl thunder-
bolts at random hover above the cornfields, the danger of crops
is averted by the recital of mantras. The efficacy of mantras has
been repeatedly observed by us. The trust-worthy persons are
the preceptors of these persons who are expert in driving away
the evil spirits, thunder-bolts, etc. Thus, the truth of the above
generalization is also verified in these cases.
Now, a question arises in our mind, viz., the Ayur-Veda is
true because it accords with facts which are perceived by us,
How do we say that the Ayur-Veda is true because it has been
uttered by a trustworthy person ? The truth of the above
generalization is not convincing. The said criticism is not
sound. We may perceive the accordance of the said science
with facts and determine its validity thereby. But we do not
explain how it acquires its validity. The genesis of its validity
is to be traced to the utterance of a trust-worthy person. The
efficacy of this science is tested by perception. Thus it is directly
known to be true. But if the metaphysical aspect of its truth is
discussed then we hold that it has become true because it owes
its existence to such a cause as has excellent property. We
have already discussed this aspect of the problem. We have
noticed that the statements of deceitful person. viz., 'there are
such and such objects on the banks of a river, etc., do not accord
with facts. Hence, we strongly re-assert our hypothesis that a
statement is true because it has been uttered by a trust-worthy
person. The source must be perfect otherwise the effect of an
impure cause cannot produce true knowledge. Perception may
help to ascertain the truth ofa statement but does not impart
truth to it. Therefore it is sound on our part to hold that what
is uttered by a trust-worthy person, is true. The above genera-
lization has been verified in the Ayurveda and other cases. The
relation of universal concomitance which subsists between the
utterance of a trust-worthy person and truth is grasped by us.
The method in question is not sound since it is beyond our
powers to know that the said works have been composed by a
trustworthy person. By the application of the joint method ofVedas as a source of valid knowledge
agreement and difference we come to know that the statements
contained in the Ayur Veda are true but we do not know them
to be true because they have been composed by a trust-worthy
person. The statements which are verified by the application of
the joint method of agreement and difference are only known
to be true. Let us take for example the statement about marbyl-
lion, etc. The statement to which the method in question
does not apply is said to be untrue. The statement that one
who uses somarāji lives a thousand years illustrates our point.
If we assume that the Ayur-Veda has been composed by a trust-
worthy person then we should hold that it has been partially
composed by a trust-worthy person and partially composed by
an unreliable person. Such a proposition is not reasonable. But
it is forced on them who hold that the Ayur-Veda has been
composed by a trust-worthy person. Because the truth of the
Ayur-Veda cannot be verified by the application of the joint
method of agreement and difference. Does the person who
frames the above proposition make an experiment on himself in
order to verify the truth of the Ayur-Veda? Or, does he do it
on some-body else? If he makes an experiment on a person
other than himself then does it universally hold good or does it
hold good on a particular person at a particular time and
place ? In any case the path in question is beset with insur-
mountable impediments. It is impossible for a person to know
during the span of his life to know all diseases, their causes, the
conditions of their aggravation, the conditions of their ameliora-
tions, medicines, their various combinations, their proper doses,
their strength, efficacy and assimilation and their varying
strength in relation to the changing place, time and bodily
conditions of a person. The impressions of the experiment made
in the past life are not in this life.
517
The people are innumerable. The diseases are endless. The
action of metals, herbs and other substances, having various
properties, upon the animal bodies cannot be numerically
counted.
A man cannot cross the ocean in the shape of the science of
medicine even if he tries to do it for lacs of yugas.
A particular substance which cures the disease of a person,518
Nyāyamanjari
having a particular constitution, is conducive to his ill-being
when it is chemically combined with other substances.
A substance having medicinal property produces an effect on
a person but does nothing on another person. Let us take a
concrete case. If one takes marbyllon, purging takes place. But
if a person who suffers from constipation owing to the wind-
troubles takes the above medicine, his bowels do not move.
If a person drinks sour milk in autumn then he gets fever
since the secretion of bile at that time is excessive. But if he
drinks it during the rainy season then he is cured of fever since
the conditions of his system are then different.
There is not the slightest sign to know the universal healing
property of a medicinal substance so that if it is known as hold-
ing good in a particular case then it may not be known as
holding good universally.
The person who is capable of knowing the details of every
thing should be omniscient since his powers are infinite. His
existence should not be controverted, raising counter-argu-
ments.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas take an exception to the above hypo-
thesis that God is the author of all works. They hold that the
science of medicine has not been composed but is only remem-
bered like the science of grammar and the like. Those who in-
tend either to abridge or to elaborate a pre-existing science are
known as the author of a science such as Caraka and others.
But they are not omniscient persons. The science which has
been handed down to us from time immemorial should not be
taken as imperfect as it has come down to us through the igno-
rant persons. The science is perfect because it has a sound basis
to stand upon. As the science of grammar is based upon the
usage of a connoisseur so the truth of the medical science hing-
es upon the joint method of agreement and difference. The
grammar of Pāṇini and others based upon the pre-existing
uses, is incorrect if it finds fault with the uses of the expert. It
is wrong because it undermines its own basis. Similarly, some
critics hold that a statement of the medical science is not to be
taken as true if its truth is not verified by the joint method of
agreement and difference. If the conclusion of the medicalVedas as a source of valid knowledge
519
science is contradicted by the joint method of agreement and
difference then it is wrong.
The above criticism does not hold good. The joint method
of agreement and difference cannot constitute the basis upon
which the existence of the medical science rests since it has
been discussed that the truth of every topic cannot be deter-
mined by the experimental method, having limited scope. If
you hold that Caraka has composed his medical treatise, hav-
ing ascertained all the properties of all substances record-
ed in it by the joint method of agreement and difference
then we strongly assert that such glorification of the joint
method of agreement and difference has been discredited.
We have made a number of experiments only on a por-
tion of the medical science till today, applying the joint
method of agreement and difference. On noticing the result of
these experiments we are able to ascertain the truth of that
portion of the said science since there is perfect consilience
between a claim and its fulfilment. We assume the truth of the
entire science since the truth of its portion has been established
by the experimental method. Thus as we have a belief in its
truth so we act upon its advice. Hence, the joint method of
agreement and difference does not constitute the basis of the
medical science. If a science is nothing but a record of experi-
ments then all of us would have written works on science. The
hypothesis that all sciences are without a beginning like the
Vedas is not sound. We all rightly remember that Caraka is the
author of a medical treatise as we do recollect that Kālidāsa is
an author. Our memory of the authorship of Caraka is never
challenged. One cannot also hold that the medical science has
no origin since it is transmitted through memory only. If this
hypothesis is true then why does the question that it passes
through a band of ignorant people arise at all? The basis of the
medical science suggested by you, cannot be accepted since
your hypothesis has been refuted. Therefore, an omniscient
person is the author of Ayur-Veda.
The advice of an ignorant person is of no use. So we should
assume the Carala and others are well acquainted with the
contents of their work. Is there any proof which points to the
hypothesis that they have directly known all these objects? A520
Nyayamanjari
reply to this question is as follows. As the joint method of agree-
ment and difference has its limitations so all matters discussed
by Caraka are beyond the reach of inferential knowledge. We
shall show later on that it is not reasonable to conjecture that
all contents of his work have been borrowed from the Vedas
like the law-book of Manu because all the so-colled basic works
have not been composed by a single author. If somebody else
is held to be a pioneer in this matter then why is Caraka open
to blame? We cannot think of the service of an analogical
argument to solve this problem. Presumption is not a distinct
source of knowledge. The truth of the medical science cannot
be challenged because the truth of many medicines prescribed
by it has been repeatedly corroborated by the method of resi-
dues since Caraka and others directly knowing space, time, per-
sons and the different conditions of their body, have ascertained
the efficacy of all medicinal substances in their relational
character. If this is so then why are the prescriptions containing
Somarāji etc. falsified? If such prescriptions do not prove their
efficacy then it has been stated that the medical science is partially
true. The above defect does not invalidate the medical science.
A prescription does not prove its worth if a medicine is not
properly administered or a person taking it is not particular
about direction of its constituents may be defective. The
Mimāṁsakas speak highly to the Vedic rites. The injunctions
enjoining these rites are also open to the same defects.
Suppose, you perform the Vedic rite Kārīrî but rain does
not fall. Now what is your opinion of the judgment about the
injunction enjoining the Kariri sacrifice? Is it partially true?
Now, you may argue that the injunction is true but the failure
of rain is due to some defects in the performer, etc. A similar
argument can also be advanced in favour of the truth of the
medical science.
A secular action which does not yield a result is defective.
But a rite enjoined by the Sastras, though unfruitful, is not so.
This is the note of the Mimâmsakas. But the conditions which
baffle the fruition of an action are held to be the same.
Good results are sometimes observed on the application of
some medicines. The persons who use them become very strong
and long-lived. Therefore, the science of medicine has beenVedas as a source of ralid knowledge
composed by a trustworthy person. It has no other sources.
Thus the Vedas which are productive of similar results have
been surely composed by the trustworthy persons.
521
Hence the generalisation "What has been stated by a reli-
able person is true" has been applied to the Ayur-Veda and
found to be true. In order to vindicate the truth of the above
generalisation the author of the Nyaya-Sutra states that the
statement of a trustworthy person admits of two kinds because
it points to perceptible and transcendental objects. When a
trustworthy person makes a statement about a perceptible
object his statement is verified. We discover that the relation
of invariable concomitance holds between the statement of a
trustworthy person and truth. By means of induction we arrive
at the conclusion that the statement of a trustworthy person
about transcendental objects is also true. Therefore, the works
containing the mantras, etc., owe their truth to a trustworthy
person, their author.
The Mimamsakas take an exception to this view. They
argue that no omniscient sage is ever found out to be the
author of the medical science. If it is seen that the contents of
a medical treatise are rue because its author is omniscient then
the illustrations such as the Ayur-Veda, etc., have been vainly
mentioned. But it is a truism that the medical treatise of
Caraka and others are held to be based upon works having in-
trinsic truth. Nobody believes that such works are true because
they have been composed by the omniscient persons. How is it
that such medical treatises have been cited as instances which
corroborate the extrinsic truth of the Vedas ?
The Naiyãyikas meet the above objection, raised by the
Mīmāmsaks. They say that the generalization "the statement
of a trustworthy person is true" has been distinctly verified
and found to be universally true when it has been applied to
the statements of the Ayur-Veda, etc. The Material validity of
the major premise has been clearly stated in the earlier portion
of this section. Similarly, the material truth of the minor pre-
mise has also been proved. The syllogistic argument is con-
tradicted neither by perception nor by verbal testimony. It is
not also set at naught by another syllogistic argument. The
middle term fulfils all the five conditions which are required522
Nyāyamanjari
for drawing a true conclusion. Therefore, it correctly draws
the conclusion.
If the Vedas are held to enjoy intrinsic truth then we cannot
cite a parallel case in support of this view. We are not aware
of a single case which we assert as true unless we believe that
the person who has made the statement is reliable.
As there is unshaky confidence in the truthfulness of the
author of the Vedas so the Vedas have right, backed by reason,
to induce persons to perform Vedic rites and difficult sacrifices
which involve a heavy expenditure of money etc. If the Vedas
are simply free from contradiction, they cannot induce persons
to such actions. No need of further discussions. The hypothesis,
suggested by the Mimāṁsakas is not acceptable. Therefore the
Vedas are the source of valid knowledge because they have
been uttered by a trustworthy person.
The method of Ascertaining the truth of the Vedas as suggested by the
Mimāṁsakas
Some other philosophers prove the veracity of the Vedas in
a different manner. Two sets of thinkers, belonging to the two
different schools of thought, contest the authority of the Vedas.
One of them believes in the existence of the next world. The
other set does not believe in the existence of such world. We
should prove the immortality of the soul, etc., by means of
syllogistic arguments, meet the arguments of the said non-
believers and establish the existence of the next world. Those
who believe in the existence of the next world hold that the
diversities, noticed in this world, viz., some are happy, some
are unhappy and so on, are exclusively due to differences in
their actions in the past. Actions do not come into being if they
are not performed. If they do not come into being, they are as
unreal as the sky-flowers are. How will they bring obout results,
viz., happiness, misery, etc.? Therefore one cannot but subs-
cribe to the hypothesis that good or bad actions have been
performed. If one does not know the nature of an action, he
cannot perform it. Which act will a poor fellow undertake as
he knows nothing about it? As actions can be done only when
their nature is completely known. What is the source of its know-Mināṁsakas' argument for establishing the truth of the Veda
523
ledge? Sense-perception is not capable of throwing light on
such actions as lead to transcendental ends such as Heaven etc.
An action is not also an inference. By the joint method of
agreement and difference the causal relation subsisting between
the act of eating and the feeling of satisfaction is established.
But by the same method we fail to establish the causal relation
holding between a sacrifice and heavenly bliss. As we cannot
otherwise explain the diversities of this world so we infer the
existence of different conditions in order to explain them. The
knowledge of the diverse conditions being vague one cannot be
guided by this light to perform an act. It has been stated to
this effect.
We should definitely know that virtue or vice brings about
the particular result. If our knowledge is indefinite, does it help
us in any way? The services of an analogical argument may be
thought of in this context. But it is of no use. Though the
common people advise one another regarding actions to be
performed yet it is un-reasonable to hold that they should
know actions which lead the performer up to heaven. Those
who advise people without knowing the nature of actions are
not trustworthy. The persons who are ignorant of the scriptures
cannot properly know actions because there is no sufficient
reason in support of their knowledge. If we suppose that the
knowledge of actions is handed down by the preceding generation
to the succeeding one then it will only amount to this that a
batch of blind men is led by another batch of such men. There-
fore when the believers in the existence of the next world will
perform actions which are fruitful in the next world they should
at first learn from the scriptures the efficacy of each action.
The scriptures in question are the Vedas. Thus every body
accepts the veracity of the Vedas. In other words, the Vedas
have intrinsic truth.
Now, an objection may be raised against the above solution.
A person will be initiated into the mystery of action conducive
to either virtue or to vice by means of popular ideas. No know-
ledge of the Sastras is required. The popular definition of
virtue or of vice is this: what does good to us is virtue and
what does disservice to us is vice. In other words, what is good
is virtue and what is evil is vice. Vyása has also said to this524
Nyayamanjari
effect. Nobody including even the untouchable Candalas
depends much upon the Sastras in order to know virtue or vice.
The above view does not hold good since the popular view
which is not based upon a sound basis is not true. The popular
view is nothing but an uninterrupted series of remembrances of
the view in question. Memory owes its origin to some form of
true knowledge but does never arise independently. Hence, its
source should be traced out. It is neither based upon percep-
tion nor upon similar sources of true knowledge. Therefore the
popular view must be based upon the Sastric doctrine. As the
popular views of a particular subject are many and incompati-
ble with one another so people do not place their confidence
in a popular view if it has an independent origin. It is not
logical to define that virtue is good and vice is evil since the
above definition does not apply to the muttering of incanta-
tions and to the drinking of wine. (The muttering of incanta-
tions does no palpable good to us. The drinking of wine in
moderate doses does no palpable injury to us). Again, one may
derive pleasure from the sinful act, viz., the illicit connection
with the wife of a preceptor, etc. Hence, the definitions in
question do not apply to all cases. Hence, the Sastras should
be taken as the only source of virtue and vice.
Can we know the following details from a popular view?
Such and such sacrifices produce these results. The recitation
of such and such mantras yields such and such results. This
person is entitled to this act. These are the subsidiary rites
which are to be performed in order to render the principal rite
complete. This is the proper place where a rite is to be perfor-
med. These are the priests who are competent to perform an
act. Therefore we should gather all the necessary information
about a distinct act from the Sastras. The Sastras in question
are nothing but the Vedas. We have already expressed this
view. Therefore, the validity of the Vedas stands above all
disputes. This is what we have got to say.
If the above thesis is presented in this manner, the view
that the world has no beginning is forced on us. As our know-
ledge of the Vedic rites does not commence from a particular
date so the Vedas should also be accepted as eternal. If we
subscribe to the above thesis then the standpoint appeals to ourMimāṁsakas' arguments for establishing the truth of the Veda
reasoning, viz., the Vedas are intrinsically true because they
are eternal. In that case, we cannot hold that they are true
because they have been composed by a trustworthy person.
Therefore the path adopted by us in order to prove the validity
of the Vedas, is the sure way to the establishment of their
validity.
525
We do not subscribe to the hypothesis that the world has no
beginning. There is divergence of opinions regarding the hypo-
thesis according to which there will be simultaneous destruction
of the whole universe. All compositions partake of the character
of an effect. Therefore, God has composed the Vedas in the
beginning of this world.
The world owes its existence to God. But the creation and
the destruction of the world go on in a cyclic order for ever.
The world process does not start on a particular date. Men
may be enlightened on the rituals from the different Vedas in
the different cycles of creation.
Now, the Mimamsakas may put a question to the Naiyāyikas
viz., "Is there any proof which establishes the hypothesis that
the Vedas are different in the different cycles of creation"?
The Naiyāyikas give an answer in this effect: "Oh intelligent
thinkers; is there any proof regarding the oneness of the Vedas
in every cycle of creation ?" When the whole world is destroyed
at the end of creation the Vedas necessarily meet their destruc-
tion. God alone survives. He may either compose the new Vedas
or may recollect the old ones. We may subscribe to any one of
these two hypotheses. But it is a truism that God who has half-
moon on his forehead enjoys absolute independence in this
matter. The Vedas with the dawn of creation are presented to
the consciousness of God who is without a second. They cannot
be different from those that were composed. God has no
memory as He always intuits all objects. The hypothesis that
the Vedas have been composed is immune from all defects.
In fine, the sage Akṣapāda has written an elaborate treatise on
logic in order to convince the people that the Vedas impart
true knowledge because the Vedas have been composed by a
trust-worthy person. He has also pulled up ignorance, the
source of all sophistry, by the roots.526
An objection to the validity of the Atharva-Veda
Some critics raise an objection in this manner the Rg Veda,
the Yajur Vedas and the Sāma Veda teach us interrelated sub-
ject-matters. Hence we infer that these three Vedas have been
composed by the same author. They are the source of valid
knowledge as it is an inference that they owe their existence to
one and the same author. But the Atharva Veda is entirely
different from the above three Vedas since it has no concern
with the religious rites mentioned in them. For this very reason
it cannot be a source book of the religious rites. Even if we
accept the hypothesis that the Vedas are the highest authority
and their validity is intrinsic then we arrive at the conclusion
that the Atharva Veda does not enjoy the same validity along
with the other three Vedas since it enjoins some actions which
are not included in the three Vedas. The Rg Veda, the Yajur
Veda and the Sama Veda enjoin the biggest religious acts such
as the Soma-sacrifices Jyotiştoma etc. Instructions regarding
these sacrifices have been given in the different recensions of
the Vedas. The Brahmins who are well-versed in these three
Vedas can only take part in the observance of these rites.
Therefore, the Vedas which enjoin such religious acts are only
valid. The Atharva Veda is not so. The popular view throws
some light on this topic. The science which renders a distinct
service to the people admits of four-fold division, viz., the
science of logic, the three Vedas, the body of Vocational
training and Political or Economic science.
Śruti and Smrti bear evidence to the above view. The passa-
ges quoted from the Taittiriya Brāhmaṇa, the Satapatha Brah-
mana and the Nārāyaṇa Upanişad corroborate this view. The
relevant portion in the passages is that they refer only to the
three Vedas. The Samhită of Manu strengthens this view. The
Samhitä says that one should observe the vow of celibacy for
a period of twelve years in order to study the different Vedas.
A Vedic student should reside in the house of his preceptor for
36 years, and read the three Vedas viz., the Rg Veda, the Yajur
Veda and the Sama Veda. He should thus observe the vow of
religious study. Manu has also stated in his section on funeral
ceremony that one who performs funeral ceremony should
earnestly feed Brahmaņas who have made a complete study of
NyayamanjariValidity of Atharva Veda
the Rg Veda, the Yajur Veda and the Sama Veda together
with the corresponding Brāhmaṇas and the different recensions
of the Vedas. Manu makes mention only of those Brahmaṇas
who have made a complete study of the three Vedas as entitled
to the funeral feast. But he does not make mention of the
Brāhmaṇas who have studied the Atharva Veda. Nay, in some
cases, prohibition is noticed. A Brahmin who is well-versed in the
Atharva Veda should not be invited to do this and that act.
527
A reply to the said objections
Some thinkers answer the objections, raised in the previous
sections, in the following manner. Let us suppose that the
Atharva Veda has no efficacy in the Vedic sacrifices. But how
can its efficacy in the other rites be set aside ?
The rites mentioned in the Atharva Veda are performed in
order to counteract the influence of the evil stars or to augment
prosperity or to put one's enemy to an end. In order to observe
these rites the assistance of a priest is required as the services
of Hotr Adhvaryu and Udgätṛ are requisitioned in connection
with the performance of sacrifices prescribed in the three Vedas.
The priest, proficient in the Atharva Veda, is called 'Brahman'.
This Veda is the only authority on the above rites.
The objections raised against the authority of the Atharva
Veda are not sound. The sage Bădarāyaṇa holds that the
Vedas are the independent sources of valid knowledge because
they do not presuppose the other sources of knowledge for their
validity. Jaimini has shown the way to ascertain the validity
of the Vedas, following the foot-steps of Bädarāyaṇa.
Akşapâda and Kanada have established the validity of the
Vedas by means of a different method. The Vedas are true
because they are God's words. Aksapâda holds that the Vedas
are true like Mantra and Ayur Veda because they have been
composed by a trustworthy person. If we follow any one of the
above methods then we see that each of them equally leads to
the validity of the four Vedas. Even if we make a thorough
search, we find the least difference in the Vedas. Can any body
say embracing the standpoint of the Mimāṁsakas that the three
Vedas are eternal but the Atharva Veda is not so because the
author of this Veda is remembered? Can any body hold from528
Nyayamanjari
the standpoint of the Naiyāyikas that the three Vadas have
been composed by a trustworthy person but the Atharva Veda
has not been so composed? Hence as the method of determin-
ing the validity of the Vedas is the same so the four Vedas are
equally true, being treated by the same logic. It is well
known that all manners and customs of discriminating persons
belonging to the four castes and the four different stages of life
on this Earth, encircled by the four seas, are based upon the
four Vedas. Therefore, no body should suspect the validity of
the Atharva Veda. The manners and customs of all people
residing in the land of the Aryans are based upon the Vedas
and upon the laws of Smṛti but not upon the caprice of indivi-
duals. The Vedas and Smṛti declare that the four Vedas stand
on the same level of authority. Many sentences of the Atharva
Veda find a place in the Rg Veda, the Yajur Veda and the Säma
Veda. Let us illustrate the point in question. The Satapatha
Brāhmaṇa makes a reference to the Atharva Veda. It discusses
the topic of horse-sacrifice. When it enlightens the rites to be
observed on the third day of horse-sacrifice it refers to the
mythological stories to be narrated in connection with the per-
formance of the Pariplava sacrifice. In this context a sentence
that it is that Atharva Veda is found. The Chandogya Upani-
şad makes mention of the Rg Veda, the Yajur Veda and the
Sama Veda and also of the Atharva Veda as the fourth one.
Now a question arises in our mind. In the Chandogya
Upanişad, History as well as the Puranas have also been
mentioned as the fifth branch of study. What is your exact
question? Do you suggest that story as well as the Purăņa
should be the fifth Veda? Or do you suggest that the Atharva
Veda should not be the fourth Veda? As the Atharva Veda is
qualified by the adjectice "fourth" so it comes down to the
level of history and the Purāṇa but does not go up to the level
of the Vedas. Why does this suggestion appear in your mind?
If you think that the adjective "fourth" assigns a subordinate
position to the Atharva Veda then as in another place it has
been said that the three Vedas were created so the adjective
'three' being applied to the Vedas, the three Vedas should also
be thrown into the shade.If you argue like this that the counting
of the Atharva Veda along with History and the Purăņa is atValidity of the Atharva Veda
529
the root of its subordinate position then we point out that such
an argument is baseless since all the Vedas have been counted
along with them.
The Satapatha Brahmaṇa commences a topic with the
remark that the Rg Veda is the vital breath of Brahman and
completes it with the statement that a Brălimana well up in the
Atharva Veda is equal to Brahman. It has been stated in the
Chandogya Upanişad that the rays of the sun, collected on the
north, are his veins through which honey flows. The mantras
seen by the sages, Atharva and Angiras are bees that produce
honey. The Taittiriya Upanişad says that besides the
sheath known as Prâņamaya there is another inner sheath
called Manomaya. It makes a number of statements of this
sheath. In this connection it remarks that the Yajur
Veda constitutes its head, the Rg Veda its right wing, the
Sama Veda its left wing, the Brahman its soul and the Atharva
Veda its tail. The Taittiriya says "To face the east is better for
the recitation of the Rg Veda, to face the south is better for
the recitation of the Yajur Veda, to face the south is better for
the recitation of the Sama Veda and to face the west is better
for the recitation of the Atharva Veda. In the Satapatha
Brāhmaṇa the following statements about the holy study of the
Vedas are found. It commences with the statement that the
mantras of the Rg Veda are the five mid-day oblations of
milk unto gods. In this context it has been stated that the
mantras of the Atharva Veda are the oblations of omentum to
be offered to gods. He who studies the Veda everyday with
this knowledge pleases gods with the offer of the oblation of
omentum. Gods, being satísfied, íncur his pleasure. The
mantras of the Taittiriya Samhită throw some ht on the
meaning of the above statement. O Fire! a person proficient
in the Atharva Veda, has kindled you from Puşkara. In the
above mantras we find the word 'Atharva'. It is not the name
of a particular sage. Such an interpretation does not stand to
reasons since similar words, found in the other Vedas, may
shake our confidence in the truth of the Vedas. We have cited
passages from the Samhitas, Brāhmaṇas, Upanișşads etc. in
order to prove the authenticity of the Atharva Veda.
We shall now place quotations from Smṛtis before our readers530
Nyāyamanjari
in support of the validity of the Atharva Veda. Manu says
'One should recite the Angirasa Śruti from the Atharva Veda
in connection with an act intended for killing some body
(abhicāra). Manu uses the term 'Śruti'. He gives it a status
equal to that of the three Vedas.
Yajñavalkya enumerates fourteen sources of knowledge. He
says that Purāņa, Logic, Mīmāṁsā, Smṛti and six branches of
the Vedas and the Vedas are the fourteen sources of knowledge
and laws. Using the term 'Vedaḥ' he says that the Vedas are four
but not three, otherwise the number fourteen' cannot be filled
up. In another Smṛti work the number of the Vedas has been
clearly stated. The auxiliary sciences, the four Vedas, Mīmā-
msã, the science of Logic, the Purana and Dharma Sastra
constitute the fourteen branches of study.
It has also been stated in another law book that there are
fourteen sources of knowledge, viz., Purāņa, Dharma Šāstra,
Mīmāṁsā, Logic, the four Vedas and the six auxiliary sciences.
Šātātapa also says :
The person who has little knowledge of the Rg Veda, the
Sama Veda, the Yajur Veda and the Atharva Veda and the
six auxiliary sciences (Vedängas) and gives an expression to
his knowledge is regarded by us as a great man.
In another Dharma Sastra it is stated that the council of
the learned men consists of five scholars of whom the four
members are Vedic-scholars (each scholar is proficient only in
one of the four Vedas) and the fifth one is well up in the
Dharma Šāstra. Sankha and Likhita hold that the council of
the learned men consists of ten members. The qualifications of
them are as follows: the first four ones are well-versed in the
Rg, Sama, Yajur and Atharva Vedas, the fifth one is well up
in the six auxiliary sciences, attached to the Vedas, sixth
one is adept in the Dharma Sastra, the seventh one is pro-
ficient in Mimāṁså, the eighth one is a sound Naiyãyika, the
ninth one practises the religious vow of life-long celibacy and
the tenth one embraces the rite of Agnihotra. Välmiki holds
that the said council is constituted by the four Vedic scholars
and a scholar of Dharma Sastra. Among the persons who
purify their clan the following persons have been mentioned,
viz., persons adept in the four Vedas, persons well up in theValidity of the Atharva Veda
six auxiliary sciences attached to the Vedas, person who
observe some particular rites and recite some particular Sama-
hymns, and the students of the Atharva Veda. All these state-
ments of many authors of Dharma Šāstras point to the thesis
that the Vedas are four in member.
531
The authors of the other branches of study are noticed to
hold a similar view. The great Patanjali, the author of the
most elaborate bhāṣya, gives priority to the mantras of the
Atharva Veda among his illustrations, viz., “Šanno devirabhi-
ştaye etc." In the topic on the eternality of the Vedas, Šabara,
the commentator on the Mimāṁsā sūtras, has mentioned the
different recensions of the Atharva Veda. In the topic on the
different recensions of Vedas as he has made references to
the various recensions of the Vedas other than the Atharva
Veda so he has also mentioned the two recensions of the
Atharva Veda, viz,, Maṇḍuka and Paippalăda and discussed
many points regarding them. In the concluding portion of
this topic he has clearly written that the different Vedas do
not teach different rites. A particular rite which is taught in
the Rg Veda is not different from the same rite taught in the
Atharva Veda. Those who are well-versed in the Vedas, Smrti,
the tradition of the good people and usages have no chance of
entertaining a doubt about the truth of the said conclusion.
Now, the objector may contend that he does not say that the
Atharva Veda is not true. But he holds that it is distinctively
other than the three Vedas. Not only the three Vedas are
other than the Atharva Veda but also there is mutual distinc-
tion among the three Vedas themselves. The Yajur Veda is
distinct from the Rg Veda and the Sama Veda. The Rg.
Veda is distinct from the Yajur Veda and the Sama Veda. The
Sama Veda is also distinct from the Rg Veda and the Yajur
Veda. Such a distinction does not amount to a defect. It is in
the nature of all positive objects, as a book consists of words,
conveying their meanings, which are all things. They are not
identical. Do they lose their own nature on this account. (If
the Vedas are not identical, they do not lose their significance).
The objector revises the character of his objection and holds
that the phrase "The Atharva Veda is other than the three
Vedas" signifies something else. It means that the Atharva532
Nyayamanjari
Veda does not give any advice with regard to an act which is
somehow connected with the three Vedas. This is what is
meant by the phrase "The Atharva Veda is other than the
three Vedas."
Such an interpretation is not tenable. Because in the
Atharva Veda there is provision for many sacrifices such as
Işți (a sacrifice which is performed only by the four priests and
the performer of the sacrifice), Pasu (a sacrifice which is
concluded by a single day), Ahina (a soma sacrifice which
lasts for many days), Satra (a soma sacrifice which is per-
formed by many persons one after another) etc. When we
perform a sacrifice all the Vedas play the same important part
in it. The Vedic Jurisprudence holds this view. The objector
may contend that the three Vedas, viz., the Rg Veda, the
Yajur Veda and the Såma Veda play the same important part
in performing a Vedic rite but not the Atharva Veda since in
a Soma sacrifice the Rg Veda supplies with the duties of a
Hotr priest, the Yajur Veda with those of an Adhvaryu priest
and the Sama Veda with those of an Udgătṛ priest but the
Atharva Veda does nothing.
This is a wrong statement of facts since the Atharva Veda
supplies with the duties of a Brahman priest. The Gopatha
Brāhmaṇa says to this effect. The lord of all beings intending
to perform a Soma sacrifice asked the Vedas "Whom should
you invite as a Hotr priest?" Raising this point he suggests
that a Brāhmaṇa proficient in the Rg Veda is to be invited as
a Hotr priest since he is conversant with the duties of a Hotr
priest; a Brāhmaṇa well-up in the Yajur Veda is to be invited
as an Adhvaryu priest because he is acquainted with the
duties of an Adhvaryu priest; a Brāhmaṇa skilled in the Sama
Veda, is to be invited as an Udgätṛ priest because he is thorough-
ly aware of the duties of an Udgåtṛ priest and a Brāhmaṇa
who is a sound scholar of the Atharva Veda is to be invited as
a Bralıman priest. Making the above suggestions he has said
again "If you do not appoint such persons as Hotr, Adlivaryu,
Udgåts and Brahman then the sacrifice will be spoiled." There-
fore one should appoint a scholar of the Rg Veda as a Hotr
priest, a scholar of the Yajur Veda as an Adhvaryu priest, a
scholar of the Såma Veda as an Udgåtp priest and a scholarValidity of the Atharva Veda
of the Atharva Veda as a Brahman priest. Moreover, if there
is a deficiency in a sacrifice, it will be made good by the
influence of the Atharva Veda. If an inauspicious element
creeps into a sacrifice, it will be converted into an auspicious
element by the influence of the Atharva Veda. If something
becomes worn out in a sacrifice, then it will acquire a new life
by the influence of the Atharva Veda. Completing the Soma
sacrifice the institutor of a Soma sacrifice should drink the
remaining portion of Soma juice from the sages "Bhrgu and
Angiras" i. e. the priests well-versed in the Atharva Veda.
533
The Atharva-veda constitutes the Trayt
The persons who are well-versed in the Atharva-Veda only
read the above Vedic passages which refer to the Atharva-Veda
but the scholars of the three Vedas do not come across
such Vedic sentences. The students of the three Vedas read
the following Vedic passages. They declare that the Rg Veda
helps to discharge the duties of a Hotr priest, the Yajur Veda
assists to discharge the duties of an Adhvaryu priest and the
Sama Veda renders assistance to discharge the duties of an
Udgàtr priest. But which Veda does help us to render the
service of a Brāhmaṇa priest? They say in reply that the duties
of a Brahmaņa priest may be fulfilled by the knowledge of the
three Vedas. The Vedas also subscribe this view that the scho-
lars of the Rg Veda, the Yajur Veda and the Sama Veda res-
pectively discharge the duties of the Hotr, Adhvaryu and
Udgătr priests. The duties of a Brāhmaṇa priest are performed
by the essence of three Vedas. In other words, there is no need
of inviting a scholar of the Atharva Veda to discharge the
duties of a Brahman priest.
An answer to the above objection is as follows. It is not a
fact that we have not read the Vedic sentences referred to by
you. But the above sentences signify that a Brahmin who is
well-versed in the Atharva Veda is Brahman. If you put a
question to us "Why do you say like this?" then listen to our
reply. There is no such distinct book as goes by the name
"trayi" (triplet). Though the collection of the Rg Veda, the
Yajur Veda and the Sama Veda is loosely called trayi Collection
yet it has space enough to include other mantras. The collec-1
532
Nyayamanjari
Veda does not give any advice with regard to an act which is
somehow connected with the three Vedas. This is what is
meant by the phrase "The Atharva Veda is other than the
three Vedas."
Such an interpretation is not tenable. Because in the
Atharva Veda there is provision for many sacrifices such as
Işti (a sacrifice which is performed only by the four priests and
the performer of the sacrifice), Paśu (a sacrifice which is
concluded by a single day), Ahina (a soma sacrifice which
lasts for many days), Satra (a soma sacrifice which is per-
formed by many persons one after another) etc. When we
perform a sacrifice all the Vedas play the same important part
in it. The Vedic Jurisprudence holds this view. The objector
may contend that the three Vedas, viz., the Rg Veda, the
Yajur Veda and the Sama Veda play the same important part
in performing a Vedic rite but not the Atharva Veda since in
a Soma sacrifice the Rg Veda supplies with the duties of a
Hotr priest, the Yajur Veda with those of an Adhvaryu priest
and the Sama Veda with those of an Udgåtṛ priest but the
Atharva Veda does nothing.
This is a wrong statement of facts since the Atharva Veda
supplies with the duties of a Brahman priest. The Gopatha
Brāhmaṇa says to this effect. The lord of all beings intending
to perform a Soma sacrifice asked the Vedas "Whom should
you invite as a Hotr priest?" Raising this point he suggests
that a Brāhmaṇa proficient in the Rg Veda is to be invited as
a Hotr priest since he is conversant with the duties of a Hotr
priest; a Brāhmaṇa well-up in the Yajur Veda is to be invited
as an Adhvaryu priest because he is acquainted with the
duties of an Adhvaryu priest; a Brāhmaṇa skilled in the Säma
Veda, is to be invited as an Udgâtṛ priest because he is thorough-
ly aware of the duties of an Udgātṛ priest and a Brāhmaṇa
who is a sound scholar of the Atharva Veda is to be invited as
a Brahman priest. Making the above suggestions he has said
again "If you do not appoint such persons as Hotr, Adhvaryu,
Udgåtr and Brahman then the sacrifice will be spoiled." There-
fore one should appoint a scholar of the Rg Veda as a Hotr
priest, a scholar of the Yajur Veda as an Adhvaryu priest, a
scholar of the Sama Veda as an Udgātṛ priest and a scholarValidity of the Atharva Veda
of the Atharva Veda as a Brahman priest. Moreover, if there
is a deficiency in a sacrifice, it will be made good by the
influence of the Atharva Veda. If an inauspicious element
creeps into a sacrifice, it will be converted into an auspicious
element by the influence of the Atharva Veda. If something
becomes worn out in a sacrifice, then it will acquire a new life
by the influence of the Atharva Veda. Completing the Soma
sacrifice the institutor of a Soma sacrifice should drink the
remaining portion of Soma juice from the sages "Bhṛgu and
Angiras" i. e. the priests well-versed in the Atharva Veda.
533
The Atharva-veda constitutes the Trayi
The persons who are well-versed in the Atharva-Veda only
read the above Vedic passages which refer to the Atharva-Veda
but the scholars of the three Vedas do not come acroSS
such Vedic sentences. The students of the three Vedas read
the following Vedic passages. They declare that the Rg Veda
helps to discharge the duties of a Hotr priest, the Yajur Veda
assists to discharge the duties of an Adhvaryu priest and the
Sama Veda renders assistance to discharge the duties of an
Udgâtr priest. But which Veda does help us to render the
service of a Brāhmaṇa priest? They say in reply that the duties
of a Brahmaņa priest may be fulfilled by the knowledge of the
three Vedas. The Vedas also subscribe this view that the scho-
lars of the Rg Veda, the Yajur Veda and the Sāma Veda res-
pectively discharge the duties of the Hotr, Adhvaryu and
Udgâtr priests. The duties of a Brāhmaṇa priest are performed
by the essence of three Vedas. In other words, there is no need
of inviting a scholar of the Atharva Veda to discharge the
duties of a Brahman priest.
A answer to the above objection is as follows. It is not a
fact that we have not read the Vedic sentences referred to by
you. But the above sentences signify that a Brahmin who is
well-versed in the Atharva Veda is Brahman. If you put a
question to us "Why do you say like this?" then listen to our
reply. There is no such distinct book as goes by the name
"trayî" (triplet). Though the collection of the Rg Veda, the
Yajur Veda and the Sama Veda is loosely called trayi Collection
yet it has space enough to include other mantras. The collec-534
Nyayamanjari
tion includes other books and is designated as the triple Vedas,
viz., the Rg Veda, etc. Each of them has become fruitful by
helping to discharge the duties of a Hotr priest, etc. The colle-
tion of the three Vedas has become fruitful since each unit in-
cluded in it has fulfilled its own mission. As all these three
units equally share the credit of realizing ends so there will be
no discriminatory treatment among these units with regard to
the realization of ends. When a collection is analysed into its
units the unnoticed mantras which represent another unit are
only presented to our consciousness. A whole is distinct from
its parts. But unlike a whole a collection is not distinct from
the units which are included in it. These units, i.e., the three
Vedas, have got their definite duties to discharge. If the three
Vedas have to discharge the duties of a Brahman priest in
addition to their own duties then will they be able to bear such
a heavy burden ? We say "No, it is not a heavy burden. The
three Vedas jointly advise the duties of a Brahman priest. But
none of them is the triple Vedas. The Atharva Veda alone is
the triplet. As the Rg Veda, the Yajur Veda and the Säma
Veda are included in the Atharva Veda so the Atharva Veda
having helped to discharge the duties of a Brahman priest, the
three Vedas jointly perform them".
Now, another problem arises in our mind. If a person who
reads the three Vedas discharges the duties of a Brahman priest
then are not the duties of a Brahman priest fulfilled by the
triple Vedas ? Our answer is in the affirmative. But we intend
to clarify our answer in the light of the principles laid down by
the Vedic jurists, i.e. the Mimáṁsakas. There is a Vedic passage
which states that sacrifices and animal sacrifices other than Jyoti
ştoma and Darsa-cum-Pūrņamāsa should be performed for the
realization of a single end but Jyotiştoma and Darśa-cum-Pūrņa
māsa sacrifices should be performed for the fulfilment of all
ends. But if one performs Jyotiştoma or Darśa-cum-Pūrṇamāsa
sacrifice only once then all his ends are not simultaneously rea-
lized. In order to accomplish another object the performance
of the said sacrifice should be repeated. In the section on Yoga-
siddhi a principle has been laid down to interpret the above
Vedic passage. According to this principle though the fulfilment
of many ends has been apparently suggested by the aboveValidity of the Atharva Veda
passage yet a single object is only accomplished by the perfor-
mance of any one of the above sacrifices. Similarly, when one
prepares himself to discharge the duties of a Brahman priest he
can think of taking the assistance of a particular Veda only but
not of the triple Vedas since a particular Veda renders help to
him but not the three Vedas.
535
Now, another question crops up in our mind. The Vedas
other than the Atharva Veda are identical with the triple Vedas.
The Atharva Veda is also identical with the triple Vedas. If
the above statements are true then the Atharva Veda should
not be distinguished from the three Vedas since all the Vedas
have the same character. An answer to this question is this. Each
of the three individual Vedas which constitutes the triplet has its
distinct designation. None of them bears the name of the
correction of the three Vedas. There is a Vedic sentence "Tray-
yai vidyāyai śukram tena Brahmatvam". It requires clarifica-
tion. The fourth case-ending has been attached to form Trayyai
and Vidyayai. It has been used in lieu of the sixth case-ending.
The term "śukra" signifies essence (sâra). Thus the above sen-
tence means that the duties of a Brahman priest are discharged
by the essence of the three Vedas, viz., the Rg Veda the Yajur
Veda and the Sama Veda. The three Vedas cannot be the
essence of themselves. Again, the essence of the three Vedas
cannot be absolutely different from the three Vedas. Hence
the essence of the three Vedas is the Atharva Veda. Thus the
Atharva Veda is an embodiment of secret doctrines. The term
'Atharva,' signifies 'a mystic'. It has been stated in a particular
recension of the Atharva Veda that the Atharva a Brahmaan
priest discharged his duties by means of the Atharva Veda
which is an essence of the three Vedas. For this reason the
Atharva Veda is not distinct from the three Vedas. All the
Vedas extend their hands to perform a Vedic rite prescribed by
any of the Vedas. 'All' has not been used in a restricted sense.
All the Vedas signify the four Vedas but not the three Vedas.
So the Atharva Veda has been mentioned as the Brahman Veda
in the earlier and the later parts of the Brahmana. The actual
text mentions the four Vedas, viz., the Rg Veda, the Yajur
Veda, the Sama Veda and the Brahma Veda.
We shall now give only the sense of the Vedic texts quoted536
Nyāyamañjari
by Jayanta. In a sacrifice a Brahmin versed in the Atharva
Veda should be appointed as a Brahman priest. Otherwise the
said sacrifice remains imperfect.
A Brahman priest should be properly honoured. A Brahmin,
proficient in the Atharva Veda, is equal to Brahman, the Sabda-
Brahman. The acts prescribed by the Atharva Veda are the
articles by which he is honoured. The four Vedas participate in
the Vedic rite. The food which is prepared by the Brahman
priest is known as Brahmaudana. This name has been given
by the Vedas themselves. When a Vedic rite is celebrated the
priests known as Hotṛ, Adhvaryu, Udgățr and Brahman should
be entertained with a hearty feast. The acts, prescribed by the
Atharva Veda, constitute the integral part of the Soma sacrifice
too. The Sāma Veda eulogises the Atharva Veda since the acts,
prescribed by the Atharva Veda, remove the possible defects in
a sacrifice. It has been stated before that the acts, prescribed
by the Atharva Veda, make up deficiency, remove evils and
mend all defects in a sacrifice by their influence. For this reason
we hold that a Brahmin, well-versed in the Atharva Veda, is
Brahman. In other words, his powers are as unlimited as those
of the Absolute are. The sound scholars have elaborately dis-
cussed this matter and logically established this conclusion in
other works. Therefore, the point in question has not been
very elaborately discussed in this book.
Some invite our attention to the statements "No body should
have connection with a Brahman who has exclusively read the
Atharva Veda". We have no regard for it since it is a state-
ment of the Kalpa Sūtra and moreover is contrary to the spirit
of the Vedas. If the above statement would have been a Vedic
sentence then it had been interpreted in the light of the proper
context. Most probably it has bearing only upon a particular
Vedic rite. When that particular Vedic rite will be performed
no scholar of the Atharva Veda should be appointed as a priest.
It is an unconditional general statement then a conflict bet-
ween the two Vedic sentences becomes inevitable. These two
contradictory statements must be reconciled. We have cited
Vedic sentences which accept the Atharva Veda as one of the
Vedas. The prohibitive sentence suggests that the Atharva
Veda falls outside the scope of the Vedas. The Vedas cannotValidity of the Atharva Veda
537
blow hot and cold in the same breath. Therefore, the prohi-
bitive sentence must have a restricted meaning. A scholar of
the Atharva Veda should not be appointed as a priest in con-
nection with an act where his sacrifices are not required.
Another objection has been raised against the inclusion of the
Atharva-Veda in the Vedas proper. It has been said that the
mantras of the Rg Veda are loudly recited, the mantras of the
Sāma Veda are loudly chanted and the mantras of the Yajur
Veda are very lowly recited but nothing has been stated about
the Atharva Veda. This objection is not sound. The characteris-
tic features of mantras have been shown but those of the Vedas
have not been pointed out. All the Vedas admit of two broad
divisions viz., Mantra and Bråhmaṇa. The mantra part of the
Vedas has two sub-divisions víz., prose and poetry. The mantras
of the Yajur Veda are prose. Those of the Rg Veda are metri-
cal. But those of the Sama Veda are not only metrical but also
melodious. The mantras, judged from this point of view, admit
of three divisions. Jaimini, having classified these mantras,
defines them. The definitions given by him run thus. The
mantras in which feet are arranged only in accordance with
the sense are called Rg mantras. The mantras which are
musical are Săma mantras. The remaining ones are Yajur
mantras. Thus he classifies the mantras under three divisions.
These characteristic features such as loudness etc. do not be-
long to the entire Vedas admitting of two broad divisions viz.,
mantras and Brahmaņas. The three types of mantras already
mentioned are found in the Atharva Veda. These characteris-
tic features belong to them. The term 'trayi' owes its origin to
the threefold division of the mantras, Two statements viz. (¹)
**The Atharva Veda is the Trayi" and (2) "It is superior to other
branches of knowledge" will not be contradictory. The Atharva
Veda is included in the Trayi because it contains the mantras
of the Rg. Veda, the Yajur Veda and the Sama Veda. But it
has at the same time a distinct individuality because it repre-
sents its subject-matter in its own peculiar manner. Some other
thinkers suggest that the Atharva Veda is the Rg Veda because
the mantras of the Rg Veda abound in it, a small quantity of
the Yajur mantras is found in it and no musical mantra of538
Nyāyamanjari
the Sāma Veda is noticed in it. We may accept this suggestion
as it involves no contradiction.
Those who hold that the term 'Veda' applies to the three
Vedas but not to the fourth Veda cherish a strong hatred
against the Atharva Veda. The usage of the experienced
teachers stands as a proof in this matter. This is the Veda. This
is the Brāhmaṇa. When these sentences are uttered the listener
makes out the meaning of the term 'Veda' as representing the
four Vedas. When a student says before some learned scholars
that he has studied the Veda they ask him "Which Veda has
been studied by you?" He replies that he has studied the
Atharva Veda. Nobody condemns him with the remark "The
book which has been studied by you is not the Veda". Some
critics hold that the term 'Veda', pure and simple, does not
denote the Atharva Veda. The former requires a prefix to
signify the latter. The same remark equally applies to the
other Vedas as we say that this is the Rg Veda or the Yajur-
Veda or the Sama-Veda. The term 'Veda', pure and simple,
also applies to the three Vedas. The same term is also equally
applicable to the Atharva Veda. We say that Bharadvaja has
studied the four Vedas. Atharva Veda does not stand on the
same footing with the Ayur-Veda. Hence it would not be
looking down upon as the inferior Veda. It has been stated
that the Vedic injunction relating to the study of the Vedas
touches the four Vedas without any distinction.
The law books also say to this effect.
Yajňavalkya has said :-
If a person who has been invested with the sacred thread
reads everyday the Atharva Veda to the best of his capacity
then he pleases gods with the gift of omentum and the departed
ancestors with the gift of honey and clarified butter.
The knowledge of the Vedas and the art of performing sacri-
fices are handed down through the traditional chain. The same
law applies to all the four Vedas. We shall no more discuss this
point. The four Vedas enjoy the same level of dignity and
sanctity since they are equally valid, become alike the object
of holy study and constitute means to the realization of human
ends.Validity of the Atharva Veda
Frimacy of the Atharva Veda
If y
you do not get satisfaction without knowing the sequence
of the Vedas then we say that the Atharva Veda is the first
in order of time. The mantras of the other Vedas and the
syllable 'om' signifying the Absolute have subsequently emerg-
ed. A passage of the Veda points to this direction. The
passage runs thus. Brahma ha vā. ... aksaramudakrāmat etc.
It clearly shows that the syllable 'om' manifested itself in the
mind of Brahman at a later period when he had become
fatigued with the study of the Atharva Veda. The three great
mantras, viz., om bhuḥ svāḥā, om bhuvaḥ svâhâ and om svah
svähä and the well-known musical note called Brhati have
sprung up from the Atharva Veda. A boy who has been in-
vested with the sacred thread in accordance with the injunc-
tions laid down in the Atharva-Veda may study the other
Vedas. But a boy who has been invested with the sacred
thread in accordance with the injunctions laid down in the other
three Vedas is not entitled to read the Atharva Veda because
he has not been initiated into the study of the Atharva Veda.
It has been stated in a law book that one who has been cere-
moniously initiated into the study of the Atharva Veda is enti-
tled to read the other three Vedas but one who has been cere-
moniously initiated into the study of the other three Vedas is
not entitled to read the Atharva Veda. Those who stick to the
belief that the three Vedas are only authoritative perform ex-
piatory rites, prescribed by the Atharva Veda, when they
commit any blunder in performing a Vedic rite. Thus we see
that the Atharva Veda is superior to the other three Vedas.
Some scholars have cited a verse from the Samhită of
Manu in order to establish the exclusive authority of the
three Vedas. A religious student, being ceremoniously initiat-
ed into the study of the Vedas, should study the three
Vedas for a period of 36 years, residing at the house of his
preceptor. Another alternative injunction is found in the 3rd
chapter of the Manu-samhitã. One should observe the vow
of absolute celibacy for a period of 12 years in order to
study a single Veda. He should observe it for 24 years if he
studies the two Vedas. He should do it for 36 years if he
studies the three Vedas. There is also another injunction in
539540
Nyāyamanjari
vow of
another Śruti work that one should observe the
celibacy for a period of 48 years if he studies the four Vedas.
This injunction has not been dishonoured by men of culture.
Some may think that it admits of a different interpretation
that it applies only to the study of the three Vedas. It
purports to enjoin that a religious student should observe the
vow of celibacy for a period of 16 years in order to study
each of the three Vedas. Such an interpretation is not sound
since it comes into conflict with the initial injunction and
also becomes fruitless. Hence, the alternative injunction points
to the study of another Veda. The scope of this injunction is
not restricted to the choice of the length of time, i.e., the
period of 12 or 16 years for the study of a single Veda. The
Second interpretation of the injunction is disregarded since it
comes into conflict with another Vedic injunction. One should
institute the sacrifice of Agnihotra when his hair does not turn
grey. In other words, one should embrace the life of a house-
holder during his youth. But if one is to practise the vow of
celibacy for a period of 46 years after the sacrament of
upanayana then his hair will turn grey. At an advanced age
his entry into the married life becomes meaningless. The
alternative injunctions regarding the study of the Vedas have
been suggested in order to avoid the possible conflict between
the two Vedic injunctions stated above. Therefore the
discussion which revolves round the determination of the
number of years for the study of the Vedas is not dependable
The injunction of the law book that one should observe the
vow of celibacy for 16 years in order to study each of the four
Vedas cannot be honoured. Manu's prescription for the
study of the three Vedas does not imply the bare denial of the
study of the Atharva Veda. The injunction, given in Manu's
law book that one should study the three Vedas, has a positive
import. It enjoins one to read the three Vedas. The three
Vedas may be other than the Atharva Veda. But it does not
import a bare denial. It does not purport to convey that
one should not read the Atharva Veda. There is no proof
positive which points to bare denial. Manu's injunction
concerning the study of the Vedas demands that a student
should observe such and such vow in order to study the threeValidity of the Atharva Veda
541
Vedas. The three Vedas have not been specified by him.
It has not been clearly stated that one should observe this
vow in order to study the Rg Veda, the Yajur Veda and
the Sama Veda.
In Manu's chapter on Sraddha ceremony it has been enjoin-
ed that a Brahmin should be respectfully entertained with
a feast in a Sraddha ceremony. It has been stated that the
invited Brahmin should be proficient in the three Vedas. In
that sentence there are three adjectives viz., Veda-paraga
(one who has gone from one end to the other end of the
Veda). Sakhantaga (one who has made a complete study
of one recension of the Veda) and Samãptiga (one who has
made the complete study of the Veda). If we try to find out
the inner significance of the three adjectives then we come to
learn that a Brahmin who has studied only one of the three Vedas
(the Rg Veda, the Yajur Veda and the Sama Veda) is not
entitled to the above invitation. But if a Brahmin who is
born in the family keeping up the tradition of the study of
the Atharva Veda, reads only a portion of the Atharva Veda,
he becomes a pankti pāvana) purifies the row of Brahmins
with whom he dínes). As the purifier of a row he is entitled
to invitation in such a feast. A partial study of the Atharva
Veda confers upon a student the honour of being the purifier
of a row. If one holds that a Brahmin who is a scholar of the
Atharva Veda does not deserve invitation in such a feast then
he goes against the spirit of the Šāstras.
The Brahmins who have properly read some portion of the
Sāma Veda or some portion of the Rg Veda or some portions
of the Rg Veda and the Yajur Veda are allowed by the
Sastras to be invited in a feast to be held on the completion
of Sraddha ceremony. This injunction seems to us to be the
second alternative in order of importance because the first
injunction declars that Brahmins who have made the complete
study of the Veda should be invited in a feast to be held on
the completion of Sraddha ceremony. This injunction has
no negative import. It does not purport to convey prohi-
bition, the exclusion of the Atharva Veda from the Vedas.
We have proved to the hilt that the Atharva Veda is one
of the Vedas. But the author of the Tantra-värttika makes542
Nyāyamanjari
such remarks about the Atharva Veda as shows that he
acknowledges it to be the Veda only out of compassion. It
seems to us that he is either afraid of the critics of the Atharva
Veda or cherishes a hatred against it or is in the dark about
it. He holds that though it is assumed that the Atharva
Veda is not useful to the Vedic rites in general yet its efficacy
in some Vedic rites cannot be ignored. Such remarks do
not make an appeal to us. In the former and the latter
parts of the Brāhmaṇa attached to the Atharva Veda various
types of sacrifices have been enjoined. They are as follows -
Ișți (a sacrifice demanding the services of the performer of
the sacrifices and four priests only), Pasu (a sacrifice in
which animals are slain), Ekäha (a sacrifice which lasis for
one day only), Ahīna (a kind of Soma sacrifice which lasts for
many days) and Sattra (a kind of Soma sacrifice which is
performed by the co-operation of many persons).
An objection may be raised against the validity of the
Atharva Veda that if injunctions enjoining these sacrifices
are found in the other Vedas then why does the Atharva Veda
contain similar injunctions in itself? The objection has
been very fair and nicely put! We may also put this question
to the objectors that if these injunctions are found in the
Atharva Veda then why do the other Vedas accommodate
them? Moreover, we fail to understand the real target of
your attack. But we have said that you are not competent to
rebuke either of them. It is not a fact that strange Vedic
rites for averting evils, augmenting prosperity and killing
enemies are not found in the other Vedas because a Śyena
sacrifice (as a hawk preys upon other birds etc.) results in
killing the enemies of the performer of the sacrifice) but
strange Vedic rites have also been prescribed by the Yajur
Veda. Therefore all the Vedas enjoy the same dignity and
are similar so far as their contents are concerned. There
none of the Vedas can claim distinction. The Vârttikakāra
(Kumārila) states that the rites prescribed by the Atharva Veda
are observed only by a priest who has the designation of
Brahman. This statement is not correct. He holds that the
functions of the Vedic priests are two-fold, viz., Vaihārikī
vṛtti and Päkayajña vṛtti. When many priests co-operate toEquality of the four Vedas
perform a Vedic rite the co-operative activity of the priests
is called vaihảrikî vṛtti. The Dharma-Sastras hold that the
rites for averting evils etc. should be done by the Brahma
priest alone. Therefore Kumarila has stated like a man in
the street that as the Vedic rites prescribed by the three
Vedas are performed by Hotr, Adhvaryu and Udgâtr priests
so the peculiar rites, prescribed by the Atharva Veda, are
performed only by the Brahma priest. The remark that the
rites, prescribed by the three Vedas are performed only by
their own priests clearly indicates the breach of impartiality
on his part for all the four Vedas. The Vedic rites cannot
discriminate between the priests proficient in the three Vedas
and those well-versed in the Atharva Veda since one and
the same Vedic rite has also been instructed by all the Vedas.
In order words, each Vedic rite is well connected with all the
Vedas. Hence all the Vedas have the same authoritative
power. But those who do not care to atone for their sin arising
from despising the Veda can differentiate a particular Veda
from the other Vedas. Those who are morally good do not
think in this way. We refrain from discussing this point to a
greater length.
543
The equality of the four Vedas (the concluding portion).
As the four Vedas like the four arms of Vişņu are possessed of
excessive majesty of the same quality so they are eulogised by
the worthy praises and yield various objects coveted by the
different persons. As Laksmi, the goddess of fortune, repudi-
ates the stigma that she is fickle by nature and firmly clings
to the four hands of Vișņu so truth, fortifies itself by refuting
the charges of falsehood attributed to the Vedas by the contest-
ing parties and rests upon the four Vedas. The tree in the shape of
the Vedas has four stumps. Its different branches and off-shoots
are mutually connected. The utility of the Vedas is well known
in the different societies of human beings. The Vedas have
become very vast because of the growth of their branches (in
different directions). The Rg Veda is represented by twenty
one recensions, the Yajur Veda by a hundred recensions, the
Sama Veda by a thousand recensions and the Atharva Veda
by nine recensions. Each stump of the Veda tree spreads forth544
Nyāyamanjari
branches which are very charming by their flowers and fruits in
the shape of charming compositions. As birds perch upon
branches, adorned with flowers and fruits and drink their
honey so the people of the twice-born classes read the different
recensions of the Vedas and enjoy the sweetness of their
composition.
A discussion on the validity of Tantra, Agama, etc. Some raise
the following question : Do you establish the validity of
the Vedas in this manner? If the question is answered in the
affirmative then can you prove the validity of Tantras and
other Agamas in the same manner?
Why do you put a question like this?
If the first question is answered in the affirmative then the
framer of the question has got nothing to say. With regard to
the second question the objector himself solves the problem in
a definite manner. In his opinion all the other Agamas should
be taken as erroneous since they involve mutual contradictions.
Now a question is put to the person who raises the question.
The question runs thus :-"Dear Sir! when you put this
question which Agamas are before your mind ?" "Do you think
of the Purana, History and Dharma Šāstras? Or, do you think
of the Agamas of the Saivas, the Pasupatas, the Pañcarátras,
the Bauddhas, the Jainas and of the other sects?" We shall
subsequently discuss the problem of the validity of Agamas of
the Saivas and others. Some critics come forward and say that
the Dharma Sastras, written by Manu and others, are absolutely
true because they give us advice on rituals cast in the Vedic
mould to be performed by us. They also hold that there is no
necessity of discussing the problem of validity. They further
add that the above Šāstras derive their validity from the Vedas.
The contents of these Šāstras have no chance of being untrue
because there is nothing to contradict them. All the Vedic
scholars till now observe rites, prescribed by Manu, with per-
fect confidence in him.
He cannot subscribe to the hypothesis that the authors of these
Šāstras, having visualised the contents of their works have re-
corded them because they cannot perceive dharma which is
transcendental, being itself potential but not actual. It is notDiscussion on the Validity of Agamas, Tantras etc.
reasonable to believe that Manu and others have been taught
by some other persons to compose their works. There is no
proof to establish the hypothesis that the supposed teacher was
able to know the transcendental objects. If there is proof in
favour of his knowledge then has Manu committed any offence
not to acquire such knowledge? If we hold that the works of
Smṛti are not based upon a sound basis and assume that they
are based upon a series of instructions then they will be inevi-
tably a memorandum of instructions for ignorant persons. It is
unfair to assume that Manu and others have imparted ins-
tructions to us with the motive of deceiving us since there is
nothing to contradict their instructions. Moreover, all good
people acknowledge the works of Manu and others as an autho-
rity. We have already discussed this point, Eliminating all
the possible hypotheses we stick to the last hypothesis that the
works of Manu and others should be based upon the Vedas.
The Vedas are the proper and competent source of them.
Kumärila also says to this effect. No person is known to be
infallible. The words of a person are sure to deceive us by their
misdirection. An assumption must be based upon the solid rock
of facts. If it is far away from facts then it is not convincing.
Again, we shall have to make a minimum number of assump-
tions if we hold that Smrti is based upon the Vedas,
545
There is a divergence of opinions among those who hold that
the works of Manu and others are based upon the Vedas. Some
hold that the works known as Smṛti are based upon such Vedic
injunctions as are inferred from the known mantras and arthavā-
das. Some other thinkers hold that they are based upon such
recensions of the Vedas as are scattered here and there. But
still another band of thinkers hold that they are based upon
such recensions as have been obsolete. No useful purpose will
be served if we scrutinize the three rival hypotheses and prove
that one of them is the most appropriate one. But if we are
true to our reasoning power then we shall assume by all means
that they (Smrti works) owe their existence to the Vedas, the
perennial source of truth but not to other sources since there is
no proof advanced in favour of the truth of these sources.
Again, if these works, "Smrti' which is well-known in this world
will be significant. But if we hold that the works of Manu andNyayamanjari
others like the Vedas contain laws derived from perception
then the designation 'Smṛti' loses its significance. Moreover, if
the works on Smṛti are based upon the Vedas then in case of
disagreement between them and the Vedas with regard to a
subject matter it will be reasonable to hold that the decision of
the latter will prevail upon that of the former. In case of the
Vedas the decision which they express is authoritative because
their foundation has been proved to be firm. But in case of
law books the decision which they express is not authoritative
since its basis is yet to be discovered. We are to find out a
passage from the Vedas which will confirm the decision given
by Smrti. Whenever one exerts his mind to recollect a passage
from the Vedas which constitutes the basis of the Smṛti text the
Vedic passage which contradicts the conclusion of the Smṛti
text flashes before his mind. How can one assume that the said
Smrti text has a corresponding Vedic passage as its basis? In
other words, as there is no contradiction in the Vedas so the
two conflicting Vedic passages do not exist. Kumãrila says to
this effect. A proverb runs thus :"How can an ass carry a load
which was carried before by a horse?"
Some other thinkers suggest that in cases of conflict between
the Vedas and Smrti it is reasonable to give an option. In
other words, one may either abide by the decision of the Vedas
or by the decision given by Smrti. This is the sure way of solving
the above problem. There are two types of the Vedas viz. the
Vedas which are directly heard and the Vedas which are in-
ferred are called Smṛti. As the two types of the Vedas have
no beginning so one cannot contradict the other. So Śruti and
Smrti are nothing but the Vedas living and dead in our memory.
Therefore, it is not fair to assume that mantras and arthāvādas
constitute the basis of Smṛti since the Vedas which are being
inferred are eternal.
546
Now, a fresh question which arises in our mind runs thus:-
If you do not subscribe to the hypothesis that Smrti is the
source of true knowledge because it is based upon the Vedas
then how can you restrain the free thinkers from propagating
the view that Smṛtis which are not affiliated to the Vedas are
also true? A reply to it is as follows. The views of the poor
thinkers have already been refuted. Jaimini has refuted theDiscussion on the Validity of Agamas, Tantras etc.
547
above view in his Mīmâmsã-Sūtra "Api vā kartṛ-sämänyāt pra-
māņam anumānaṁ syād iti”. (1.2). The phrase "kartṛ-sāmān-
yat' denotes having the same right'. The persons who are
entitled to perform the Vedic rites enjoy the privilege of per-
forming rites prescribed by Smrti. We have learnt from ex-
perience that he who sips water with the utterance of mantra
(performs a Smrti rite) but he who strews kuśa grasses on the
sacrificial altar performs a Vedic rite. But those who follow
the dictates of the non-affiliated Smṛtis are not entitled to per-
form Vedic rites. Hence, the Smṛti works of Manu and others
are held to be the source of true knowledge but not the non-
affiliated Smrtis.
Let us now discuss the hypothesis that the law books, com-
posed by Manu and others, are the source of true knowledge
because they are based only upon the Vedas but not because
they derive their truth from the other sources of true knowledge.
We shall now criticise it. You loudly proclaim the hypothesis
that Smrti is true since it is based upon the Vedas. There is a
mystery behind this proclamation. You cannot tolerate the view
that the principle of merit and demerit is intuited by the trans-
cendental perception of the sages. Such an attitude of your
mind is illogical. As God has been proved to be the creator of
everything and lord of all beings, omniscient and compassionate
so the transcendental perception of the sages who enjoy divine
grace is competent to have the direct knowledge of Dharma.
It is absolutely distinct from the normal perception of the ordi-
nary people. The existence of such transcendental perception
has been proved by us in the chapter on the definition of per-
ception. Therefore we have established the point that the
Dharma-Šāstras, written by Manu and others, may as well derive
their truth from the transcendental perception of the sages.
The Mimāṁsakas have raised an objection against the hypo-
thesis of the transcendental perception of Dharma that Dharma
cannot be perceived since it has only a potential being but is
not an event in time. Hence they hold that the Vedas are the
ultimate source of knowledge of the transcendental objects.
This view has been refuted. As God perceives the Agnihotra
sacrifice and such other sacrifices as virtuous acts so the sages
like Manu and others will be able to apprehend directly rites548
Nyayamanjari
like Aṣṭakās etc., as virtuous acts. It is superflous to know
whether or not virtue has an actual being or a potential being.
Now, an objection may be raised against the above hypothesis
that the Vedas and the Dharma Šāstras are based upon percep
tion. The implication of the above hypothesis is this that God
has perceived the sacrifices like Agnihotra etc., as virtuous acts.
If this is the implication of the above hypothesis then God's
omniscience is at fault since He is unacquainted with the rites
like Aṣṭakā etc., as virtuous acts. Or He may be called cruel
since He does not communicate it to others though He is
directly acquainted with it. The above objection does not
impair the hypothesis in question. There is no doubt about the
hypothesis that God is omniscient. But He does not directly
instruct everything. He directly teaches some subjects and gets
the teaching of subjects done by others. The persons who are
the mouthpiece of God are the blessed sons of God. They
acquire such intuitive capacity as enables them to be an
instructor only through his grace. The Vedas also declare that
the sages like Manu and others have intuited Dharma. It is also
recorded in the Vedas that the sages who intuited Dharma
revealed mantras in order to initiate the ignorant persons into
Dharma.
Now, a problem arises in our mind. It runs thus. As the
Vedas and the Dharma Šāstras are based upon perception, so
if a conflict arises between the Vedas and the Dharma Sastras
then one is at liberty to exercise his option, i.e., he may accept
either the decision of the Vedas or that of the Dharma Sastras.
In that case, as an injunction of the Vedas cannot contradict
another injunction of the Vedas though one is clearly opposed
to the other so there will be no contradiction between the
Vedas and the Dharma Šāstras. Let us take an example from
the Sama Veda'. It has been enjoined that a Vedic
be sung
loudly (the song is to be set to the tune Brhat Saman).
song is to
It has also been enjoined that the same song is to be sung lowly
(the song is to be set to the tune Rathantra Saman). The one
and the same song cannot be sung both loudly and lowly.
Therefore there is contradiction between these two injunctions.
But these two injunctions being equally strong one cannot
invalidate the other. Therefore in such cases the performer isDiscussion on the Validity of Agamas, Tantras etc.
549
permitted to exercise his discretion. He may exercise his free
will to sing loudly or lowly. There is no distinction between
the eternal perception of God and the transcendental one of
the sages so far as their validity is concerned. But a distinction
which exists between these two perceptions is this that God's
perception is eternal whereas the perception of the sages is an
event in time. But this distinction makes no material difference
in the nature of their validity. In the above matter our final
opinion is as follows: In case of a conflict between the injunc-
tion of the Vedas and that of Smrti as both of them are based
upon the Vedas so the problem of the conflicting injunctions
is solved and we arrive at the conclusion that in such cases it
is optional on the part of the person enjoined to obey either
of them. We may solve the problem in a different manner.
We hold that the scope of these two conflicting injunctions
should be so well defined that there will be no room for
conflict. Some restriction will be imposed upon the range of
each injunction so that one injunction will not encroach upon
the field of another injunction. Thus the so-called irreconcilable
conflict will be satisfactorily solved. The sound Vedic scholars
assert that there is no illustration of conflict between the Vedas
and Smrti. Thus as the Dharma Šăstras are based upon the
perception of the trustworthy persons so they are true. Some
authoritative persons say that the Puranas are the fifth Veda.
It has been stated that History and the Purăņas should supple-
ment the Vedas since the Vedas apprehend that the ignorant
persons will lay blame on them.
We have no dogmatism in this matter. We may agree with
the Mīmāṁsakas in this point that Smrti is true since it is based
upon the Vedas and the Purāṇas are also true since they like
Smrti are based upon the Vedas. By all means the six sources
of knowledge, viz., the four Vedas, Smrti and the Puranas,
furnish us with the instructions of the proximate means to
human ends. The six auxiliary branches of the Vedas headed
by grammar supply us with the key to open the store-house of
knowledge. They remain always subordinate to the principal
branches of study and being rightly applied, become help-
ful to their understanding. But they do never directly teach
Dharma. No new instructions can be had from the Kalpa-sūtras.550
Nyāyamanjari
They simply inform us of the proper order of the disorderly
many subsidiary rites as means to a principal act. Mīmāṁsā is
a discursive work which determines the meaning of a Vedic
sentence. Nyäya Śāstra purports to establish the truth of the
Vedas. We have discussed this topic in our introduction to
Nyāya-mañjarī. In fine, we say that these fourteen sources of
knowledge are regarded as authentic. Some of them initiate us
into the proximate means to human ends and the rest teach us the
remote means to human ends. This view is agreed on all hands.
The demonstration of the authenticity of the Agamas of the Saiva, the
Pāñcarătra and such other Schools
Various other Agamas are noticed by us. They generally
admit of two types. Some Agamas are absolutely opposed to
the Vedas, viz., the Agamas of the Buddhist school. The other
Agamas are not opposed to the Vedas. But they teach new
rites which have been suggested by them. The Ãgamas of the
Saiva school illustrate the second type of Agamas. Of these
two types we hold that the Agamas of the Saiva school are
authentic since we find reasons neither to entertain a doubt
about the truth of knowledge, derived from these Agamas nor
to contradict the truth of knowledge, derived from these
Agamas nor to contradict the truth of such knowledge by other
true judgments. It has been established by the Dharma Šāstras
and inference that these Agamas have been composed by God.
We cannot imagine that they owe their origin to greed, delusion
and such other sinister motives. Some doctrines of the Šaiva
system of thought are in perfect agreement with those of some
sections of the Vedas. Thus there is no scope for entertaining
the hypothesis that these Agamas bear the stamp of sinister
motives such as greed, delusion, etc., on their face. They do
not challenge the authority of the Vedas since they do not
discard the caste-system etc., accepted by the Vedas. Reasons
which have been advanced in support of the authenticity of
the works of Manu and such other persons are not applicable
to vindicate the truth of the Agamas of the Saiva school. But
still it is reasonable to hold that they are true. If we carefully
examine the doctrines of these scriptures then we find that theyDiscussion on the Validity of Saiva Agamas, Pāñcarătra etc.
are saturated with the teachings of the Upanişadas which point
to final emancipation.
551
Kṛṣṇa-Dvaipayana and others-the leaders of the Vedic
scholars, approve of the authenticity of the Agamas of the
Saiva school, etc. But this approval of the authenticity of the
Pancarătra school is also hinted at since there is nothing to
discredit the truth of the scriptures of this school.
Lord Vişņu has been declared to be the author of the said
scriptures. He is none but God. God who is the eternal cause of
the whole world has infinite majesty. He creates, preserves and
destroys it. As He discharges three distinct functions, viz.,
creation, preservation and destruction so three designations,
viz., Brahman, Viṣṇu and Śiva, are given to Him. In the Vedas
there are repeated references to the hypothesis that Rudra is
only one without a second; and Visņu strides over this world.
It is also stated that Rudra is Vişņu. As they are held to be
in charge of creation, preservation and destruction so the ways
and means of worshipping them have been prescribed in the
Vedas. In the scriptures of the Saiva and the Pancarătra schools
the different methods of worshipping them have been given.
Such a difference does not imply that the scriptures of these
schools are in conflict with the Vedas since the methods of
worshipping God are merely optional. Hence their authenticity
should not be challenged since they have been composed by
the trustworthy persons and are not opposed to the Vedas.
The scriptures of the Buddhists are not authentic
No man of culture approves of the authenticity of the scrip-
tures of the Buddhist schools since these scriptures which prefer
to teach the means of final emancipation really embody lectures
on misconduct. It is a plain fact that the Buddhist scriptures
are not affiliated to the Vedas. We learn from them that they
have advised to abandon all manners and customs arising from
duties prescribed for the different castes.
The Buddhist saints who are indifferent to the worldly plea-
sures are addicted to animal slaughter. So their conscience is
clouded. Hence their scriptures are not true.
They generally induce persons to do such acts as are prohi-552
Nyayamanjari
bited by the Vedas. Whose speech will not falter to declare that
the scriptures are true?
Though it is a very rare phenomenon that few persons some-
times obtain mysterious control over some departments of
Nature, following the said sinful path yet this success is com.
pared to the enjoyment of creature comforts, derived from
killing a Brahmin. This success will result in hellish tortures.
Sins which arise from indulging in prohibited acts are never
remedied. The inevitable result of them is to suffer in inferno
in the future.
The defenders of Buddhism may argue in favour of the truth
of the Buddhist scriptures that Buddha and such other saints,
the authors of these scriptures, are trust-worthy persons since
they have become omniscient practising meditation. How do
you meet this argument? It is refuted thus. No book can pass
as a work of a trust-worthy person unless and until an authori-
tative person recommends it to be so. He approves of the
authenticity of the Vedas, the Purāṇas and the Dharma Šāstras
which closely follow the teachings of the Vedas and those of
some Agamas that are not hostile to the Vedas. But he does
not recommend the truth of the Agamas of the Buddhist school.
How will these Ägamas be accepted as works of the trust-
worthy persons ? The motive behind the composition of these
texts may be clearly stated. Ignorance, greed and such other
motives play an important part in their composition. With this
remark the Buddhists who challenge the authority of the Vedas
should be excluded from the list of the trust-worthy persons
(āptas). The Buddhists review this stand and say.
"Who is an authoritative person? What is his appearance?
How much is the number of such persons? What is his con-
duct? Answer these questions." Moreover, in order to establish
the truth of their scriptures the Buddhists hold that Buddha is
a trust-worthy person. They may also add that they have got
their own authoritative persons and their number is roughly
a hundred crores. How can you refute this view? The refutation
of this view is as follows. The stages of life are well-known in
the land of Aryas. The second question is "What is his appea-
rance?" Does this question amount to this? How do his hands
and feet look like? Or, how do his head and neck look like?Non-authenticity of the Buddhist Scriptures
553
(Our simple answer is this that all his limbs bear a close
resemblance to those of a human being). The number of these
authoritative persons is so vast that it is beyond the scope of
human calculation. The authoritative persons who adhere to
the laws of caste-system and the duties of four stages of life
are as old as the Vedas are. Those who believe in the truth
of their Agamas are also loyal to the above tenets of the
Vedas.
The wicked Buddhists, restrained by the influence of the
Vedas, avoid the touch of Caṇḍālas. If they bid a long farewell
to caste-system then how does the touch of a caṇḍāla conta-
minate ? the other saviours in the name of initiation into the
mystic intuition of incomprehensible Reality commit sinful acts
such as the taking of prohibited food, unchartered debauchery
etc. But they being afraid of the great persons who honour
caste-system, do everything behind a screen but not in broad
day-light. But if they have unflinching confidence in their
scriptures then why do they behave like a thief? Thus they
cannot claim that they have got hundreds of millions of great
men as their own. But the great men who adhere to caste-
system etc., discard such Agama
nas as are hostile to the Vedas
but do never join hands in their praise.
Whenever a man of good conduct touches a saviour he takes
an ablution and washes his cloth with water. The Buddhists have
no social intercourse with them. Almost every body follows the
dictates of the Vedas. An Agama, non-affiliated to the Vedas,
is a trick to mislead people.
The voluminous work, known as the Vedas, fortunately is
possessed of such unique wealth of contents that the authors of
Agamas non-affiliated to the Vedas envy it. When they vindi-
cate the truth of their Agamas they follow the method of the
Vedas to express their ideas. As they try to dive deep into the
subject-matter of the Vedas they import Vedic ideas in their
Agamas here and there. They consider their works to be pure
by the touch of the Vedas. The lamp of the truth of the Vedas
becomes bright as it were in their heart. As no Agamas other
than the Vedas stand the test of the good opinion of the great
men so they have not been composed by the trust-worthy
persons.554
Nyayamanjari
It has been declared that the system of logic has been written
to establish the validity of the Vedas. If the task is done by the
approval of the great men then what is the necessity of compo-
sing the said logical system. Enough of these superficial objec-
tions! There are a few heretics who contradict the veracity of
the Vedas accepted by the great men. The weapon in the shape
of logic is hurled against them in order to counteract their
arguments. Therefore the truth of the scriptures stated before
is established. But the works which are not affiliated to the
Vedas are not true.
The hypothesis that all Agamas are authentic since they have been
revealed by the trust-worthy persons
Some thinkers accept the veracity of all Agamas since the
truth of knowledge imparted by them is neither contradicted nor
doubted. They imagine that all Ägamas like the Vedas have
been composed by the trust-worthy persons. These Āgamas teach
us both secular and transcendental matters. Their teachings
on secular matters are found to be correct. (But the verifica-
tion of their doctrines with regard to transcendental objects is
not possible. This remark applies to the Vedas as well). An
objection has been raised regarding the Agamas that all
Agamas, having discordant voice should invalidate one another.
It is met thus. All Agamas are equally true since they have
been composed by trust-worthy persons. One Agama cannot
cantradict another Agama since a weak spot is noticed in none
of them. The content of one Agama is contrary to that of ano-
ther. The said contrariety is negligible. All the sentences of the
Vedas are held to be true. They exhibit such contrary chara-
cter. The touch of the head of a person, the drinking of wine,
the killing of a cow etc. have been enjoined by some Vedic
injunctions. But the just opposite acts have been enjoined by
some other Vedic injunctions. Moreover, the Agamas are not
really opposed to one another since they do not disagree in
pointing out the goal of human life.
✔
The Agamas are many. The roads to the goal of life, they
prescribe, are also many. But they all converge upon the same
goal of life as many rivers carrying different currents of water
flow into the same ocean.On the Authenticity of the Agamaśāstra
In all the systems of thought final emancipation has been
declared to be the only ultimate goal of human life. But they
differ from one another in selecting various forms of knowledge
as ways and means to that end. But many of them agree toge-
ther to declare that the object of such knowledge is the soul.
Those who hold that the discriminating knowledge between
Purusa and Prakṛti leads to final emancipation express the view
that Purușa should be distinguished from Prakṛti. Those who
preach the doctrine that the soul does not exist make a show of
refuting the existence of a soul, But they believe in the existence
of pure consciousness (consciousness which is not mixed up
with feelings, passions, desires, impressions etc.). This consci-
ousness has its independent existence, i.e., it is not a by-product
of matter. It does not rest upon another object as its locus.
Such consciousness is a substitute for the soul. The only
difference lying between these two hypotheses is this that the
soul is static but a series of phenomena of consciousness is
dynamic. The Buddhists also hold that this series of consciousness
is infinite, i.e., does neither begin nor meet with an end. All the
different systems agree in accepting the two principal tenets,
viz., the knowledge of Reality and final emancipation. (They all
believe that the knowledge of Reality is the proximate cause of
realising the ultimate goal and the cessation of all sorrows is
the final goal of human life. Let each Agama prescribe its own
distinct rite. One Agama may advise its followers to wear
matted hair and besmear their bodies with ashes. Another
Agama may prescribe to carry a stick and a water-pot.
Another Agama may teach its followers to remain naked. But
do these diverse teachings suggest that the Agamas are
at war with one another? Do not the Vedas enjoin the
different ways of attaining Heaven? Hence though the
Agamas hold contrary views yet this opposition does not
contradict their validity. Now, an objection is raised against
this solution. How do you correctly know if Kapila is omnis-
cient then Sugata is not omniscient. Again, if both of them are
omniscient why do they hold contrary views ? Such an objection
is met thus. If they are unanimous in major topics then their
difference in minor matters may be easily overlooked. But
sometimes the very existence of difference invalidates a work. If
555556
Nyayamanjari
an Agama instructs a rite which loudly denounces other Agamas
then such condemnation does not amount to their invalidation
since condemnation does not logically determine invalidation.
The Agama of a particular sect prescribes to take food
from the skull of a dead person. We entertain a doubt as to
the validity of the Agama because it prescribes such a rule.
Such a doubt arises in our mind since we are familiar with the
teachings of the other systems of thought, have framed a
habit of thinking in that direction and possess deep-rooted
impressions of the contrary teachings. In other words, we have
formed a peculiar angle of vision. From that point of view we
find fault with the above prescription. But we do not dive
deep into the merits of the question.
But, on the contrary, persons who possess calmness of mind
and have compassion for every creature entertain a doubt about
the validity of the Vedic injunction prescribing animal
slaughter. Let one's heart trouble, thinking of the killing of
enemies enjoined by the Vedas since carnage is its end and
personal gain is its motive. The killing of animals has been
prescribed as a means to an end (a subsidiary rite) in connec-
tion with a few sacrifices such as Agni-soma etc.
We learn from the Vedas that the killing of animals is useful
to the completion of the sacrifices mentioned above. People
undertake such actions, being inspired by the Vedas. A compa-
ssionate person entertains a doubt, even in such cases, about
the validity of such injunctions. They say "If animal-slaughter
is a religious act, which act will be an irreligious one? The
truth of the Vedas is not discredited in spite of the inclusion
of such disputed injunctions. Similarly, the other Agamas will
also be held to be true though they contain certain matters
which do not find universal acceptance,
A hostile remark has been made against some procedures of
the other Agamas which advocate the attainment of perfection.
It has been stated that though one attains communion with
Siva yet he will be punished in the future because he has done
prohibited acts. Such criticisms are not fair since these acts
have not been prohibited by the Agamas in question. Though
the said acts have been prohibited by the other Agamas yet
they may be taken as optional ones. If they are proved to beOn the Authenticity of the Agamašāstra
557
the means to the ultimate goal of a human being then how can
it lead to a pit-fall?
Or, we may assume for the sake of an argument that the act
which has been prescribed by a particular Agama and at the
same time condemned by the other Agamas may be productive
of evil consequences in the future. Still, an Agama is not
invalidated because of its prescription of such an act just as the
truth of the Vedas is not questioned though they contain in-
junctions enjoining Syena sacrifice and its like. All these
scriptures prescribe acts, considering the mental get-up of the
followers with an eye on educating them in accordance with
capacity. The injunction that one should perform Syena
sacrifice, intending to kill an enemy points to a deeper mean-
ing. The injunction contains the (significant class-name)
'abhicāraḥ' (intending to kill enemy). The said epithet signi-
fies that the person who transgresses the prohibition that one
should not kill an animal is directed to perform Śyena sacrifice.
The person who is entitled to Śyena sacrifice will commit a
sin because he will kill his enemy by means of this sacrifice.
The Vedas will not be discredited because they enjoin such
acts. It has been stated in the Sabara Bhāṣya that some in-
junctions enjoin such acts as produce good results in the next
life some other injunctions enjoin such acts as bring about pro-
sperity in this life and some other injunctions enjoin such acts as
yield evil consequences. It is not irrational to enjoin different acts
according to the capacity of the different persons to be directed
by injunctions. One who covets death is enjoined to perform
the Sarvasvåra sacrifice. One who longs for a long life is en-
joined to perform the Krsnala caru sacrifice. Such prescrip
tions do not invalidate the Vedas.
In the Buddhist scriptures caste-system has been refuted.
This refutation is significant It suggests that the Buddhists
extend their favour to all and take pity upon all. The good-
will and the softness of heart of the Buddhists have been prais-
ed. The refutation of caste-system purports to convey the good
qualities of the heart of the Buddhists. The abolition of caste-
system should not be literally taken. There is a rule in the
Buddhist scriptures that a sick man or a man of very low birth
should not be admitted to mendicant orders. It is, therefore,Nyāyamañjari
reasonable to hold that all the Ägamas are true since they
have been composed by the trust-worthy persons such as Kapila,
Sugata, Arhat and such other personages.
God is the author of all Ägamas
558
Some other thinkers suggest that God who is the ruler of this
Universe is the real author of all Āgamas. He has direct ex-
perince of the various degrees of maturity of actions of all
creations. He enters into their feelings and sees that there are
several roads to final emancipation. He takes into consideration
the capacity of each person, determined by his previous actions
and instructs him the proper way to the final goal. He assumes
various bodies by virtue of His transcendental powers and goes
by different names. The epithets ‘Arhat', 'Kapila' and 'Sugata'
apply to God who is self-identical. If one assumes that there are
many mniscient beings than he violates the law of parsimony.
Lord Buddha is the son of Suddhodana. How can he be
God? Revered Kṛṣṇadvaipayana has given an answer to this
question.
Whenever there is a degeneration of religion and irreligion
prevails upon the earth I assume a body.
The body of Buddha has been procreated by Suddhodana
but not his soul. Therefore, the great teachers of religion hold
this view that Lord Vișņu comes down upon this earth as an
incarnation of divine law.
If the Vedas and the other Agamas have one and the same
author, why do not the other ´Agamas command the same
respect from the great personages? It is a truism that they do
not honour the other Āgamas as much as they do the Vedas. Be-
cause God is directly aware of the subconscious mind with its
tendencies of a few persons, chalked out a path for them, and
blessed them with His instructions. Innumerable persons derive
immense benefit following the royal road, prescribed by the
Vedas. For this reason, their regard for the Vedas is very high
but that for the other Agamas is limited. If all of them owe
their existence to the author why are they at war with onc
another? The Vedas themselves furnish us with the required
answer. We may cite a large number of Vedic instances which
represent irreconcilable views. Therefore, all the Agamas are
true since they have been composed by God. The otherOn the Authenticity of the Agamalastra
559
thinkers hold that all the Agamas are true because they rest
upon the Vedas as their foundation. We should not hold that
Manu's law-book is reliable because it has been composed by
a trust-worthy person since to err is human, the words of a
person sometimes mislead us and a hypothesis should be based
upon facts. We shall make minimum assumptions if we hold
that the said book is based upon the Vedas.
This argument applies to all Agamas. The Vedas which are
believed to be the basis of Manu's Law-book are not known to
us. If the upholders of this hypothesis hold that they are to be
inferred then we may as well say that the Vedas which consti-
tute the basis of the other Agamas are also to be inferred.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may argue that as the preformer of
the Vedic rites and that of the rites, prescribed by Smrti
literature, are one and the same person so the Vedas which
are supposed to constitute the basis of Manu's Law-books are
inferred. But those who obey the dictates of the other Agamas
do not perform the Vedic rites. So we cannot infer that the
other Agamas are based upon the Vedas. Hence how can we
infer that the Vedas constitute the basis of the other Agamas?
The above argument does not refute the hypothesis that the
other Agamas are based upon the Vedas. If a person who obser-
ves Vedic rites is identical with him who performs acts preserib-
ed by Smrtis then this identity does not determine the validity
of Smrtis. This shows that the Vedic rites may be blended with
those of Smrtis.
It is not a truism that an act which is not correlated to a
Vedic rite is not derived from an authentic source. The duties
of the different castes and the different stages of life are not
discharged by one and the same person. Are they not derived
from an authentic source? As the said duties are derived from
an authentic source so an act which is not correlated to a Vedic
rite is also derived from an authentic source.
It may be argued that as a person who follows the path of
the other Agamas does not perform the Vedic rites so the other
Agamas are based upon a source which is distinct from the
Vedas. The argument does not hold good. There is nothing to
contradict the hypothesis that the Agamas are based upon the
Vedas since they contain no error-no defect.560
Nyayamanjari
If it is held that the authors of the other Agamas have direct
experience of the contents of their works by transcendental
perception then this assumption does not obey the law of
parsimony. The recensions of the Vedas are infinite. The
Āgamas in question may draw their materials from
Vedic works. It is highly logical to hold that they are based
of the
any
upon the Vedas.
are based
Now if it is assumed that the Agamas in question
upon the Vedas, why do the Mimāṁsakas who are well-versed
in the Vedas cherish hatred against this assumption ? Our reply
to this question is this: "Just approach the Mimāṁsakas who
bear a grudge against the other Agamas to find out an answer.
93
Why do the Mimāṁsakas cherish hatred against cow-slaughter
which has been clearly prescribed by the Vedas? The alleged
incompatibility holding between the Vedas and the other
Āgamas has been refuted. As the Vedic literature is infinitely
large so it is difficult to establish the said discrepancy.
Do you think that a fraction of Vedic literature, which being
committed to memory is current among us constitutes the
whole of it? How do you know for certain that the views
which we do not accept do not correspond to those to be found
in the other branches of the Vedas ?
The Samkhyas hold that Prakṛti is constituted by three gunas,
viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. A germ of this hypothesis is
noticed in the Vedic literature. The verse 'ajām ekām lohita-
śukla-kṛṣṇām etc.' points to it. The Buddhists hold that the
sages live only on the air. It is a repetition of the Vedic con-
clusion that the realisation of consciousness as the ultimate
reality is the goal of life. The Vedic scholars notice the germs
of a few customs such as putting on red cloths, besmearing the
whole body with ashes, using the skull of a dead man as a pot
and so on in the Vedic literature.
Though the followers of some Agamas do not perform the
Vedic rites like the adherents to Manu's Smrti yet those
Agamas are the source of true knowledge since they are based
upon the Vedas. Hence all the Agamas should be treated as
Smrti.
Manu in some places teaches the duty of an individual. Such
teaching is not the product of his imagination. He closelyOn the Authenticity of the Agamaŝăstra
561
follows the Vedic texts. Everything has been given in the Vedas.
The Vedas are the store-house of all knowledge.
The mention of the name of Manu is by way of illustration.
The names of the other authors of Smrti should also be taken
into consideration. Gautama, Yama, Apastmba, Samavrta,
Kathaka and others should also command our respect. Simi-
larly, the same treatment should be accorded to Arhat, Kapila,
Sugata and such other persons. The verse which offers eulogy
to Manu should be interpreted in such a catholic spirit.
Now, a fresh problem arises. If we are so generous in our
attitude towards the Agamas then the works of the materialists
should be accepted as authentic. A germ of the materialistic
doctrine is noticed in the Vedic literature. The body is nothing
but our soul. It is constituted by the gross elements. It perishes
with the decay of elements. No consciousness persists after the
destruction of a body. No soul is immortal from this point of
view. The continuity of consciousness is absurd. If the materia-
listic philosophy is taken to be true then the safety of all
Agamas will be assured.
The solution of this problem is as follows. No duty has been
prescribed by the materialistic system. It is purely dialectical
in its character. No work of this system is entitled to the desig-
nation of Agama.
The materialists may contend that their work embodies duties.
One should pass his days in happiness as long as he lives. It is
no advice since our instinct prompts us to seek after pleasure.
An advice in this matter is useless. One should not follow the
round of duties prescribed by the Vedas. One should not place
his confidence in the teachings of the Vedas. What has been
taught by the materialists has been refuted.
The materialistic philosophy is based upon the prima facie
view stated in the Vedas but not upon the conclusive views of
the Vedas. In the Brhadaraṇyaka Upanişad the concluding
portion of the doctrine of soul runs thus:-"I do not intend
to mislead you, misrepresenting the doctrine of soul. The soul
is imperishable. It has a short-lived contact with a body”.
Therefore the books on materialism do not represent an
independent point of view since they embody the superficial
view of things, stated in the Vedas in order to be refuted. As562
Nyayamanjari
the above view is confuted by the concluding portion of the
Vedas so it should be absolutely disregarded. But it will be
improper on our part to assume that the views represented in
the other Agamas are based upon the prima facie views, stated
in the Vedas since no corresponding counter-conclusions are
noticed in the Vedas. Therefore, all Agamas are authentic since
they are based upon the Vedas.
The proving of the hypothesis that a particular Agama is not authentic
Now, a fresh problem arises in our mind. If the validity of
all Agamas is thus established then a new book which I write
may be accepted as authentic within a few days. The reasons
which have been stated above are also applicable to it.
The book which is very old is reported by some cunning
fellows as a new one.
The Agamas are held to be authentic if they satisfy the
following conditions :
(1) They must attain celebrity among the circle of the great
persons.
(2) They must be accepted by a large number of men of
good conduct.
(3) Though they may have been recently composed yet they
should not instruct such conduct as appears to be unprecedented.
(4) The greed of money should not be the motive of their
composition.
(5) They should not preach such doctrines as cause anxiety
to others.
Any and every treatise should not be considered to be an
authentic one. Shall we accept 'Kuttinimatam' (a book written
by Damodara Gupta) in which advice has been given by a
senior prostitute to the junior ones as an authentic one ?
Let us cite an example of bad conduct under the name of
religion. So goes the rumour that some designing persons intro-
duced a festival known as Nīlămbara vratam (a black curtain
festival). They used to hang up a curtain. Behind the screen a
large number of men and women used to mix freely with one
another and to enjoy promiscuous relation with no regard
for moral codes. The king Samkara Varman, conversant with
the essence of religion, stopped it as he knew it to be somethingProof that a particular Agama is not authentic
unprecedented. But he did not stop the real religious practice
of the Jainas and others.
563
In fine, we arrive at the conclusion that the Vedas are true
as they have been composed by a trustworthy person. They
have been so composed that no defects which have been ascribed
to them by the philosophers of the rival schools belong to them.
Thus validity has been firmly assured of them. The other Sastras
are true since either they are based upon the Vedas or they
have been composed by the trustworthy persons. We may
apply any of these two reasons to prove the thesis. But under
no circumstances one can point out defects in the Vedas on the
ground that the Vedas are not based upon a source book.
An objection to the validity of the Vedas
Veracity does not belong to the Vedas unlike health which
is the property of a sound body. The body of the Vedas suffers
from many defects such as falsehood, etc.
+
One who is desirous of getting animals should perform the
Citră sacrifice. One who intends to get a son should perform
Putresți sacrifice. On the completion of these sacrifices the
performer does not invariably obtain the result. Therefore the
injunctions, prescribing Citra sacrifice and its like, are false.
The defender of the truth of the Vedas meets the objection
thus. What is the meaning of the first injunction. The sentence
proposes to import that he who intends to get an animal should
perform the above işți. We are to prove that one obtains
animals just after the conclusion of the said isti. Then why are
not the injunctions prescribing the Citra sacrifice, etc. true ?
In the injunctions, viz., "One should perform a sacrifice as
long as he lives". "One should offer libation as long as he
lives" nothing is stated about the prolongation of the life of the
performer of a sacrifice since life is not the result of such actions.
Similarly, as animals do not result from the Citra-sacrifice so
desire for animals should qualify the performer of the sacrifice.
When one knows for certain that he cannot gain animals by
means of the said sacrifice he may not perform the sacrifice.
We shall discuss this matter later on. Reflecting on the nature
of an action we come to know that a result which a sacrifice is
proclaimed to yield, will follow it in close succession since an564
Nyayamanjari
effect is seen to follow from an act in immediate succession.
Some say that an act should produce its effect during its life-
time since when our limbs are pressed we enjoy pleasure. One
who undertakes to perform a sacrifice does so under the impres-
sion that the feeling of want which pains him will be removed
at once. The act of sacrifice, being an act, will perish after
sometime. Such being the nature of a sacrifice how can it yield
the so-called effect in the remote future? Some argue in the
following manner. When an act had existed it did not yield
its result. When the said result is produced the act does not
exist. In that case how can we causally connect a sacrifice with
the result? How will a sacrifice yield the result, having perished
at the time of its fruition ? Moreover when the said result is
obtained in some other time some other tangible causes are
noticed to condition it. A sincere service, rendered to the owner
of animals, is the tangible cause of getting animals. As such a
visible cause is noticed so no person of clear understanding
will subscribe to the hypothesis that a sacrifice like Citră, etc.,
the result of which is not tangibly established produces the said
result. Thus we hold that the injunctions which prescribe sacri-
fices like Citrã, etc., are false.
We cannot pin our faith in the truth of the Vedic injunction
which prescribes sacrifices like Citrã, etc., since they do not
yield the promised result. Similarly, we are not convinced of
the truth of the other Vedic injunctions prescribing Agnihotra
sacrifice and others.
The injunctions which prescribe Agnihotra, etc., are false
since they are part and parcel of the Vedic sentences like the
Vedic injunctions enjoining sacrifices like Citrã, etc. They are
not held to be true because there is no agreement between
a promise and its fulfilment. It should also be noted that there
is also discrepancy between an injunction and its result in case
of the Vedic injunctions "One who deserves to have a son should
perform the putra-işți-sacrifice".
Sometimes, we notice just the opposite of what has been stated
in the Vedas (A person who has undertaken the sacrifice of
Agnihotra should preserve the fire kindled at the time of his
marriage ceremony as long as he lives. The fire is preserved
in a pot. After his demise, the pot, containing the said fire, isObjections to the validity of the Vedas
}
565
taken to the cremation ground. His funeral pyre is set to fire
only by means of this preserved fire. If this fire is not available
the dead body of the performer of an Agnihotra sacrifice will
not be burnt). In the Vedas the collection of the pot, containing
the preserved fire, has been enjoined. Having given instruction
relating to the above act the Vedas declare that this dead per-
son, the performer of Agnihotra sacrifice armed with the instru-
ment of sacrifice, goes to heaven. What is the meaning of the
demonstrative pronoun 'this' (esaḥ), used in the Vedic text?
If it is held that this' signifies the soul then it has only a
secondary meaning since the soul is a transcendental object.
The soul does not wield the implements of a sacrifice, viz., a
wood-knife, a pot-sherd, etc. Therefore the pronoun 'this' signi-
fies the body. But the body does not go to heaven since the
body is reduced to ashes. This state of the body is opposed to
its going to heaven. Thus the result, declared by the Vedas, is
reversed. The Vedas are not true since there is no agreement
between a promise and its fulfilment and there is a reversal of
the declared result.
The Vedas are false since they involve inner contradiction.
There are three injunctions in the Vedas, viz., (1) “One should
offer libation after sun-rise", (2) "One should offer libation
just before sun-rise", and (3) "One should offer libation in the
early morning, i. e., long before sun-rise". Having prescribed
these three periods of time of offering libation they (these hours
of libation) have been prohibited by artha-vādas which con-
demn such libations at these periods. If one offers libation after
sun-rise then the dog called Syāva licks the content of his liba-
tion. If one offers libation long before sun-rise, Sabala licks the
content of his libation. If one offers libation just before sun-rise
then the dogs Śyāva and Śabala lick the content of his libation.
The defenders of the Vedas cannot hold that these are nominal
artha-vādas having nothing to import. The reason behind our
statement is this that a praise amounts to an injunction and
condemnation indicates a prohibition. As a praise and an injunc-
tion have the same meaning to import so condemnation and
prohibition imply the same sense.
The defenders of the Vedas may argue that when one con-
demns something he does not do it for the sake of mere censure566
Nyāyamanjari
but when he condemns something he does it for praising some-
thing else. Such a contention is not tenable. The specified
periods of time have been prohibited. No hour remains in order
to be praised by this censure. Therefore the Vedas are false
since they impart incompatible instructions, i.e., they involve
contradiction.
The Vedas are false since they contain repetition. (The hotṛ
priest utters a Vedic mantra in order to kindle fire. This mantra
is called Samidheni. Or, the hotṛ priest places faggots on fire
uttering a Vedic mantra. This mantra is called Samidheni.
These Samidheni mantras are eleven in number. Each mantra
has its distinct designation). The first one of these Samidhenis
is called the prathama rk. The last one is called the uttama ṛk.
It has been enjoined that the prathama rk is to be repeated
three times and the uttama rk is also to be repeated thrice. If
these mantras are recited thrice, such a recitation amounts to
repetition. As the Vedas prescribe to read out a mantra again
and again so they are open to the charge of repetition. If the
single recitation of a mantra bears fruit then the thrice recita-
tion of the mantra is redundant. Therefore the Vedas are not
true since they contain false statements, involve contradiction
and encourage idle repetition.
The author of the Nyaya-sutra says to this effect. In case of
Putra-işti-sacrifice the Vedas make a false statement. When they
enjoin the offer of libation they involve contradiction. When
they advise to utter a mantra again and again they expose them-
selves to the charge of repetition. The Vedas are not true since
they suffer from these defects.
A reply to the charge of the falsehood of the Vedas.
The above problem is solved thus. Gautama says that it is
not true that the Vedas are untrue since they do not fulfil the
promise held out by them. He further adds that the result is
not obtained because there may be some defects in the sacrifi-
cial act itself or in the institutor of the sacrifice or in accessaries
of the sacrifice. The critics of the Vedas hold that the Vedas
are not the source of true knowledge because they make a false
declaration of results. But it is not a fact. As it has not been
established. The false declaration of results is proved by theObjections to the validity of the Vedas-Answered
567
experience of the absence of results. The latter is not
an invariable concomitant of the former. It is seen that
though the Vedas are not false yet the expected result is
not obtained. Do you think that the result is not obtained
because the Vedas are false? Or the expected result does
not occur because there are some defects somewhere in
the conditions of a sacrifice. There is no crucial instance on
either sides. Now the critics may contend that as the result
does never immediately follow from a sacrifice so the result is
not experienced because the Vedas are false. They further add
that the said defects in the performer of a sacrifice is not
responsible for the non-appearance of the expected result. Such a
contention is not sound. Our experience teaches that if the
Kārīrī sacrifice is well-done then there is instantaneous rainfall.
It is not a case of accidental coincidence. The causality of the
said sacrifice has been stated by the Vedas. It has been verified
by the joint method of agreement and difference. Some sacrifice
yields secular results like a son, etc. If we reflect on the nature
of these results then we come to know that these results cannot
be produced at once. A son does not fall from the sky like
drops of rain. The union of a man with a woman is one of its
necessary conditions. So a son is not born just after the com-
pletion of a sacrifice. It is also seen that somebody receives a
gift of animals just after the completion of a sacrifice. Let us cite
an example. Our grandfather desirous of owning a village
performed a sacrifice known as Samgrahaņi. He obtained the
village of Gauiamūlaka just after the completion of the
sacrifice.
woman
Now, the critics raise another problem. Let the acceptance
of a gift be the tangible cause of getting an animal, etc.
Let the union 3 man with a
be the cause of
begetting a son. Is there any necessity of postulating a
sacrifice as a cause? Do not argue in this strain. Though the
tangible conditions assemble yet the effect is not produced.
When the sacrifice is performed the result follows. Thus we
arrive at the definite conclusion that the union of a man with a
woman accompanied by the performance of a sacrifice is the
cause of begetting a son.
Moreover, when all persons wait upon their preceptors, readNyayamanjari
the books upto the end with equal attention the result differs
in degree. Therefore it is not reasonable to hold that the
tangible conditions are only responsible for the result. Now,
the objectors may contend that the very nature of the tangible
material causes is responsible for the difference in the result.
Such a hypothesis will be refuted later on. A condition over
and above the tangible ones must be assumed.
568
Some thinkers hold a similar view and
say that a sacrifice
and an injunction enjoining it are to be included in the list.
of conditions. There are cases when sacrifices are performed
without any defect but no result in the shape of getting a son
or an animal, etc., follows even in the remote future. In such
cases it is to be assumed that a powerful unrewarded
action persists from the previous birth and counteracts the
fruition of the present action. The sacriptures also lend their
support to this hypothesis. If an action does not sometime
yield its result then unrewarded merit or demerit lingers to
prevent its result. The author of the Nyaya-Sūtra illustrates the
counteractive agents of an action citing various examples. But
he does not believe that these defects constitute the exclusive
counteracting agents. It is not responsible to hold that the
Vedas are not true since the result does not follow in close
succession. They may yield results after some lapse of time.
When they do not yield results some factors such as defects in
the performance or counter-acting agents may be responsible.
Moreover, the Vedic injunction concerning Citra sacrifice
signifies that one obtains animals if he performs it (Citrā sacri-
fice). But there is no proof in favour of the suggested meaning
that the result of the said sacrifice follows in immediate succes-
sion. The present time comes only within the scope of
perception. The injunction enjoining Citra sacrifice suggests
that the result will occur at an indefinite period of time. Percep-
tion cannot contradict such an injunction since the subject-
matter of an injunction does not fall within the province of
perception.
Kumarila Bhatta has said to this effect in his Šloka-Vārttika.
If the result of an enjoined act does not follow in close
succession the injunction in question is not invalidated therebyObjections to the Validity of the Vedas-Answered
since it does not refer to say fixed period of time within which
the result of the act will be produced (i.c. obtained).
The objector has stated that if we reflect on the nature of
an act then we come to know that the result of Citră sacrifice
should follow in close succession. They also put forward an
analogical argument that whenever one presses his limbs he feels
pleasure arising from it. But this is the analogical statement of
an ignorant person since no result of an ordinary act should be
logically compared to that of an act enjoined. An ordinary act
yields a particular result but an enjoined act also produces a
different result. In case of cultivation an improvement upon
land is the result of the act of ng. The wealth of harvest is
the result of an act enjoined by a sentence. When do you find
an injunction with regard to cultivation? Such an injunction is
found in the science on agriculture, or, we learn it from the
experts. Or, we learn it from the joint method of agreement
and difference which is a substitute for an injunction. (If we
cultivate we get harvest and if we do not cultivate, we do not
get harvest. Thus one should cultivate in order to grow
harvest.)
There are some secular injunctions current among the people.
Let us take an illustration of such injunctions, viz., one who is
desirous of getting a salary should cook food in another person's
house. The act of cooking is enjoined by the above injunction.
The result, produced by the act, is rice. But he who obeys the
injunction gets salary which is its result. A law which governs
all acts is this that an effect follows an act in close succession.
But in the above illustration there is no definite temporal
sequence between an injunction and its result. One who obeys
the above popular injunction does not necessarily get the result
i.e., salary just after the completion of the enjoined act. In a
sacrifice the immediate result of the act of offering an oblation
to fire is a change in the nature of an article offered. A person
who massages the limbs of another person irregularly gets the
reward of his service. There are secular injunctions such as one
should wait upon a king with a view to owning a village etc.
There is no law regarding these injunctions that a result
regularly follows from such an injunction at a definite period
of time. Prescriptions of medicine have been instructed by the
569570
Nyayamanjari
Ayur-Veda (medical science). If one follows any such instruc-
tion and takes medicine then he does not instantaneously get
its result. But it requires an interval of time to get it. Thus there
is no proof with regard to the hypothesis that every act
produces its effect in close succession. It is generally said that
if a person performs a particular sacrifice then he very quickly
obtains animals. Such a statement has been made in view of
the mental condition of a person who has been suffering from
taking bad food for a long time and is in need of animals. But
it is not logically sound. A person who performs the said sacri-
fices wishes to have the result. But there is no logical certainty
about the speedy result.
If the desire of the person or that of his priest is very strong
then he gets the result in this life. But the result of a sacrifice
is not instantaneous like that of an ordinary act. There are
certain acts which bear fruits in this phase of life but take time
to produce them. If one desires to possess holy effulgence then
he should be invested with the holy thread at the age of five.
But the boy does not possess holy effulgence as soon as he is
invested with holy thread. But after a lapse of time he acquires
it. Similarly, the other rites which are performed for acquiring
manly vigour etc., share the same lot. As there is no hard and
fast rule that acts which are enjoined yield immediate result so
the result of such an act being not immediate the injunction
concerned does not become invalid. If an act enjoined does not
bear its fruit even after a long interval of time then some
defects or demerits of the institutor stand in the way of its
fruition. We have already made this point of view clear.
A reply to the objection against the validity of the Vedas from another
standpoint.
Some other thinkers do not approve of the incompleteness of
a Vedic rite due to a defect in the performer of the rite etc.
They hold that if a sacrifice does not yield its result in this life
then it will do so in the next life. As a purposive Vedic rite is
completely observed with an eye upon each of its details so it is
not fair to assume a defect in it. So we assume that the result
is obtained in the next life.
We assume that there are three kinds of Vedic rites, viz., (1)Objections to the Validity of the Vedas-Answered
some acts produce results in this life, (2) Some other acts bring
about irregular results and (3) the rest acts bear fruits in the
next life. Among them the Käriri sacrifice yields its result
in this life. When famine breaks out and the whole country
is tormented with excessive heat owing to the scarcity
of rain the Käriri sacrifice is performed.
571
Rainfall is the result which it aims at. Rainfall is anxiously
expected by all since it pleases all. So rain should come down
instantaneously. The actual wording of the Vedas is noticed
thus :-If it rains then the Vedic rite will be completed with
rain-drops. But if it does not rain on the day of performance
then libation should be offered on the next day. Sacrifices
like Jyotiştoma etc. bring forth fruits in the next life. The
very nature of the fruit speaks for itself that it will be effec-
tuated in the next world.
Paradise is happiness beyond comparison. Or, it is a place
where such happiness is enjoined. A person having this body
can neither enjoy such happiness nor enter that land of bliss.
The sacrifices like Citrä etc. produce irregular results. We may
obtain the result of the Citrā sacrifice, viz., animals in this
life or in the next life. We should also note the following in
this connection. We see that some persons who have not per-
formed the Citra sacrifice obtain animals. If it is held that the
gaining of animals is due to tangible causes such as service,
the acceptance of gifts etc., then with the break-down of the
causal relation subsisting between the said sacrifice and the
gaining of animals the materialistic view should be embraced.
If we stick to the hypothesis that we gain animals by means of
a sacrifice then we should determine which rite helps us to do
so. We are sure that if one performs such rites as bestow on
him holy effulgence, etc., he does not gain animals thereby.
He has not performed the Citra sacrifice which helps him to
gain animals in this life. If he had performed the said sacri-
fice in the previous birth then he must have obtained the result
in that life since it has been admitted by them that the Citrá
sacrifice brings forth its result in the same life. Now our
opponents should explain "How does he gain animals ?"
Now, the opponents may contend in the following manner.
They take their stand upon the authority of Gautama's law-572
Nyayamanjari
book and quote a passage from his book to suit their purpose.
Some persons who performed the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice and such
other sacrifices in the previous birth enjoyed some portion of
their fruits after their demise. Merits arising from such acts
have not been exhausted. On the strength of stored-up merits
they gain animals. Gautama says, "When persons belonging to
four castes and four different orders of life discharge their res-
pective duties prescribed by the scriptures they enjoy heavenly
bliss after their death. When the stock of merits giving heav-
enly bliss is exhausted they are again born on this earth owing
to the influence of remaining merits. Now, they become
distinguished scholars, are noted for their good conduct and
acquire immense wealth etc." We are not able to follow the
meaning of this passage as given by you.
A Vedic rite produces a particular result but cannot bring
forth another result since an act and its result are causally
connected.
For this very reason the above passage of Gautama's book
does not refer to a particular Vedic rite. It refers to many
such rites. On the basis of this reasonable assumption we
should interpret the passage of Gautama. Persons, belonging to
different castes and orders of life, have performed many Vedic
rites. Among these rites they enjoy the fruit of Jyotistoma
after their death. The other Vedic rites viz., Citrà etc. do not
produce result at that time. When merit arising from Jyotis-
toma becomes exhausted the turn of other sacrifices such as
Citră etc. comes up. Merit arising from them has been held
up so long. It finds an opportunity of producing its effect. The
performers of Citră sacrifice take their birth marked by distinc-
tion, on this earth, in order to enjoy its fruit. This is the
inner meaning of the passage of Gautama. Hence the ownership
of animals in this life is due to the performance of Citrá sacri-
fice in the previous birth. Such ownership is neither due to
actions other than Vedic ones nor due to the other Vedic rites.
As Citră sacrifice irregularly produces its result so the result of
Citră sacrifice is not invariably produced in this life. The
Vedas, containing injunctions, are not false since if the result
of Vedic rites is not seen in this life, they will produce their
result in the next life.Objections to the Validity of the Vedas-Answered
A reply to the above reply
We answer the points, raised by the rival school and
directed against us, in a serial order. Do the Vedas clearly
state the threefold division of the Vedic rites? Or, do you
grasp it, examining the nature of Vedic injunctions? Or, do
you discover it, reflecting on the nature of the result of such
injunctions? Or, do you exercise your sweet will to establish
such division? Of these suggestions the first one is not tenable
since there is no clear statement indicating the three-fold
division of injunctions. The Vedic injunctions run thus:-One
who is desirous of rain should perform Kärīrī sacrifice; one
who desires heaven should perform Jyotistoma sacrifice; and
one who expects to gain animals should perform Citră sacrifice.
This much has only been stated in the Vedas but nothing
more. The Vedas do not declare that such-and-such rite yields
its result in this life, such-and-such rite brings forth its result
in the next life and such-and-such rite irregularly produces its
result. The function of an injunction is to induce a person to a
good action. The subjunctive mood in which a verb, con-
tained in the Vedic sentence, is used implies that it should be
done in response to his desire. But an injunction does not induce
a person to an impracticable action. It induces a person to a
practicable action. If the desired object is not realised then an
injunction does not prompt one to undertake such an action. A
person undertakes such a sacrifice as leads to the desired goal.
An injunction implies that the causal relation subsists between
a sacrifice, the meaning of a verb, and its result. But an
injunction does not imply whether the result which the insti-
tutor of a sacrifice intends to have will immediately happen or
not. But if we closely examine the nature of the result of a
sacrifice then we know that heaven is realised in the next life
but not in this life. But, it does not point to the realisation
of the result in the next life. The result of Citra sacrifice viz.,
the gaining of animals does not immediately follow the sacri-
fice. A person may cherish a wish to classify results but it has
no effective power. We cannot ascertain the meaning of the
Sastras by means of our arbitrary will. There is no proof in
support of the three-fold division of results.
The argument which has been put forward to prove the
573574
Nyāyamanjari
thesis that the result of Citră sacrifices takes place at an irregu-
lar interval may be easily applied to the result of Citră sacrifice
which invariably yields result in this life. The Citră sacrifice
brings forth its result in this life but there is no certainty about
the time of its occurrence. Kumārila has said in his Śloka-
Värttika that Citra sacrifice produces its result in this life but
nobody can accurately predict the time of its fruition. It is not
a fact that the god of cloud does not send down rain if the
Kārīri sacrifice has not been performed today. Why do you
not postulate that the Kārīrī sacrifice performed in the
previous birth, is responsible for rainfall? Therefore, let the
Kārīrī sacrifice be irregular in yielding its result.
The objectors may contend that the statement "It is not a
fact that the god of cloud does not send down rain if Kārīri
sacrifice has not been performed today" purports to convey
that the rainfall in question is due to merit. They prove their
point thus. If there is a plenty of harvest, people are happy.
The enjoyment of happiness in due to merit. Therefore merit
alone accounts for the said rainfall. If this is the drift of the above
contention then they should as well say that one will gain
animals without performing Citra sacrifice. One derives much
pleasure from drinking milk, sour milk etc. The enjoyment of
such pleasure is due to merit. Such merit will alone help him
to gain animals. For this purpose the performance of Citra
sacrifice is not at all needed. Rice depends upon Kārīrī
sacrifice and the gain of animals depends upon Citrā sacrifice.
Let one gain animals and have rainfall due to merit alone
since the pleasure derived from taking rice mixed
milk is effectuated by merit. Now, the Mīmāṁsakas may
up with sour
contend that the Vedas distinctly mention that the gain of
animals is due to the performance of the Citra sacrifice. Hence
merit, arising from any good action, produces an enjoyment of
pleasure but does never account for the gain of animals.
If they argue like this then it may be pointed out that the
Vedas distinctly declare that Kâriri sacrifice brings forth rain.
In that case merit arising from any good action will not explain
rainfall. (The draft of this discussion is that the result of
Kariri sacrifice appears irregularly. If the Mimariisakas accept itObjections to the Validity of the Vedas-Answered
then they should discard their thesis viz, the three-fold division
of Vedic rites).
575
The Mimamsakas may contend that the deep reflection on
the meaning of the Vedic sentence "If one performs Käriri
sacrifice today but it does not rain then he will offer libation
tomorrow etc." makes us understand that rain which results from
Kārīti sacrifice takes place in this life. If this is their contention
then on the absence of such a direct statement, e.g., "One who
wishes rain should chant the hymn seen by Saubhari etc.", the
Vedic rite should produce its result in the next life. Moreover,
if the secular character of a result is determined only by the
authority of the sentence "One should offer libation to-morrow"
then the obvious secular character of the result of a Vedic
rite, not based upon such an authoritative Vedic sentence,
will cease to exist.
If the secular character is asserted of rain because it is to be
enjoyed in common by many then the same logic applies to
the result of Citră sacrifice, viz., animals. The perfomer of a
sacrifice is not necessarily a selfish person since he has been
advised to feed his sons and daughters, guests and servants etc.
before he takes his meal. But we admit that rain does service
to a greater number of people. No need of comparison.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas argue that rain is secular because
men long for its speedy setting in, but the same logic applies
to animals since they are also coveted in a similar manner.
When men are oppressed by excessive heat owing to the
absence of rain they long for its speedy arrival. When people
pass their days in anxiety, being afflicted by the scarcity of
food they also long for animals in a similar manner, In fine,
we suggest the following. He who bestows drinking water gets
satisfaction in return, i.e., he never suffers from the scarcity of
water. He who gives food enjoys endless bliss. These instruc-
tive words of a sage point to the thesis that merit is the con-
dition of bliss in general. It is also implied that if Kariri
sacrifice is not performed rain may come down and if Gitrā
sacrifice is not performed animals may be gained. If this
implied meaning is accepted one does not enter the fold of the
Carvãkas since it is never stated that a result does not follow576
Nyāyamanjari
from a Vedic rite. The accepted moral law that a vedic rite
and its result are causally connected is not at all violated.
The problem why Kariri sacrifice does not occasionally
produce its result has been solved. If a Vedic rite though
thoroughly performed does not become fruitful sometimes then
unrequited demerit which is in store for the performer of the
rite from the previous birth counteracts its fruition. The scrip-
tures also lend their support to this solution. Hence, one
should arrive at the conclusion that Kārīrī sacrifice irregularly
gives its fruit. The above-mentioned demerit cannot create
a perpetual hindrance. When it is requited it must terminate.
When demerit which stands in the way of the fruition of
Kārīrī sacrifice wanes, i. e., when the obstacle is removed
Kārīrī sacrifice surely becomes fruitful. Again, Kārīrī sacrifice
may not produce its result in this life owing to the presence of an
obstacle. But it cannot decay without bringing about its result.
It will most probably yield its result in the next life. So it
cannot but be irregular in producing its effect. In this manner
we approve of the hypothesis that the other sacrifices like
Citrå etc. are also irregular in producing their result. When
Citră sacrifice is performed perfectly well but its result is not
obtained it is assumed that demerit hinders its fruition. Citrâ
sacrifice agrees on all fours with Kārīrī sacrifice with the only
exception that Kärīrī sacrifice is capable of producing an
instantaneous result. Similarly, we explain the nature of other
sacrifices which are performed by persons longing for the
spiritual lustre of a Vedic scholar, undissipated semen, food,
a village etc. Therefore, we should accept the literal sense of
the above-quoted passage of Gautama's Dharma-sastra. The
Mimarisakas have stated that if a purposeful Vedic rite is
performed along with all its subsidiary rites then there is no
possibility of its being defective. Such a statement is really
illogical. Even though a person sets himself to perform a
sacrifice accompanied by all its subsidiary rites yet defects may
unwittingly creep in through inadvertence. The author of the
Nyaya-bhäsya has exhibited that such inadvertence admits of
various types. Therefore the former way of solving the pro-
blem is better.On the Validity of the Vedas
The determination of the meaning of the term Dharma from the stand-
point of the Naiyāyikas
The objectors have joined issue with the believers in the
efficacy of sacrifices and said "How do the sacrifices bring
forth results since they do not endure when the so-called
results appear?" Such an adverse criticism is not fair. Though
a religious act does not endure till the appearance of the
expected result yet the institutor of the act acquires invisible
potentiality arising from it (the term "saṁskāra" stands for
adrsta but not for impressions).
This invisible potentiality which is produced by a religious
act is an attribute of the individual soul like the other ones,
e. g., consciousness, etc. It persists in the soul until the result
appears.
As consciousness is generated by the contact of the soul with
the sense-organs, etc., so invisible potentiality arises from the
performance of sacrifices and similar religious acts.
Consciousness is short-lived but unlike it invisible poten-
tiality lasts till the appearance of the result of Vedic rites. If
one does not subscribe to this hypothesis then the causal relation
between a religious act and its result cannot be established. As
the thinkers of the other schools admit that impressions condition
memory so the Naiyãyikas hold that invisible potentiality
which determines the appearance of the said result will also
belong to the soul.
577
This invisible potentiality admits of two kinds, viz., merit
and demerit. The invisible potentiality which arises from a
sacrifice or from a similar pious act is called merit but the
unseen potentiality which springs up from sinful acts such as
the killing of a Brahmin is called demerit.
The finding of the different meanings of the term Dharma and the
refutation of these meanings
The followers of Kapila hold that the specific mode of
Buddhi which is part and parcel of inner organ is colled adṛṣṭa
(invisible principle of merit and demerit). The Jainas suggest
that the changing substance entitled punya is called Dharma.
The Buddhists hold that tendencies which tend to form habits
and reside in Citta (the inner organ) are called Dharma. The576
Nyayamanjari
from a Vedic rite. The accepted moral law that a vedic rite
and its result are causally connected is not at all violated.
The problem why Kārīrī sacrifice does not occasionally
produce its result has been solved. If a Vedic rite though
thoroughly performed does not become fruitful sometimes then
unrequited demerit which is in store for the performer of the
rite from the previous birth counteracts its fruition. The scrip-
tures also lend their support to this solution. Hence, one
should arrive at the conclusion that Kārīrī sacrifice irregularly
gives its fruit. The above-mentioned demerit cannot create
a perpetual hindrance. When it is requited it must terminate.
When demerit which stands in the way of the fruition of
Kārīrī sacrifice wanes, i. e., when the obstacle is removed
Kārīrī sacrifice surely becomes fruitful. Again, Kārīrī sacrifice
may not produce its result in this life owing to the presence of an
obstacle. But it cannot decay without bringing about its result.
It will most probably yield its result in the next life. So it
cannot but be irregular in producing its effect. In this manner
we approve of the hypothesis that the other sacrifices like
Citră etc. are also irregular in producing their result. When
Citră sacrifice is performed perfectly well but its result is not
obtained it is assumed that demerit hinders its fruition. Citrā
sacrifice agrees on all fours with Kārīrī sacrifice with the only
exception that Kārīrī sacrifice is capable of producing an
instantaneous result. Similarly, we explain the nature of other
sacrifices which are performed by persons longing for the
spiritual lustre of a Vedic scholar, undissipated semen, food,
a village etc. Therefore, we should accept the literal sense of
the above-quoted passage of Gautama's Dharma-sastra. The
Mimamsakas have stated that if a purposeful Vedic rite is
performed along with all its subsidiary rites then there is no
possibility of its being defective. Such a statement is really
illogical. Even though a person sets himself to perform a
sacrifice accompanied by all its subsidiary rites yet defects may
unwittingly creep in through inadvertence. The author of the
Nyâya-bhäsya has exhibited that such inadvertence admits of
various types. Therefore the former way of solving the pro-
blem is better.On the Validity of the Vedas
The determination of the meaning of the term Dharma from the stand-
point of the Naiyāyikas
577
The objectors have joined issue with the believers in the
efficacy of sacrifices and said "How do the sacrifices bring
forth results since they do not endure when the so-called
results appear?" Such an adverse criticism is not fair. Though
a religious act does not endure till the appearance of the
expected result yet the institutor of the act acquires invisible
potentiality arising from it (the term "samskara" stands for
adṛṣṭa but not for impressions).
This invisible potentiality which is produced by a religious
act is an attribute of the individual soul like the other ones,
e. g., consciousness, etc. It persists in the soul until the result
appears.
As consciousness is generated by the contact of the soul with
the sense-organs, etc., so invisible potentiality arises from the
performance of sacrifices and similar religious acts.
Consciousness is short-lived but unlike it invisible poten-
tiality lasts till the appearance of the result of Vedic rites. If
one does not subscribe to this hypothesis then the causal relation
between a religious act and its result cannot be established. As
the thinkers of the other schools admit that impressions condition
memory so the Naiyâyikas hold that invisible potentiality
which determines the appearance of the said result will also
belong to the soul.
This invisible potentiality admits of two kinds, viz., merit
and demerit. The invisible potentiality which arises from a
sacrifice or from a similar pious act is called merit but the
unseen potentiality which springs up from sinful acts such as
the killing of a Brahmin is called demerit.
The finding of the different meanings of the term Dharma and the
refutation of these meanings
The followers of Kapila hold that the specific mode of
Buddhi which is part and parcel of inner organ is colled adrsta
(invisible principle of merit and demerit). The Jainas suggest
that the changing substance entitled punya is called Dharma.
The Buddhists hold that tendencies which tend to form habits.
and reside in Citta (the inner organ) are called Dharma. The578
Nyayamanjari
older section of the Mīmāṁsakas assert that a new thing which
emerges from the performance of pious acts such as a sacrifice,
etc., and goes under the title 'Apūrva' is Dharma. According
to Sabara the religious acts themselves are Dharma. The
followers of Prabhakara preach that a mandate which is
signified by an injunction is called Dharma. The view of the
Samkhyists that a specific mode of Buddhi is Dharma and that
of the Jainas that the changing substance is known as 'punya'
stand refuted as their fundamental tenets have been refuted.
As the existence of the soul will be established so it should be
held that Vāsanā belongs to the soul but not to Citta. There-
fore, the Buddhist hypothesis is not sound. The existence of
Apūrva which steadily persists, being unsupported during the
time intervening between the performance of a sacrifice and
the attainment of heaven cannot be proved. So the hypothesis
of the early Mímāṁsakas is not tenable. Some Mīmāṁsakas
hold that the pre-non-existence of the effect of a sacrifice or
the force of a sacrifice is denoted by the term 'Apūrva' but
such a meaning is not tenable. [There is a misprint in the text-
book. 'Agni-sabdena' is a misprint. It should be 'Apūrva-
śabdena'.] The Prabhākaras hold that a mandate which is
signified by a Vedic injunction is denoted by the term
'Apūrva'. Such a meaning is not tenable. This view will be
refuted later on. He who performs a sacrifice is called a
pious man (a man who is possessed of dharma). So, the term
'dharma' has been employed in the sense of another term
which denotes a sacrifice and such other good acts. Hence,
the final import conveys that a sacrifice is the meaning of the
term 'Dharma'. Such a decision is not tenable. A sacrifice,
being short-lived, cannot produce its effect after a long time.
Hence, the terms 'sacrifice' and 'dharma' are not synonymous.
Even the people at large say that dharma (merit) springs
up from the performance of good acts such as a sacrifice,
charity, etc. This popular view gets the support of an age-long
tradition which gives evidence to the proposition that the
performance of good acts begets merit inhering the soul.
We should interpret the Vedic illustration "Yajñena Yajñam
ayajanta deväh", etc., as referring to dharma. Dharma, being
a lasting attribute of the soul, is capable of producing an effectMeaning of Dharma
579
even after a lapse of long time. In fine, dharma which is a
potentiality is a durable attribute of the soul, encased in a
human body. This attribute may easily produce an affect in
the future. Hence, the Vedas do not tell a lie when they
prescribe Citrá sacrifice which does not produce an instantan-
eous effect.
In a Vedic sentence we find a reference to the institutor of
a sacrifice, armed with the sacrificial implements. The truth
of this sentence is contradicted by perception since the body
of this person is reduced to ashes. Such a charge against the
truth of the sentence in question is baseless. The demonstrative
pronoun 'this' refers to the soul to which the identity with the
body has been attributed.
The soul may go to heaven since the verb 'to go' has been
used in a secondary sense. To go' conveys the meaning of
enjoying. It is quite possible for the soul to enjoy heavenly
bliss. When we say that the soul is born or that it is dead we
use these sentences in a secondary sense. We purport to convey
that the soul has been united with a body or that the soul has
been separated from a body. Similarly, when we state that the
soul goes to heaven we mean to say that the soul enjoys
heavenly bliss. As the soul is all-pervasive so it has no motion.
The soul is an agent because consciousness, conation and
volition inhere in it. Its agency is not determined by its
activity. We shall discuss this point later on. When we say
that the institutor of a sacrifice is armed with sacrificial
implements we purport to convey that he possesses them. The
relation of ownership subsists between him and the implements
in question. We should not think that these implements are
conjoined to the soul since all souls, being all-pervasive, are
conjoined to them. In that case these would have no distinction
to mark off the soul in question from the rest. Therefore it will
be better for us to suppose that the relation of ownership holds
between the soul and the implements in question. Though the
souls are all-pervasive yet the particular soul will be distingui-
shed from all other souls since none but the soul in question
possesses the above implements. It is adequately proved that
the relation of ownership subsists between the soul and the
above implements.
.580
Nyayamanjari
In fine, the charges of falsehood, etc., levelled against the
Vedas, are baseless.
The Vedas are immune from inner contradiction, etc.
It has been pointed out that the Vedic injunction concerning
the time of pouring libation to fire suffers from inner contradic-
tion. The three different hours of such offerings have been
prescribed with regard to the three different acts of pouring
libation. One has got to select the hour of pouring libation.
He should never transgress the hour once selected by him.
If one selects any one of these three hours and dishonours his
selection by violating it then he becomes an object of censure.
Thus injunctions and prohibitions are not contradictory as their
spheres of application are wide apart.
When the repetition of the Vedic mantras is necessary, being
due to significant regulation it does not amount to the defect
of tautology since the Vedic mantras are not repeated for
nothing out of caprice. The Vedas distinctly declare that the
number of kindling verses (samidheni) should be fifteen. The
mantra "I strike the enemy who hates us and whom we hate in
return with this thunderbolt, having fifteen sharp edges" has
been given in the Vedas. In this context there are only eleven'
kindling verses given in the Vedic text. We cannot get the
number fifteen if we do not repeat the verse. The mantras must
be repeated. But there is no definite ruling in this matter. The
absence of a rule will surely lead to a chaos. In order to bring
the situation under law and order, a restriction is imposed upon
the repetition of mantras. The rule of repetition runs thus : The
first and the last mantras should be read out thrice. Hence as
the repetition in question has got a definite purpose to serve so
it does not suffer from the defect of tautology.
If the repetition of a mantra is fruitless then it will be open to
the charge of tautology. But in the present context the repetition
of mantras is not fruitless. Hence the charges of inner-contra-
diction, falsehood, repetition, etc. do not detract from the
absolute validity of the Vedas.
The sage Gautama, being determined to vindicate the vali-
dity of the Vedas, discusses the meaning of the Vedic sentences
in his own work since he thinks that such a discussion is a
means to the justification of the validity of the Vedas.On the Validity of the Vedas
An objection to the validity of the Vedas since they contain artha-
vādas (praises, condemnations, mythological stories, etc.)
The objectors continue their negative criticism thus: Though
you are adept in the art of logic yet you have not been able
even today to remove all the defects to which the Vedas are
exposed.
Let us reaffirm defects which belong to the Vedas. He wept.
As he wept so he acquired the epithet 'Rudra'. The lord of all
beings heated his own fat. Then he poured libation of the same
into fire. But a goat came up as a result of this deed. Gods
became confused when they had come to know about divine
worship. Are these arthavadas literally true? Or, do they advise
us to discharge some duty ? Or do they play the part of a means
to an end which has been referred to by the Vedic injunctions
containing verbs in the subjunctive mood? In any case, they
are encircled by inconsistencies on all sides. If one holds that
arthavadas contain a record of events which happened then
such a statement is contradicted by other proofs. Thus the
Vedas cannot save themselves from the charge of untruth as
they contain such matters as are contradicted. There is no
proof in support of the correctness of statements about weeping,
the heating of fat, confusion, etc.
F
Moreover, the artha-vādas such as the inner organ is prone
to theft, everybody tells a lie, etc., inform us of such matters
as are contradicted by other proofs. It is a truism that everyday
does not naturally tell a lie and that the inner organ of every-
body is not prone to theft.
581
Moreover, smoke has been seen during the day as rising from
fire but the brightness of fire has not been seen. For this reason
the brightness of fire is seen at night but not smoke. This is
another instance of arthavada the subject matter of which is
contradicted by perception since the above two objects are
perceived when they come in contact with the sense organ.
Let us cite another instance of arthavada the content of which
is contradicted by perception. It states "We do not know
whether we are Brāhmaṇas or not". When we perceive a man
we recognise him to be a Brāhmaṇa provided that this act of
perception is strengthened by proper instruction. Some artha-
vādas also come in conflict with the scriptures. Let us illustrate582
Nyāyamanjari
our point. Who knows what exists or does not exist in the next
world. The Sastras instruct that heavenly bliss results from the
performance of Jyotiştoma sacrifice and so on. Is this result
impossible in the next world?
Let another instance of arthavāda be cited. This sentence
makes an assertion about the Triratra-Brāhmaṇa seen by Garga.
The face of a person who knows this Brāhmaṇa looks very
beautiful. But nobody's face looks more beautiful if he knows
the Brāhmaṇa. The truth of the arthavāda in question is contra-
dicted by perception.
There is also an arthavāda which indicates the futility of
some other Vedic rites. The text of the arthavāda is as follows
One fulfils all his desires if he pours final libation into fire. He
who performs the Paśu-bandha sacrifice conquers all the worlds.
He who performs the horse sacrifice conquers death, gets rid
of all sins and of the sin which arises from the killing of Brāh-
maņa. He who is acquainted with the text dealing with the
horse-sacrifice gets all these benefits. If the pouring of final
libation alone is sufficient to fulfil all desire, if the conquest of
all worlds is only possible through the performance of the Pasu-
bandha sacrifice and if the knowledge of the text dealing with
the horse-sacrifice confers on us the full benefit of the perfor-
mance of the horse sacrifice then what for are these instructions
regarding the performance of the other Vedic rites? The Vedic
rites which have been instructed in the Vedas should sink into
insignificance though one is to take a lot of cares and troubles
to perform them since the same results are obtained by means
of the other casier methods.
Let another example of arthavada be cited. Fire should be
kindled neither on earth nor in the mid region nor in the sky.
The kindling of fire has been prohibited in a roundabout way.
It is impossible to kindle fire either in the mid-region or in the
sky. Is the denial of kindling fire in either places significant ?
The sentence which purports to prohibit the kindling of fire
on earth should be taken as the universal prohibition of the
kindling of fire since the kindling of fire is only possible on
carth.
Let another illustration of arthavada be quoted. The insti-
tutor of a sacrifice is (the kusa grass strewn over a sacrificialOn the Validity of the Vedas
altar) and the sacrificial post is the sun. How can we accept
the truth of such a sentence? Sentences like this directly refer
to such things as are contradicted by our perception. The per-
former of a Vedic rite cannot be the kusa grass and the sacrifi-
cial post cannot be the sun. (The performer of a sacrifice is a
man but not grass. We learn this from our perception. The
sacrificial post is a log of wood but not the sun. We gather this
from perception). Therefore such sentences are not literally true.
We cannot prove them to be so.
Now the defender of the truth of arthavādas may suggest
that these arthavādas oblige us to do something. Such a sugges-
tion is not logically sound since the acts which are indicated
by the arthavada are not practicable. He (the lord of gods)
wept. As he wept so he acquired the epithet 'Rudra' from the
weeping. Now let us assume an act which may be indicated by
this sentence. If we are to assume we should assume like this:
So goes the story that Rudra wept. Other persons should also
weep following his example. But we cannot entertain such a
suggestion. Weeping means the shedding of tears arising from
sorrow due to the separation from dear and near ones. One
cannot weep because the Sastras instruct him to do so. The
lord of all creatures heated his own omentum and poured it
into fire. So should other persons follow his example, heat their
omentum and pour it into fire. Such an act is impracticable.
Who can pour his own omentum into fire after having heated
it? If this act is done after whose performance would a goat
immediately go up to the sky? Gods were bewildered. There-
fore others should be bewildered. Such an instruction cannot be
worked out. Nobody can create his own state of bewilderment
at the instance of the Sastras. We cannot frame injunctions
from these artha-vådas. Therefore, the second alternative
suggestion is not sound.
Now, a third alternative suggestion has been forwarded that
the implied meanings of arthavādas are means to a principal act
which has been expressed by a distinct injunction. The third
suggestion is not also possible since it is not easily possible for
something to be a means to an obligatory act. An Arthavada
may act as an accessory to an injunction if it prescribes or to gods
having bearing upon the main obligatory action. Let us cite
583584
Nyāyamañjart
an instance in order to clarify the point in question. There is
an injunction, viz., "One should perform the Agnihotra sacri-
fice". There are other injunctions, viz., "One should pour the
libation of sour milk into fire", "One should pour the libation
of milk into fire", etc. These injunctions are called 'viniyogas'
(A viniyoga is such an injunction as enjoins the means to an
obligatory action). The latter injunctions supply us with articles
which are required for the performance of Agnihotra sacrifice.
Thus these injunctions become subsidiary ones whereas the prin-
cipal one is that which enjoins the Agnihotra sacrifice. There
are other injunctions, viz., "One should offer offerings in the
evening to the lord of all beings and to the god of fire. These
injunctions reveal the nature of gods to whom an offering is to
be made. Thus they become subsidiary to the injunction which
prescribes the Agnihotra sacrifice. This service cannot be ren-
dered by arthavadas. The arthavadas in question do not pres-
cribe minor acts which directly or indirectly feed the main act.
The minor dutics have been enjoined by the following injun-
ctions, viz., "One should pound Brīhis", "One should sprinkle
water on Brihis", etc. Thus we see that the arthavādas in
question render no help to any injunction.
Now the defenders of the truth of arthavādas may contend
that arthavadas are helpful to injunctions since they induce
the intelligent persons to perform obligatory duties and enco-
urage them. Such a contention is not tenable. Some good
selves hold that our implicit confidence in the eternality of the
Vedas encourages one to undertake an obligatory act prescribed
by the Vedas. But the Naiyāyikas assert that as a person has
unflinching reverence for the author of the Vedas so he feels
encouraged to take up a Vedic action but he feels no necessity
of being induced for this purpose. If a person does not move to
do on hearing the injunction that one who longs for such and
such results should perform such and such acts then he will
never budge an inch though temptations are held before him
in order to induce him to take up the above actions. This is
the shortcut criticism of the truth of arthavādas. The above
three hypotheses fail to establish that the words which consti-
tute the arthavadas have no self-consistence. Therefore as theOn the Validity of the Vedas
arthavadas which constitute a portion of the Vedas are contra-
dicted so the whole of the Vedas is untrue,
585
Now the defenders of the truth of the Vedas may contend
thus The portion of the Vedas which is contradicted by the
other sources of valid knowledge may be admitted to be false,
But why do you apprehend that the whole of the Vedas is
untrue? The critics give a fit rejoinder and hold that as the
arthavādas bear a resemblance to the other parts of the Vedas
so we disbelieve the truth of the other parts of the Vedas.
According to the Mimāṁsakas the Vedas which do not contain
arthavādas are not found out. Therefore, the Vedas, being inti-
mately connected with arthavadas, are false. Let us discuss the
problem of the point of view of the Naiyayikas. If it is clearly
grasped that God is not truthful in some cases then how can it
be firmly believed that He is veracious in other cases? There-
fore, the net result is that the Vedas as a whole come under
untrue knowledge.
A reply to the objection against the veracity of the Vedas since they
contain artha-vādas.
Our reply to the above objections is as follows. In the majority
of cases artha-vādas are so syntactically connected with injunc-
tions that they form a single sentence. A person who is desirous
of prosperity should kill a white goat, standing in the south-
west quarter. The god of the air is very speedy. The first of
these two is an injunction. The second one is an artha-vâda.
Though the sentence signifying praise does neither point to a
Vedic rite to be performed nor anything relating to it yet it
makes a statement about the injunction in question. Thus, it
becomes a predicate of the injunction. The injunction and the
artha-väda construct a single sentence. The artha-vāda "Väyur
vaí kṣepiştha etc." purports to make an assertion of the sentence
containing 'bhūti-kamah' as the last word. Why do these two
sentences construct a single sentence? The reason behind the
supposition is this that words which constitute these two senten-
ces imply mutual syntactical relation.
Now, a fresh question appears in our mind. By the sentence
containing the word 'bhūti-kāmaḥ' as the last word a rite to be
performed has been enjoyed. The learner has completely586
Nyayamanjari
understood its meaning. There is no incompleteness from the
syntactical point of view. Wherein lies the necessity of the other
sentence, viz., 'Väyur vai kşepistha etc.? Now it may be
replied that the second sentence contains a praise of the rite
communicated by the first sentence. In other words, what has
been prescribed by the former sentence has been recommended
by the latter one.
Now, a question re-appears in our mind. Is not the recom-
mendation superfluous? It matters little whether praise is bes-
towed on the rite or not since the rite always remains the same
but acquires no new character if it is recommended. Such an
objection against the utility of an artha-vāda does not hold good.
When words denoting praises are constructed with a sentence
embodying an injunction to complete it such a complete sen-
tence becomes significantly injunctive. If a sentence is simply
used in the subjunctive mood, having no words of praise in it
then does it not enjoin? If no words of praise are found
near about an injunctive sentence then a sentence in the sub-
junctive mood surely enjoins. But, on the contrary, if therc
are words of praise found near about an injunction then the
sentence, expressing a command, shall contain the words of
praise as its essential components, otherwise it shall not express
a command since our experience teaches us to think so. If words
expressing praise are syntactically connected with a sentence
denoting a command then we are to sec according to the gram-
matical rule whether there is a split in the sentence. In obedience
to the rule we hold that these words denoting praise and the
words which constitute an injunctive sentence are put together
to express a complete idea. Our experience records its evidence
in favour of such construction. If words which constitute a
sentence express no correlative meaning then such a sentence
should be given up or it should be split up into two or more
sentences. Therefore, words denoting praise are not superfluous.
Now, another fresh question appears in our mind. It runs
thus If injunctions disunited with praise are competent enough
to prescribe rites, why are praises attached to injunction?
Our answer to this question is this. According to the Mimam-
sakas, the Vedas are not to be taken to task. According to us
God is above all reproaches. When the Vedas are recited to usObjections against the Validity of the Vedas-Answered
we understand them but we do not compose them. For the
better understanding of injunctions the function of the artha-
vādas has been pointed out. It is a truism that artha-vådas are
not means to a Vedic rite like mínor injunctions which prescribe
accessories such as articles of worship, gods and other minor
details which contribute towards the completion of a principal
rite. Still nobody can prevent them from their efficacy in revea-
ling the significance of such injunctions. Thus, they help us to
maintain the veracity of the Vedas but do not throw light on
the subject-matter of the Vedas. When the performers of sacri-
fices listen to bare injunctions they find little interest in them.
Hearing such injunctions the spirit of prospective sacrificers for
whom they are meant droops down. But on hearing the artha-
vādas which contain the praise of these acts the sinking spirit is
cheered up. One should perform the sacrifice 'Sarvajit'. It is a
simple injunction-not associated with an artha-vāda. When
we hear it do we feel much regard for it? But when we hear the
associated artha-vadas such as 'Gods performed the Sarvajít
sacrifice in order to win all objects and to conquer all. Every
body who performs it conquers all' we cherish much regard for
the rite in question. This law also holds good in worldly tran-
saction. If persons listen to the injunction: This cow should
be purchased' then are they induced to purchase the cow? But
if they hear at the same time the praises of the cow, viz., "This
cow gives much milk, Her milk is substantial. She is very noble.
She has a calf. All her calves are living etc.' then they are
tempted to purchase her. If one simply asks his own experience,
he will understand the efficacy of praises, i.e., artha-vadas. For
this reason,
some jurists assume artha-vãdas where there
are injunctions, i.e., injunctions not associated with artha-
vādas just as they in some cases guess injunctions from artha-
vādas. It has been stated that an injunction and praises always
co-exist as the latter ones have bearing upon the rite in
question. This statement is based upon the sound practice of
jurists. An injunction is inferred from an artha-vāda (i.e. a
praise) if a syntactical relation is discerned between) a sentence
containing praises and a sentence embodying a mandate. But no
injunction is inferred from an artha-vada if such relation bet-
ween it (artha-vada) and an injunction is not known to us.
587588
Nyayamanjari
In the light of the above decision we shall not assume the
injunction "One should weep" from the artha-vāda "He wept
etc." The objector has unfairly made an adverse criticism. In
this case the syntactical relation of the artha-vāda with another
injunction has been directly suggested. There is an injunction
"Silver should not be paid as sacrificial fees in Barhiş sacrifice."
The subordinate position is occupied by the artha-vāda in
question (i. e., "He wept" etc.) in the above paragraph. The
full text runs thus : Rudra had wept. His tears which tickled
down on the ground became silver. He who pays silver in Barhiş
sacrifice will experience a sad scene of weeping in his house
within a year. Hence, silver should not be paid in Barhiş
sacrifice. There runs the injunction that one should slay a big
sheep, placing it in proper place, in honour of the lord of all
beings. Its remaining portion is that the lord of all beings
let out his own fat. In order to exhibit the excellence of the
libation of fat, it has been stated that as soon as the libation
of fat had been poured into fire the goat went up in the sky.
It is merely a praise. The sun is rice, boiled in milk, known
as 'Prayaṇīya'. There is an injunction concerning 'Prāyaṇiya'.
Its concluding portion is that gods were perplexed to find out
the sacrificial ground and their obscurity was removed by the
above-mentioned milk-boiled rice just as the sun, rising up,
removes the bewilderment of persons. Thus, in all cases, the
sentences containing artha-vāda (praise etc.) are to be taken
as the concluding portions of injunctions.
Why do you say that the incidents referred to by artha-vādas
are not true? The incidents are that silver sprang up from the
tears of Rudra and that a goat went up in the sky when the
sacrificial altar had been bright on the pouring of Prajapati's
own fat into it. Our reply to the charge of falsehood is that the
artha-vādas are not false.
The deep meaning of these sentences (artha-vādas) is truc
since the literal meaning of these sentences has not been pur-
ported to be conveyed here. An artha-vāda simply suggests
that some work should be done or that some work should be
avoided. These two meanings of artha-vādas will be clear to
us if we reconsider their significance. It should also be noted that
when we know some incidents we feel fascination for or hatredObjections against the Validity of the Vedas-Answered
589
against some works but the knowledge of these incidents does
neither propel not repel us. Therefore; such knowledge should
be disregarded as it becomes insignificant, having no useful
purpose to serve. Love and hatred are the two motive forces
which stir up a person. They are really signified by artha-vadas.
For this reason when a person takes the meaning of an artha
to his heart, he either moves to do something if he feels fasci-
nation for it or refrains from doing it if he feels hatred against
it. Therefore, artha-vădas are truly significant.
Rudra did not weep. Why do you tell the story of his weep-
ing. The story is allegorical. It purports to convey a meaning
through a metaphor. It relates an attribute. The attribute of
silver bears a resemblance to that of tears since both of them
are white. Silver is as impure as tears since silver is supposed
to be an effect of weeping. The possession of the same quality
suggests the causal relation subsisting between them. Thus the
story has been introduced in order to condemn the use of silver
in the said sacrifice. Similarly, in a sacrifice which requires
animal-slaughter the libation of fat has been recommended. In
order to make this recommendation strong the story that the
lord of all beings has heated his own fat to pour líbation into
fire has to be interpreted. In order to praise rice, boiled in
milk, called the sun, the story that gods, having taken their
seat in the sacrificial altar, were bewildered, has been narrated.
But the Naiyãyikas told that as the powers of God are in-
finite so there will be no absurdity if it is believed that the story
is literally true. We may believe that silver sprang up from
the tears of Rudra, the lord of all beings heated his own fat,
a goat went up after the libation of fat, and gods were bewif-
dered when they had taken their seats on the sacrificial altar.
If these stories are true, is there any harm? By all means the
artha-vādas in question are true.
The statement that the inner organ is a thief and the organ
of speech is a liar refers to the functions of these organs. As
the inner organ conceals its own nature so it is called a thief.
As the organ of speech indulges in exaggeration so it is called
a liar.
Smoke emanating from fire has been noticed during the day
but not the flame of fire. The flame of fire is seen at night but590
Nyayamanjari
not its smoke. The artha-vāda sentence purports to convey a
special meaning. The smoke, being voluminous, is seen from a
distance but the flame, being slender, is not perceived. The
flame of fire increases in volume at night. So it is perceived
from a distance. Smoke, being covered by darkness, is not seen
at night. This statement has been made to serve a special
purpose in the evening and to praise the sacrificial fire in the
morning.
The artha-vāda sentence "We do not know whether we are
Brahmins or not" apparently reveals a doubt about one's Brah-
manhood in order to praise the act of purifying one's lineage
with the utterance of mantras. (This act is so edifying that it
makes the attainment of Brahmanhood doubly sure). The act
of consecrating one's lineage with the utterance of incantations
is so meritorious that even a non-Brahmin becomes a Brahmin
if he observes it. Another artha-väda sentence "Who knows
whether the effect will happen in the next world or not" pur-
ports to culogise in act the result of which is tangible.
The artha-vāda sentence "The face of one who knows it
shines" embodies the praise of learning. The face of a teacher
shines when it is looked at by the admiring students. In ano-
ther sentence that he gets all the objects longed for the word
'all' does not denote all the objects in the universe without any
restriction. It should be interpreted with reference to the uni-
verse of discourse. It signifies all covetable objects appended in
the list of the effects of the Aśvamedha-sacrifice. The state-
ment that he who reads the text of the Aśvamedha-sacrifice
gets the same reward simply glorifies the said sacrifice.
One should kindle fire at a spot having placed gold beneath
it. In order to recommend this act the kindling of fire in the
sky or in the mid region or on Earth has been prohibited. One
should not kindle fire at a spot where gold has not been kept
inside. The injunction does not mean to say that fire should
not be kindled on Earth.
The statement that the sacrificial post is the sun purports to
convey that the sacrificial post, painted with bright colours and
anointed with clarified butter, looks like the sun because a cerc-
mony has been stated to be performed, viz., the Kuśa grasses
should be spread over the sacrificial altar in its honour sinceObjections against the Validity of the Vedas--Answered
the contribution of both of them towards the completion of the
sacrifise is of equal importance. People do not always use words
in the primary sense. They also employ words in the secondary
sense. Our experience testifies to such usages. In the Vedic
literature the words will also be similarly used. Thus, with
regard to Vedic rites if one worships the household fire reci-
ting the rks, sung in honour of Indra then he commits no
violation of rule. Thus, artha-vādas which embody either recom-
mendation or condemnation are the source of valid knowledge
since they are syntactically combined with the corresponding
injunctions to form a single unit. Similarly artha-vādas which
narrate the Vedic rites differently performed by the different
persons and record the mythological stories are to be similarly
combined with the corresponding injunctions.
591
In some cases, gaps of injunctions are filled up by an artha-
vāda. Thus they (artha-vadas) not only help the better
understanding of injunctions but also supplement the obser-
vance of Vedic rites. Let us give an illustration. Those who sit
the whole night acquire distinction. But the performance of a
sacrifice at night has not been prescribed by the injunction in
question. We learn it from the artha-vāda attached to it. We
learn only from an artha-vāda that person is entitled to perform
a sacrifice at night. Jaimini in his Mîmämsä sūtra (phalama-
traiva nirdesät) has also said to the effect. The sūtra expresses
this idea that if an injunction does not enjoin an action and
the artha-vāda, associated with it prescribes an action then the
action should be duly performed since an artha-vāda supple-
ments an injunction. Those who seek after name and fame
should perform a particular sacrifice at night. We grasp the
sense of the complete injunction only through the medium of
the said artha-vāda.
When a doubt arises in our mind about the meaning of an
injunction the doubt is solved by the accompanying artha-vāda
which supplements it (the injunction in question). The injune-
tion is that one should make an offering of sand anointed with
oily substance. Is it clarified butter or oil or fat? When a
doubt spreads over our mind the artha-vâda which is associated
with the above injunction comes to our rescue. It helps us to
solve the doubt. It says that clarified butter is a luminous594
Nyayamanjari
should be referred to by it. But there is no such animal in this
world as is required for the sacrifice in question. Therefore, the
mantra conveys no meaning. The second illustration also
points to the conclusion that mantras purport to convey no
meaning since an inanimate object is commanded to behave
like an animate object. The mantra runs thus :-'Auşadhe
trāyasva enam (Oh medicine protect this person.)' But medicine
does not understand that it has been employed to protect him.
Another example is this :-'Hear, Oh slabs of stone! (Srnota
grāvāṇaḥ). This meaning is absurd since unconscious slabs of
stone are never employed to listen to something. Moreover, the
mantra 'Aditir dyaurantarîkṣam' (Aditi is the sky, she is the
mid region). Similar mantras are full of contradictions.
How can Aditi who is the sky be the mid-region? There are
some mantras the meaning of which is not at all intelligible.
How can these mantras render some service to a rite by com-
municating their meaning? The mantras which convey no
meaning are as follows:
(1) 'Amyaksāta Indra rsţiriti'
(2) 'Śṛṇyeva jarpharī turpharitu'
(3) 'Indraḥ Somasya Karaketi ca'
Moreover, mantras do not purport to convey any meaning
since they have one of the two ends to realise, viz., (1) to pro-
duce merits or (2) to convey a meaning. If words are not
uttered, they cannot convey their meaning. Thus the recital of
mantras, being obligatory, renders its assistance to the comple-
tion of a sacrifice. Therefore it should not be assumed that
sole purpose of the recitation of a mantra is to convey its
meaning.
Establishing the hypothesis that mantras are valid we shall
now refute the above hypothesis that mantras have no mean-
ing. Do mantras convey no meaning? Or do they convey
their meaning without being restrained by any condition? Or,
is it your point that their meaning is not intended to be con-
veyed like the number 'one' of a sacrificial cup though the
communication of their meaning is governed by a set of condi-
tions? It is not sound to hold that they (mantras) convey no
meaning since when persons who are adept in the meaning of
words hear the mantra 'Barhir deva sadanaṁ dāmi (I cutObjection to the Validity of Mantras
the kusa-grass, the seat of gods)' they understand its meaning.
Their own experience bears witness to such understanding.
In other words, if they ask their own consciousness, they will
find an answer in the affirmative. One cannot hold that the
meaning of a mantra is unconditionally grasped. As the
constituent words determine the meaning of a sentence consti-
tuted by then in classical Sanskrit Language so words deter-
mine the meaning of a sentence in Vedic Language. It is not
a truism that their meaning is not learnt since words which
are used in classical Sanskrit Language are also used in Vedic
Language. These words denote the same meaning. It is highly
probable that the meaning of words is learnt from verbal
transactions. Now though mantras may communicate their
meaning yet it is not possible to hold that they do not purport
to convey their meaning like the number one of a sacrificial
cup since there is no reason behind the said non-intention.
There is a Vedic sentence which refers to a sacrificial cup.
There are other sentences which clearly determine their num-
ber. In a Soma sacrifice soma juice is divided into many
shares and is proportionately deposited on the different cups
since it is the recognised duty to place offerings on such cups.
All cups uniformly contain such juice. When a mantra says
"Pour soma-juice into a cup', it does not purport to convey
the singleness of the cup. It purports to convey the case-
ending of the cup but not its number since the number has no
significance. Let us now turn our attention to the mantra al-
ready referred to. The mantra "Barhir deva sadanam dâmi"
throws light on such articles as are required for a sacrifice.
These articles must get the sanction of an injunction. So they
have been previously known to us. A man refreshes our
memory and helps to remember the essential articles. Thus,
when we perform a rite with the aid of mantras it does some
good to us. Therefore, one cannot hold that mantras do not
purport to reveal articles which are essentially required for a
sacrifice. Therefore, it is not fair to state that mantras should
only be recited but their sense should not be grasped. There
are some mantras which are only muttered. Among these
mantras the Pavamani is included. There is an injunction
with regard to it that it should be muttered. The injunction
595596
Nyayamanjari
prescribes only muttering. So the knowledge of the meaning
of this mantra is not required. When can it be done? But if the
injunction 'One should mutter' is conspicuous by its absence
then we cannot disregard the meaning of a mantra which is
being presented to our consciousness and is being needed for
the performance of a rite.
Now, the objectors may contend that if on the strength of
the injunction 'One should mutter' it is held that a parti-
cular mantra, dedicated to Viṣņu, does not purport to convey
any meaning then on the strength of the injunction The
Vedas should be read' it may be as well pointed out that one
is only to get the Vedas by heart but not to grasp their mean-
ing the learning of which has not been emphasised. This point
has been elaborately discussed in the other works on philo-
sophy. But if we re-open the problem and discuss it in a de-
tailed manner then we shall expose ourselves to the charge of
garrulity since we overdo a minor issue. We shall not make a
mountain of molehills.
It has been stated that if the very recital of a mantra is
conducive to an end then its meaning is not to be insisted
upon. In this connection we point out that we indirectly know
from its sense that the mantra 'uru prathasva' is conducive
to the expansion of a sacrificial cake. If this be the case then
the injunction which reveals its conduciveness should be super-
fluous since it says over again what has been known. The
sense which follows from a mantra and is grasped by us can-
not be set aside. Now, the problem is: 'Is the mantra super-
fluous? No, it is not superfluous. But it is iterative. Or, the
above mantra is not an injunction. But it is an artha-vāda.
In other words, it has a secondary meaning. The act of expan-
sion augments the prosperity of the institutor of a sacrifice.
It increases his children and animals and thereby augments his
prosperity. In some cases, the instrumentality of mantras has
been enjoined e. g., when one is to handle a sacrificial ladle
he is to recite four mantras. Similarly, the instrumentality of
mantras is to be noticed in the mantras 'Agnīda agnin vihara'
etc. (From ähavaniya fire some portion is carried off to
establish gårhapatya fire).
It has been said that the recital of mantras is efficaciousObjection to the Validity of Mantras
597
but not its sense; the order of words in a mantra admits of no
change of place. This statement does not stand to reasoning.
The Mimamsakas hold that the Vedas are eternal. Hence, the
order of words in a mantra is unalterable. Kumárila has said
that the order of words in a mantra is unalterable. Kumārila
has said that if the order of words is changed then objections
arise from many points of view. We, the Naiyãyikas, hold that
God is the author of the Vedas. Have the students of the Vedas
the liberty to change the place of words? Our conclusion on
this point is this that the order of words in a mantra cannot be
changed for the expression of a particular meaning intended
by a person like the order of sentences in a Brāhmaṇa work.
An imaginary meaning of the mantra 'Catvāri Śṛngā etc.'
has been apprehended. Such an apprehension is based upon
sheer ignorance. It praises the act of sacrifice. It has a secon-
dary meaning. The clause 'Catvãri Sṛngă' points to the four
Vedas. The clause "Trayo' asya pādāḥ' indicates the three
acts of pressing the soma juice. The clause 'Dve Širşe' suggests
the husband and the wife who perform a sacrifice. 'Sapta has-
tasaḥ' refers to seven metres. The phrase 'Tridhã baddho'
implies that the procedure of a sacrifice is recorded in Mantra,
Brahmana and Kalpasūtra. The predicate 'Vṛṣabha' signifies
that a sacrifice fulfils all desires. The verb 'roraviti produces
an impression that a sacrifice resounds with the chanting of
stotras and the recitation of Šāstras.
The clause 'Maho devo martyān à viveśa' suggests that the
act of sacrifice is the best of all duties and has become current
on this earth. The implication of the whole sentence is the
praise of a sacrifice as we praise a river when we say that she
has her breasts in the shape of a pair of curlews, rows of teeth
in the shape of swans, a tuft of hair in the shape of moss and
her cloth in the shape of kaša flowers.
As a conscious being is ordered so an unconscious being has
been ordered by the command 'Oh, medicine! protect this
person'. This command is means for the Praise of medicine.
The sentence 'Sṛṇota grāvāṇaḥ', is an eulogy of pratar anuvāka.
It is a miraculous act by the influence of which slabs of stone
can even hear. The sentence 'Aditir Dyauh Aditir antarikşam'
is metaphorical. Hence it involves no contradiction. ThereNyāyamanjari
is a similar usage in our popular language, viz., 'You alone
are my mother, you alone are my father, you alone are my
sister and you alone are my brother.'
598
It has been stated that the meaning of some mantras re-
mains unintelligible to us. An answer to this objection is that
a reader is to blame. There are various ways and means
of understanding the meaning of the Vedas. In spite of them
if a person fails to make out the meaning of the Vedas then
he does not make a serious attempt at the proper under-
standing of such meaning owing to idleness. Therefore, the
Vedas should not be taken to task for this failure to under-
stand. We may make out the meaning of the Vedas by the
same method as we adopt to understand the meaning of the
sentences of Brahmaṇas. The first and foremost method is the
usage of the experienced persons since the same words are
used in Vedic and classical languages and they convey the
same sense. The words which are found in classical Sanskrit
Language are found in Vedic Sanskrit Language. These words
have the same meaning.
Let us take a few illustrations to bring home our point. The
Vedic sentence "Agnir vṛtrani janghaṇat" (fire dispelled
darkness). But in the Vedic sentence the word 'Agni' contains
cerebral 'na' but in classical language the word 'Agni' has
dental 'na'. Let us illustrate another Vedic sentence "Uttamā
vai devagavo vahanti" (The divine cows carry the piece of
wood by which fire is kindled). Let us illustrate another Vedic
sentence 'vanaspate hiraṇyavarṇa pradivaste artham" (Oh
gold coloured lord of trees! I receive from you the objects
longed for by me). With regard to the above illustration some
apprehend that words which have been used in Vedic sentence
are different from the similar words found in classical Sanskrit
language and that they do not convey the same meaning. In
the face of this misapprehension if we examine these words
with close attention then we recognise them to be the same.
But we admit that slight changes are only noticed in the Vedic
words. These words denote the identical meaning which they
convey in classical language. These words admit of the same
derivation. As they are derived in classical language so theyObjection to the Validity of Mantras
are derived in Vedic language. Generally, the popular meaning
of a Vedic word is accepted. But when the popular meaning of
a word comes into conflict with that of it, determined by the
scholars, the latter meaning is accepted as an authoritative one.
In the Vedic sentences, viz., (1) 'yavamayaścaruḥ', (2)
"Vārāhi upanahau" and (3) "Vaitase kate Präjāpatyaṁ sanci-
noti" the words ‘yava', 'varāha' and 'vetasa' respectively stand
for barley, a boar and cane in accordance with convention of
the cultured scholars. They do not respectively signify
Priyañgu, a black vulture and a black-berry. If there is no
such convention to ascertain the meaning of a few words then
we resort to the convention of the Mlecchas (those who speak
in non-Sanskritic language in order to communicate their
ideas). These words are 'pika', 'nema', 'Tâmarasa”.
If the convention of the Mlecchas is not available then we
should find out the signification of a word from the original
root with the aid of Nigama, Nirukta and Vyakaraṇa. The two
words 'jarphari' and 'turpharï' are in dual number. They have
been used in the hymn, dedicated to the twin gods 'Aśvins'.
With reference to the context their etymological meaning is not
hard to find out. They signify the sources of preservation and
destruction respectively. Thus they are names of Aśvins. In this
way we should explain other difficult words. For this reason,
we should not stick to the idea that mantras do not purport to
convey a sense.
599
Mantras, revealing their senses, render assistance to a sacri-
ficial rite. But they do not help a rite by their mere recitation
like the muttering of a mantra. Thus mantras do not indepen-
dently render service to a rite. But the validity of the Vedas,
the ocean of nectar in the shape of human ends, cannot be
detracted on that ground.
An objection to the validity of the Vedas as they contain names of rites
We now refer to a few Vedic sentences, víz., (I) 'One should
perform udbhid (that which comes into being) sacrifice', (2)
'One who desires animals should perform Citra-sacrifice', (3)
'One who longs for heaven should perform Agnihotra sacri-
fice', (4) 'One who seeks to kill his enemy should perform
Syena sacrifice' and (5) 'One who aspires after the celestial600
Nyayamanjari
kingdom should perform Väjapeya sacrifice'. Do these sentenc-
es prescribe means by which sacrifices are performed? Do
Udbhid, Citrā, Agnihotra, Śyena and Vajapeya constitute the
means to an end, viz., sacrifice? Or are these terms proper
names of a few sacrifices? What is the necessity of this scrutiny?
If it is held that these terms serve both the purposes then the
validity of the Vedic sentences will be called in question. For
this reason a thorough examination into the character of these
sentences is necessary. If you hold that these sentences prescribe
means with words 'Udbhidā' (that which comes into exis-
tence), etc, like the other sentences, viz., 'One should perform
a sacrifice with corns' 'One should perform a sacrifice with
the libation of sour-milk', etc. Do they inform us of a few
specific articles by which sacrifices are to be performed? If
this suggestion is accepted then there should be other Vedic
sentences which will prescribe the very act of sacrifice
the
end. If the act of sacrifice, i.e., the end, is not known then
there is no scope for the prescription of means. The injunctions,
viz., (1) "the offering of sacrifice unto Fire should be made
with cight pot-sherds" and "One should perform Agnihotra
sacrifice" are distinct ones which throw light on the act of
sacrifice, i. e., the end. When the end is revealed to us the
means are communicated to us by means of other subsidiary
injunctions, viz., (1) 'One should perform the sacrifice with
corns' and (2) 'One should perform the sacrifice with the
libation of sour milk'.
Now, a question arises, viz., 'Why do you look out for diffe-
rent sentences as principal or subordinate injunctions ? Let us
suggest that the single sentence 'One who aspires after
heavenly kingdom should perform Vajapeya sacrifice' pres-
cribes a sacrifice and at the same time demands that wine
should constitute its means. Is this interpretation open to criti-
cism? Yes, why is it not so? If you hold that the above sen-
tence has two independent predicates then it cannot retain its
unity. Then it should be split up into two independent sen-
teners. One of them signifies that heavenly kingdom is to be
attained by means of a sacrifice. The other one signifies that
the sacrifice should be performed by means of wine (vājapeya).Objection to the Validity of Mantras
601
The sentence, once uttered, cannot communicate the two senses
suggested by our opponents.
Now, the two sentences, suggested by our opponents, contain
the same verb 'Yajeta'. As the verb remains identical so it is
syntactically connected with the two sentences. One who aspires
after heavenly kingdom should perform a sacrifice and should
do it by means of wine. In both sentences the verb remains
the same. There will be no change in its character. Such a
defence does not hold good. In these two sentences the verb
which appears to be the same differs in essence. In the first
sentence a sacrifice is enjoined because it is not at all known
to us. In the second sentence a means to the sacrifice is pres-
cribed because the sacrifice is already known to us since the
prescription of a means is not at all possible if the act to be
done is not known beforehand. The injunction which prescribes
a means amounts to this that a sacrifice is to be done by such-
and-such means. The sacrifice in question becomes the goal as
it is known before. It is the substantive in the sentence. But in
the sentence heavenly kingdom is attainable by a sacrifice.
Heavenly kingdom is the goal. A sacrifice is a predicate. This
predicate is not an accomplished fact. It is to be done. It occu-
pies subordinate place in the sentence in question. Therefore,
the sacrifice in question has contrary characters in the two sen-
tences. The same verb cannot be syntactically connected with
the two sentences. In that case it should be characterized by
the irreconcilable contrary characters. He who aspires after
heavenly kingdom should perform a sacrifice. In this sentence
the predicate should perform a sacrifice' has a distinct
meaning. He who should perform a sacrifice should do it with
wine. In this second sentence the predicate of the first sentence
is no more a predicate. It is an adjunct of the subject. So it has
a distinct character of its own, (There is a gulf of difference
fixed between these two characters.)
If we hold that the injunction 'One should perform a parti-
cular sacrifice with wine' prescribes only a means then the act
of performing a particular sacrifice must have been learnt from
another source. Therefore, the very act of performing a parti-
cular sacrifice, being already known, is not an object of valid
knowledge since novelty is the criterion of knowledge. There-602
Nyayamanjari
fore, an injunction prescribing only a means is not true. In order
to avoid this defect of the said injunction the hypothesis that
the above injunction prescribes the act bearing the title ‘Vāja-
peya' is resorted to. If our opponent argues in this manner then
the injunctions ‘Udbhidā Yajeta', etc. become clearly super-
fluous. As soon as it is stated that one should perform a sacrifice,
it is learnt that this act bears the title 'Vajapeya'. (As the
injunctions referred to do not contain the names of. sacrifices.
so they involve repetition and hence are superfluous). Now, as
some sentences of the Vedas being superfluous, cease to be
authentic so we do not continue our belief in the veracity of
the other sentences of the Vedas. (The import of this topic is
that the name of a sacrifice is not revealed by a Vedic injunc-
tion).
An answer to the objection that Vedic sentences relating names of
sacrifices are not true
Our reply to the above problem is as follows: If it is held
that the above injunction prescribed only a means then, of
course, it suffers from the defect which has been pointed out by
you. We think that those injunctions prescribe acts of sacrifice
not known before and designate them. This alternate suggestion
appears to us to be better. Let us prove the point in question.
The root 'to sacrifice' (yaj) denotes a sacrifice. It is instru-
mental to the ultimate result, i. e., heavenly bliss. The term
"Vājapeya' is a case in apposition with sacrifice. Hence it takes
the third case-ending. There are two types of instrumental
cases, viz., (1) the pre-existing instrumental case and (2) the
instrumental case which will come into being. In this case a
sacrifice which is an instrumental case will come into being.
When it comes into being it becomes instrumental to the result.
Now, the instrumental case itself is an effect. It is produced.
As it is a case in apposition with the meaning of a root so it
takes the second case-ending in some cases."Agnihotram juhoti"
is an instance of this type. In other words, an object itself,
being effectuated, becomes instrumental to the ultimate result.
When the character of being an effect is emphasised it takes
the second case-ending. A verb in Sanskrit grammar contains
two parts, viz., (1) a process and (2) a result. The result is asObjection to the Validity of the Vedas-Answered
603
good as an object. We say 'cooks'. We may express it more
explicitly, viz., 'He does cooking'. The root to cook included
cooking in its meaning. It may be used as an objective case.
Now, a fresh question arises in our mind. As a means is pres-
cribed by an injunction so the designation of a sacrifice should
be enjoined since what has not been stated cannot be known.
If this be the case then the injunction which furnishes us with
designation of a sacrifice will be exposed to the same charges
as are levelled against a guna vidhi (an injunction prescribing
a means). Such a criticism is not sound. The Vedas do never
state that this rite should have this designation. But we learn
that this name applies to this rite because the name is signi-
ficant, admitting of derivation. As this sacrifice helps us to gain
animals so it is called Udbhid. A sacrifice which is performed in
honour of Prajapati (the lord of all beings) is called Prājā-
patya. Various articles such as sour milk, honey, clarified butter,
paddy and water, are instrumental to this sacrifice. As various
articles are required for the completion of the Prājāpatya sacri-
fice so it is called 'Citra'. The rite in which a libation is poured
into fire in honour of Fire is called Agnihotra. As a hawk
descends with a sweep and catches its prey so this sacrifice
assists one to destroy his enemy. Hence from the above praise
the sacrifice acquires the title of Syena (a hawk). The word
"Vaja' means food or drink. The sacrifice which provides us
with drink is called Vajapeya. Thus we arrive at the conclu-
sion that the above words are nothing but proper names of
sacrifices.
If these words constitute names of sacrifices then it is
apprehended that they will be superfluous. But such an
objection is not fair. Some distinguished scholars meet this
objection with the remark that though the words 'Vājapeya' etc.
are names of sacrifices yet they are significant since they
reveal the names and the results of sacrifices. This act of
sacrifice is designated by this name. From this designation
we learn that a substance and a deity are its means. It is also
learnt later on that the act is conducive to heaven. Hence,
in some cases, names such as Vājapeya etc. denote sacrifices
without violating the rules of the science of Vedic exegeses.
Some Vedic injunctions furnish us with the names of sacrifices.Nyayamanjari
together with their means, viz., gods, articles etc. Let us cite
a few examples. The first example is this "Agneyo aṣṭakapālo
âmăväsyāyām paurņamāsyâm căcyuto bhavati iti". (The
offering of food prepared on eight pot sherds to the god of fire
on the days of the new moon and the full moon is fruitful.)
604
(Jayanta does not explicitly discuss the point in question.
It requires an elaborate discussion. The word 'Agneya' should
be explained. Is it merely the name of a sacrifice like the
word 'Agnihotra?' Or, does it signify something more? The
word 'Agnihotra' does not indicate the deity to be honoured
since there is a Vedic text in that section which supplies with
the required deity. But in the Vedic sentence, quoted above,
there is no such word as reveals the deity to be worshipped.
Moreover, the taddhita suffix attached to the word 'Agni'
indicates that Agni is the deity of this sacrifice. Hence, the
above injunction supplies us with both the deity and the
article to be offered and throws light on a sacrifice not known
before along with its name 'Āgneya'.)
Let us now discuss the second example. It runs thus,
Etasyaiva revatișu váravantiyamagnistomasāma kṛtvā
pasukimo hyetena yajeteti (one who is desirous of obtaining
animals should sing a collection of Rgmantras containing the
syllable 're' set to the tone of Varavantiya, replacing agnis-
toma, in honour of the god of fire).-Tandya mahā Brāhmaṇa).
(Jayanta does not discuss the point at issue. It should be
elaborately discussed. The injunction in question throws light
on a new act of sacrifice. This sacrifice is not Agnistut. The
injunction also supplies us with the result of this sacrifice to-
gether with the means of performing it. The setting of the
said reas to the tune of Väravantiya is the required means.)
We shall not enter into the elaborate discussion of the
knotty points of the other branches of study. Our point is this
that the truth of the Vedas is not challenged if the Vedas
reveal the names of sacrifices. Therefore, by all means, the
validity of the Vedas is established.
Jayanta says "I have elaborately discussed all these points
in order to establish the veracity of the Vedas. At the same
time I implore you all not to take it amiss. I do not do itObjection to the Validity of the Vedas-Answered
out of my conceit of scholarship that I have been a sound
scholar of the Mimāmṁsā literature.
605
The meaning of the Vedic words will be grasped if they denote only rites
to be observed
The Vedic sentences which contain injunctions, praises or
censures and mantras and reveal names of sacrifices have
some utility as they point to rites to be performed. Our
experience emboldens us to make the above remark. There-
fore we should subscribe to the view that the Vedas are true
only when they reveal some obligations. (This is the view of
the Mimāṁsakas).
The Naiyãyikas criticise this hypothesis thus :-Do the
Vedas turn to be untrue if they signify already existing
objects? On the strength of the above hypothesis will a large
portion of the Vedic lore which points to such objects be set
aside and neglected? The task before the logical treatise of
the Nyaya school is to establish the truth of the Vedas per se,
Some express their opinion in this matter that the truth of the
Vedas lies in expressing rites to be performed. The logic be-
hind this statement is as follows. When the meaning of a word
is grasped a word communicates its meaning. The meaning of a
word is learnt from the employment of words by an experi-
enced man. An experienced person uses such sentences as
refer to some acts to be performed. He says in the following
manner: "Bring water. Fasten this cow with a cord. Go to a
village". The boys who listen to these statements of the
experienced person learn the meaning of the words from these
mandatory sentences and their execution. The experienced
persons employ such sentences with the definite purpose of
relating an end. The statements about existing objects do
neither persuade nor dissuade persons. Therefore, these senten-
ces serve no purpose. Hence, these sentences are not worthy
of being used. The words of which the meanings are not
known cannot communicate their meanings. The words which
fail to communicate their meanings are not true. Words which
remain unrelated to a verb fail to convey any meaning. There-
fore, we should use a sentence which contains a verb. A verb
denotes an act to be performed. But proper and common$606
Nyāyamañjari
nouns denoted such objects as do already exist. If a word which
denotes an existing object and a word which signifies an act
to be performed are uttered together then the former is
employed to convey the meaning of the latter. Hence, a comp-
lete sentence purports to convey an act to be done. There-
fore, a sentence is not valid if it conveys only an
accomplished fact or a pre-existing substance as its meaning.
A sentence is true if it points only to an act to be performed.
A sentence which refers to an accomplished fact or a pre-
existing object is not true. As an accomplished object is
already known so it is capable of being known by some other
valid forms of knowledge. If a sentence reveals such an object
then it does not reveal an unknown object as it depends upon
another source of knowledge for the knowledge of the object
in question. In other words, its information is second-hand
but not first-hand. Hence the piece of knowledge which dis-
covers the object at first is valid. But the sentence which
reveals it is not true. In this case, the said sentence only
.awakens the memory of the object. Those who are inclined
to stick to the hypothesis that verbal knowledge is true should
admit that the import of a sentence is an act and an act only.
The demonstration of the hypothesis that the knowledge of the
meaning of a word is possible if it denotes an accomplished fact or a
pre-existing object. Let us review the above hypothesis and
arrive at a conclusion. Addressing the Mimaṁsakas Jayanta
says "You hold that the import of a sentence is an act to be
performed, and that the relation of denotation holding between
a word and an accomplished fact cannot be detected. But it
is not reasonable to subscribe to such a hypothesis. How do
you say that this word denotes an accomplished fact? A
word does not convey its sense to a person who does not know
its meaning. It is strange to hold that a word conveys its
sense but its meaning remains unknown. All our worldly
transactions are not conducted only by such words as denote
existing objects. People also learn the meaning of such words.
A person points his finger to a yonder object and says that
this is the name of this object. At that time though no instruc-
tion is given to do something yet a person is informed of the
meaning of a word. It may be contended that an instruction607
On the meaning of Vedic words
is imparted to this effect that one should learn this meaning
from this word. Therefore a word refers to an act to be done.
Such a contention is not tenable since there is no verbal
instruction to this effect that one should learn this meaning
from this word. It is only heard that this is the name of the
object. But nobody hears that this meaning should be learnt.
It may be again contended that the statement "This is the
name of this object' implies that one should learn this mean-
ing from this word. Such a contention does not hold water
since a sentence cannot communicate such a sense as has not
been expressed by adequate words. None can entertain such
a suggestion since if the sentence 'This word is its name' is
competent enough to produce the perfect knowledge of the
listener then it is useless to hold that the knowledge of the
object should be fashioned in this manner. It demands to
ignore logic of facts. Therefore such a demand is absurd since
it is superfluous.
When one comes to know the power of the denotation of
words which denote only acts to be performed he makes out
only the meaning of a sentence consisting of such words,
(This is the view of the Mimāṁsakas). This hypothesis is
not tenable. But by the joint method of agreement and diffe-
rence the meaning of each constituent word is distinctly known
and thereby its power of denotation is grasped by us. If one
possesses the deep-rooted impression of the knowledge of the
power of denotation of words then he surely understands the
meaning of the sentences in a poem which is composed by a
modern poet and which relates to existing objects. Therefore,
words which denote existing objects are not to be discredited
with untruth on the ground that their meaning is not detected.
Knowledge which is produced by a word denoting an exis-
ting object is neither erroneous nor doubtful. As other sources
of knowledge, e. g., perception etc. produce valid knowledge
so a sentence referring to an existing object may generate true
knowledge.
The Mimamsakas have stated that a sentence which implies
an effect to be produced is a source of valid knowledge since
it reveals such a meaning as it is not grasped by other sources
of valid knowledge. They have also stated that if a sentence607
On the meaning of Vedic words
is imparted to this effect that one should learn this meaning
from this word. Therefore a word refers to an act to be done.
Such a contention is not tenable since there is no verbal
instruction to this effect that one should learn this meaning
from this word. It is only heard that this is the name of the
object. But nobody hears that this meaning should be learnt.
It may be again contended that the statement "This is the
name of this object' implies that one should learn this mean-
ing from this word. Such a contention does not hold water
since a sentence cannot communicate such a sense as has not
been expressed by adequate words. None can entertain such
a suggestion since if the sentence 'This word is its name' is
competent enough to produce the perfect knowledge of the
listener then it is useless to hold that the knowledge of the
object should be fashioned in this manner. It demands to
ignore logic of facts. Therefore such a demand is absurd since
it is superfluous.
When one comes to know the power of the denotation of
words which denote only acts to be performed he makes out
only the meaning of a sentence consisting of such words.
(This is the view of the Mimāṁsakas). This hypothesis is
not tenable. But by the joint method of agreement and diffe-
rence the meaning of each constituent word is distinctly known
and thereby its power of denotation is grasped by us. If one
possesses the deep-rooted impression of the knowledge of the
power of denotation of words then he surely understands the
meaning of the sentences in a poem which is composed by a
modern poet and which relates to existing objects. Therefore,
words which denote existing objects are not to be discredited
with untruth on the ground that their meaning is not detected.
Knowledge which is produced by a word denoting an exis-
ting object is neither erroneous nor doubtful. As other sources
of knowledge, e. g., perception etc. produce valid knowledge
so a sentence referring to an existing object may generate true
knowledge.
The Mimāṁsakas have stated that a sentence which implies
an effect to be produced is a source of valid knowledge since
it reveals such a meaning as it is not grasped by other sources
of valid knowledge. They have also stated that if a sentence608
Nyāyamañjari
makes an assertion about an existing object then it is not a
source of valid knowledge as it depends upon other sources of
valid knowledge. This view is not tenable. If all sentences
purport to convey only an effect to be produced then they
cannot induce a person to do something. We have discussed
this point already. We shall also discuss this point in the
subsequent section on the meaning of a sentence. If a sentence
makes an assertion about an existing object then it depends
upon another source of valid knowledge. But such a depen-
dence imparts validity to it. Now, the meaning of the phrase,
'dependence upon another source of valid knowledge' should be
clarified. Does it mean that the word which denotes an existing
object depends upon another source of valid knowledge at the
time of its coming into being? Or, does it mean that the
object denoted by the word is capable of being grasped by
another source of valid knowledge? These two meanings of
the phrase are too wide to be accepted. If it is held that a
word is not a source of valid knowledge as it depends upon
another source of valid knowledge for its appearance then the
validity of an inference is undermined since it depends upon
perception etc. for its coming into being. It has been stated
that the three types of inference are based upon perception.
If a word which denotes an existing object is invalid because
the object is capable of being grasped by other sources of
knowledge then all sources of valid knowledge such as percep-
tion etc. turn out to be invalid since it has been already
proved that a particular object is grasped by many sources of
valid knowledge. Moreover, there are sentences both Vedic
and classical in the imperative mood such as 'Read', 'Fasten
this cow with a piece of rope', 'Go to a village' etc. Though
these verbs have been used in the imperative mood yet they
do not by themselves induce a person to an action. By the
joint method of agreement and difference he ascertains that
they are conducive to his well-being and instrumental to the
avoidance of his adversity. Being thus convinced he proceeds
to do something. Thus these sentences are only formally but
not really injunctive since a verb in the injunctive mood
embodies a mandate or a command which independently stirs
an inactive person to adopt a course of action. These so-calledOn the meaning of Vedic words
609
injunctive sentences really imply repetition of something al-
ready established. Thus those who hold that a sentence imply-
ing an effect to be performed is only a source of valid
knowledge must admit that all injunctive sentences used by
the people at large should not be a source of valid knowledge.
Some thinkers hold that if sentences embodying an asser-
tion about the existing objects persuade or dissuade people
then they should be taken as good as injunctive or prohibitive
ones. But they are really obtruse. We have already pointed out
that though a sentence contains a verb in the injunctive mood
yet it loses its significance and comes out to be such a sen-
tence as records the repetition of something already estab-
lished. They suggest that the above sentences should be
imagined to be injunctive though verbs in the injunctive mood
are not given in them. Is a better example of their dullness
required? A verb in the injunctive mood is not necessary for
persuading a person. A person moves to do something on
hearing a sentence when he ascertains by the joint method of
agreement and difference that the sentence shows the way to
human end or when he has implicit confidence in the person
who utters it. It should also be noted in this connection that
ordinary sentences purport to convey the intention of a spea-
ker but not an act to be performed.
When a person hears a man-made sentence he determines
that the speaker knows the content of his sentence thus, other-
wise, he should not have said like this. But the Vedic sentences
which have been composed by no author exclusively point to
acts to be performed. Such a hypothesis is not sound. The
hypothesis that the Vedas have no author has been refuted.
It has been proved on the contrary that God is the author of
the Vedas. We have also established that a sentence, com.
posed by a person, does not imply the intention of the speaker.
The intention of an author does not constitute the meaning of
his sentence. In the sentence, 'Oh Devadatta! drive away
the black cow with a stick' there is no such word as points to
the intention of the speaker. It is unreasonable to hold that a
sentence implies a sense which is not denoted by a word in
it. The Mimāṁsakas may contend that as the meaning of the
sentence “Go and swallow poison' is determined from itsNyayamanjari
purport so the meaning of every sentence will be ascertained
from its purport. The purport of the sentence is to dissuade
the son of the speaker from taking meal in another's house.
The meaning of this sentence is the intention of the speaker.
The intention is of course revealed to us from the purport of
the sentence. Thus the drift of this contention is that the
intention of the speaker is the meaning of his sentence. But
such a contention is not tenable. The purport of a sentence
does not flash in our mind if it completely disregards the
primary meanings of words contained in it. Hence, the inten-
tion of a speaker cannot be based upon the purport of his
sentence. Therefore, the intention of a speaker cannot be
conveyed by a sentence. How does a listener understand the
intention of a speaker from his sentence? Our answer is that
his intention is inferred from the sentence uttered by him.
An orderly arrangement of words is an effect. This arrange-
ment is not possible if a person does not will to do it. When-
ever one notices an arrangement of words he infers that it has
been conditioned by the will of a person. When he knows
the meaning of a sentence he infers to this effect 'as the
speaker knows so he intends to communicate his knowledge.'
A mere colourless intention which has no reference to the
meaning of a sentence cannot be inferred since such an inten-
tion is the natural gift of all living beings. We cannot say that
this meaning has been intended unless and until the intention
takes a concrete shape, being focussed upon the meaning of a
sentence. Such a qualified intention cannot be guessed if we
do not know the meaning of a sentence. If the primary meaning
of a sentence is not learnt at the outset then the sentence can-
not convey the intention of its speaker as its sense. If it is held
that the ordinary sentences signify intention but not external
objects then none can know the relation of denotation holding
between a word and an external object. In that case none
should make out the meaning of a sentence. There is no
need of further discussion. Therefore it is not reasonable to
hold that words which only enter into syntactical relation
with a word denoting an act to be performed rightly com-
municate their sense.
It has also been stated that there should be no such sentence
610On the meaning of Vedic Words
as does not involve a reference to a process since if a process
is set aside then a sentence cannot retain its self-completeness.
The inflexion attached to a verb denotes a process (an act to
be performed). Like a noun it does not signify an existent
object. When we utter together two types of words denoting
pre-existing objects and a process, words which denote pre-
existent objects are employed with a view to expressing a
process, i.e. something to be effectuated. This hypothesis is
not tenable. The sentences viz. 'You are blessed with a new
born son', 'Your daughter (virgin) is big with a child' etc.
make one happy and sad. They do neither persuade us to do
something nor dissuade us from doing something. The words
contained in these sentences have no syntactical relation to a
process, words which denote pre-existent objects are employed
with a view to expressing a process, i.e., something to be effec-
tuated. This hypothesis is not tenable. The sentences viz.
'You are blessed with a new born son', 'Your virgin
daughter is big with a child' etc. make us happy and sad.
They do neither persuade us to do something nor dissuade
us from doing something. The words contained in these sen-
tences have no syntactical relation to a process. But in worldly
transactions similar sentences are copiously used. Now the
opponents may contend that the above two sentences imply
'Be happy' and 'Be sad'. Thus they purport to do some-
thing. Such an interpretation is not tenable since no such
words which denote an act to be performed (a process) are
heard in these sentences. It is useless to imagine the presence
of such words. None is happy if he is advised to be happy. No
body prepares his mind to be happy in response to such an
advice. One moves for the means which is conducive to
pleasure but none sets up for the result itself. A person feels
happy as soon as he hears that a son has been born to him.
We have got another point to add. A person enjoys sleep
with his body covered with an upper garment. During his
slumberhis body is bound by a piece of rope to make a fun of him.
When he wakes up he suddenly imagines that he was wrapped
by the coil of a snake and does not properly open his eyes
out of fear. In this plight if the sentence 'You have been
tied by a piece of rope' reaches his ears then in spite of its
611612
Nyayamanjari
denoting an accomplished fact it becomes a source of true
knowledge. In this case it is superfluous to imagine that the
above sentence purports to convey 'Don't cherish fear', i.e.,
something to be done since as soon as he believes in the
statement that he has been bound by a piece of rope his
fear disappears. Therefore the above advice is fruitless.
Let us cite a few examples. The sentences, viz., 'There is a
terrible poisonous snake on the road', 'There is a precious
gem on this spot' etc., point to pre-existent objects. They
are not untrue. It is not reasonable to make out prohibition
and injunction as their meaning. They do not respectively
suggest 'Do not go by this path' and 'Go by this way
and come by a gem' since words denoting persuasion and
dissuasion are not heard in them.
The Mīnāmsakas may contend thus -As the speaker makes
a statement after mature deliberation so he makes no super-
fluous statement. For this reason the advisory words such as
'Do not go', 'Go by this path', etc., have flashed in his
mind but owing to some reasons such as indolence etc., he
has not uttered them. Such a contention is not tenable.
As the speaker is an intelligent person so he should make only
a statement of facts. The listener realising the meaning of
the sentence either moves toward the object or turns away
from it. All listeners have no common purpose to serve.
Therefore one and the same advice should not be given to all.
If the listener is a snake-charmer then he welcomes the path,
inhabited by snakes. With regard to the second it does not
apply to him since as he, having realised the Absolute, has
neither attachment for worldly objects nor hankering after
wealth so the gem in question is considered by him as a
rejectable object. Which advice will be given to whom? In
other words, no advice has universal application. But if a
statement of facts is made then love and hatred may act as
the spring of action of a listener and he may proceed towards
an object or turn away from it. Therefore an intelligent person
makes a statement of facts and should employ neither injunc-
tion nor prohibition.
Some Mimamsakas hold that all speakers should always make
such statements as advise their listeners to this effect that theyOn the meaning of Vedic Words
should properly understand the meaning of these statements
since statements whice involve no injunction should not be
made. This hypothesis is not tenable. A person who knows
the relation of denotation obtaining between a word and the
object denoted by it makes out the meaning of the same when-
ever he hears it. It is not advisable to issue a mandate to
make out the meaning of a sentence as one's own duty. If a
person does not make out the meaning of a sentence then does
he realise that it is his duty to do it?
The Mimamsakas further contend that if in a sentence there
is no such word as denotes an act to be brought into being
then remaining words are not mutually connected since if the
word denoting an act to be generated requires them (those
words) then they are mutually connected, otherwise, they are
not connected. Therefore all sentences purport to convey an
act to be brought into being, an act which requires them to be
so connected. It is seen that in sentences which are statements
of facts words mutually connect themselves and communicate
a connected meaning.
613
Words in sentences which are statements of facts do not
lack mutual connection like those in the famous sentence 'Ten
pomegranates etc.' If a word denoting an act to be brought
into being were the pivot of mutual connection among all
other words in a sentence then a sentence which is the state-
ment of a fact and which contains no such word as denotes
an act to be brought into being would not have communicated
a connected meaning. It has been shown that all the sentences
referred to before by way of illustrations convey well-connected
meanings. Moreover, in a sentence which contains a verb in
the injunctive mood all other words are noticed to be mutually
connected. How will the Mimamsakas explain this? If the
mutual connection of words denoting facts is determined by
the requirement of a word denoting something to be brought
into being then the mutual connection of them (those words
denoting facts) cannot take place.
The Mimamsakas may
further contend that the relation of
all words in a sentence at first centres round a word denoting an
act to be performed and later on the syntactical relation of all
words is determined in the light of the principle adopted in614
Nyayamañjart
connection with the interpretation of the sentence 'One
should purchase Soma plant in exchange of a red, brown-eyed
and one-year-old heifer'. In case of such a defence we regret
to point out that they should admit that the mutual connection
of words takes place because the word denoting an act to be
preformed requires it (such connection). If they admit the act
above suggestion then as in the sentence 'One should purchase
Soma plant in exchange of a red brown-eyed and one-year-old
heifer' the third case-ending is attached to the stems denoting
substances and qualities and thereby they are considered to be fit
for purchase so they are at first detected to be connected with the
act of purchasing and afterwards the mutual connection subsisting
between the substance and its qualities is grasped. But the third
case-ending attached to stems cannot condition the mutual
relation of the stems mentioned above since it points only to
the subordinate position of a substance and qualities in the
above context. The mutual connection of words takes place
even in the absence of the third case-ending, e.g., "The cloth
is white'. Therefore we arrive at the conclusion that the hypo-
thesis that the requirement of an act to be performed condi-
tions the mutual connection of words is based upon pure imagi-
nation but not upon sound observation.
The rule that when a word denoting an existing object and
that denoting an act to be performed are used together in a
sentence the first object expresses itself as subordinate to the
second one is not universally true. We find an exception to this
rule in the Vedic sentence 'One should sprinkle water on
sacrificial paddy. Let us explain the drift of the above argu-
ment. A sacrificial cake is the proximate condition of a sacri-
fice. Rice is the stuff of which a cake is made up. We get rice,
unhusked paddy. In order to unhusk paddy water should be
sprinkled on it. The sprinkling of water is the act to be per-
formed. But the act in question is subordinate to paddy.
Therefore the above rule does not hold good. We need not
refer to this example since it finds a place in the section on
New and Full Moon sacrifices where no pains have been spared
to demonstrate that an act to be performed is their goal.
Let us cite another example, viz., 'the soul should be
known.' In this case the act to be performed has been instruct-On the meaning of Vedic words
615
ed as subordinate to the existing object. No cardinal duty to
be discharged by us has been instructed since no result yet some
result is suggested to us per instruction. But no such result can
be imagined in this way as there is no definite instruction. The
knowledge of the soul does not prompt us to any action. We
hear many praises about the knowledge of the soul. There are
mere praises. They cannot help us to imagine the result of the
knowledge of the soul. For this reason if one knows the souf
then he becomes the soul who stands above all sins and other
imperfections. If one realises the perfect soul then he does
not suffer from the sorrow of hankering after other objects
since the soul itself is the highest goal of life. The soul is an
existing substance but not an effect to be brought into being.
After the realisation of the soul the men of settled conviction
should exert themselves to dispel the basic ignorance about the
soul. This is the finding of the learned scholars.
The Mimamsakas may contend that the sentence The soul
should be known' is injunctive since it enjoins one to acquire
the knowledge of the soul. Thus, the knowledge of the soul is
a duty which is to be done. Such a contention is not tenable.
The knowledge of the soul is not fashioned by our will. It is
the true knowledge of an object. The true knowledge of an
object is determined only by the object. The verb 'jñātavyah'
has been used in the passive voice because the verbal suffix
'tavya' is used to emphasise the position of the objective case
as a principal part of speech in a sentence. Thus the objective
case in question is such as implies the preferential connection
with the verb 'to know'. Thus the knowable object comes out
to be the soul itself. Thus the above sentence purports to con-
vey the soul as its sole meaning. An injunction cannot exert its
influence upon the soul since a result cannot be enjoined.
Kumārila has also lent his support to the above view that a
suffix which denotes an injunction enjoins to do an action but
not to realise a result. In other words, the sphere of an injunc-
tion is limited. The word denoting means falls within it but
a result falls outside it. Knowledge is really a means: So it
may be enjoined. But Jayanta points out that the knowledge of
an object culminates in the object itself. It moves toward the
object which is an end in itself. The culminating point of theNyayamanjari
knowledge of the soul is the soul itself. The soul cannot be
enjoined. But no injunction regarding the knowledge of the
soul is possible.
The instructions regarding the procedures of acquiring the
knowledge of the soul, viz., Yama (non-violence, celibacy, non-
possession of property etc.) Niyama (Purity internal and
external, indifference, self-content etc.) and other such
methods have the realisation of the soul in view. The realisa-
tion of the soul takes place through the cancellation of the
world of names and forms which is an imaginary superstruc-
ture upon the solid rock of reality. The above methods are
means to an end. The supreme end is the soul itself. Hence,
all the changing processes are subordinate to the Soul, the self-
sufficient eternal object.
The Vedāntins hold that apart from the injunctions pres-
cribing the methods of acquiring the knowledge of the soul, viz.,
Yama, Niyama, control of breath, withdrawal of sense-organs
from the sense-objects all injunctions enjoining sacrifices such
as Jyotişțoma (a Soma sacrifice) etc. are means to the realisa-
tion of the soul. The soul alone is the highest end of human
life. The other ends which are effectuated do not endure. The
Absolute, being uncaused, is not subject to destruction. It
transcends beginningless Nescience. As it enjoys immutable
existence so it is the summum bonum of human life. Our inte-
rest shifts from some objects to someother objects when we
realise the unsubstantial character of the former ones. Thus it
is a sort of slow pilgrimage towards the Absolute by means of
the negation of a section of worldly objects. As a person starts
with the process of negating worldly objects slowly so he gradu-
ally qualifies himself to realise the soul. Therefore, all injunc-
tions are means to the realisation of the soul.
616
Manu has also said to this effect :-
This human body is made fit for realising the Supreme soul
if one observes the following prescription, viz., the study of the
Vedas, the observance of the vow of abstinence, morning and
evening offer of libation to Fire, the study of the three Vedas,
the paying off of the three obligatory debts, the performance of
five great sacrifices during the period of life of a house-holder
and the performance of other sacrifices.On the meaning of Vedic words
The great savants say that the Vedas are the source of true
knowledge if they reveal an eternal object. The Vedas should
reveal both eternal and non-eternal objects. If they reveal all
objects alike, they do not become untrue thereby.
It does not suit our purpose if we hold long discussion on
the subject, viz., which portion of the Vedas is authoritative
on acts to be performed and which one is authoritative on
the eternal objects. We have spared no pains to maintain the
validity of the Vedas and have done it ungrudgingly.
We have discussed all relevant matters to establish the
validity of the Vedas. We have not gone beyond the bounds of
relevancy. We shall now discuss some other topics which are
in high favour with all. Kindly listen to them if your intellect
is not over-fatigued.
The End of the Fourth Ahnika of Nyāya-mañjari
617ÄHNIKA V
Introductory
Homage be paid to God who is the sincere friend of all, the
saviour of the oppressed, the comforter of the miserable and
the fulfiller of hopes of those who have completely surrender-
ed themselves to him.
Now, the hypothesis that as the meaning of a word is un-
real so the relation of denotation which subsists between a
word and its meaning is going to be refuted. Significant
aggregate of letters admits of two kinds, viz., a word and a
sentence. As the meaning of a sentence presupposes that of
a word so the meaning of a word is at first discussed.
A word is of two kinds, viz., a noun and a verb. Prepositions.
which prefix a verb, indeclinables and prepositions which are
used independently of a verb but govern a case-ending are
declared to be included in nouns. A part of speech is that
word to which 'sup' or 'tin' inflexions are attached. The
author of the Nyāya-Sūtra holds that a part of speech is that
word to which inflexions are attached.
The meaning of a verb with the proper inflexion attached
to it will be discussed when the meaning of a sentence will
be taken into consideration since the meaning of a verb fur-
nishes us with the key to unlock the sense of a sentence.
Now, the meaning of a noun is as follows. The inflexional
nouns admit of four kinds. They are called parts of speech.
Some nouns denote universals. They correspond to common
nouns. Some of them denote attributes. They are abstract
nouns. Some of them denote particulars. They are proper
nouns. And some of them denote motion or activity. They are
called verbal nouns. A common noun, viz., a cow, denotes a
particular characterized by a common feature belonging to all
members of a class. The Naiyayikas hold that a particular is a
substance to which a universal belongs.
A particular is a substance to which an attribute or an acti-
vity belongs. This substance has a form which is constituted
by the arrangement of its parts, c.g., dewlap, etc. The uni-Objections against the acceptance of a universal
619
versal of cowness is the common feature which is shared by all
particular cows such as Sabaleya etc. Now, a question arises.
in our mind, viz., 'How does the noun 'cow' denote only the
locus of the Universal of cowness to the exclusion of a particu-.
lar cow and its form?" It puzzles us. We cannot follow the
conclusion of the Naiyãyikas. If we are to discuss this problem
then we shall have to hold a long discussion. We shall discuss.
it later on.
An objection against the acceptance of a universal
A universal is not a sense-datum. It is a matter for discus-
sion. As its existence cannot be proved so it is non-existent
like the horns of a hare. How can the locus of a universal be
the meaning of a word? A universal cannot be perceived since
an act of perception reveals only an exclusively particular
point of reality which does not endure through the past and
the future times.
A universal rests upon many similar locii. Its essence is
constituted by its belonging to such locii. The comprehension
of such an essence presupposes the knowledge of similarity
which is due to the act of comparing these locii. Thus, the com-
prehension of a universal is not immediate as it has a relative
being. Perception is immediate. It presupposes no prior know-
ledge for its existence. How can perception reveal a universal?
Unless all locii of the so-called universal are compared and
known to be similar a universal which belongs to all particu-
lars as their common property cannot be known. Hence the
knowledge of a universal has a dependant character. Perception
immediately results from the sense-object-contact. It involves
no reference to the past and the future times. It is independent
of all prior knowledge. How can it discover universals. Judg-
ments, which follow it in close succession, being constructed by
our imagination, cannot reveal real objects. Even if a univer-
sal is the object of a judgment, it has only an imaginary being
but no real existence. An inference or verbal knowledge cannot
establish the reality of universals since they reveal imaginary
objects but no real ones. We shall explain in a different manner
from the Buddhist point of view how a person comes across a
real object when he proceeds towards it after having inferred620
Nyāyamanjari
it. A particular is not different from a universal since their
distinction is not apprehended. If we place a blue lotus, a
myrobalan, and a melon fruit on our palm then their difference
is at once detected. But a universal and a particular are not
different since they are not differently perceived. A universal
is not different from a particular since the space occupied by a
particular, is not grasped to be different from that occupied by
a universal. Spaces, occupied by the different objects, are
grasped by us as different, e.g., the space, occupied by a jar,
is different from that occupied by a piece of cloth since they
are different. As no spatial difference is noticed between a
universal and a particular so they are not different. A univer-
sal is not different from a particular since a universal is not
cognised if a particular is not perceived. If an object is different
from another object then the cognition of one does not pre-
suppose that of another. Let us take an illustration. A jar is
different from a piece of cloth. The former is cognised indepen-
dently of the latter. But a universal is never cognised if a
particular is not cognised. Therefore a particular is not different
from a universal.
The locus of a Universal is logically untenable.
A universal rests on a particular. If a particular is not grasped
then a universal remains uncognised. Such a contention is not
tenable since the suggestion that a universal rests on a parti-
cular is not at all tenable. Does a universal wholly rest on a
particular (say a body)? Or, does the former partially rest on
the latter? We shall solve the problem at the outset. None of
these two replies is satisfactory. If a universal wholly rests
upon a distinct particular then it resides there completely. And
as such it should be exclusively perceived there. There is no
chance of cognising it at another locus. Again, if a universal
rests upon a particular partially then a universal does not
wholly rest on a particular. In that case, how can we recognise
a particular cow as a cow? Moreover, a universal is a part-
less whole. As such it consists of no parts. Hence, the different
particulars cannot share it part by part. If a universal wholly
rests on a particularlocus then it cannot wholly rest on another
locus since an object which completely occupies a particular
space cannot occupy another space in the same manner withoutObjections against the acceptance of a universal
being born again. Thus it is difficult to solve the problem of
locating a universal on a suitable locus since no suitable locus
is to be found out. The Buddhist fail to follow the hypothesis
of the Vaiseşikas that a universal inleres in all the particulars
of a class. The Vaiseşikas define the relation of inherence thus:-
It is such a relation as subsists between the container and the
contained which are inseparably connected and is a source of
the judgment that one rests on another. Now if two objects are
inseparable from each other then how does the relation of
inherence subsist between them? If an object keeps itself apart
from another object then a relation takes place between such a
pair of objects, e. g., a plum fruit and a reservoir of water or a
male and a female. If the two objects are inseparable then they
are one with each other. As there is no difference between them
so how can they be related to each other? In other words, a
relation pre-supposes two terms but one-term-relation is an
absurdity. Thus with regard to the two inseparable objects we
cannot say that one of them rests on the other.
The Vaišeşikas may contend that though substances and
attributes do not exist apart yet they are united by the relation
of inherence. There is no sense in this contention since an object
having an attribute cannot be distinguished from an attribute
An object having attributes cannot demonstrate its separate
entity from attributes such as colour etc. But it is strange that
the Vaiseşikas wish to draw a distinction between a substance
and its attributes.
621
Moreover, the Vaišeşikas have drawn a distinction between
the eternal Yutasiddhas and the non-eternal Yutasiddhas.
According to their texts the word 'Yuta-siddha' is a conven-
tional one. They say that the eternal atoms are Yutasiddhas
since they move independently. Their absolutely independent
character is proved by their free movement. The distinct entity
of the two non-eternal objects depends upon their inherence in
the separate substrata. Let us illustrate this point.
A piece of cloth is distinct from a jar since the former inheres
in threads and the latter inheres in pot-sherds. Threads are
distinct from pot-sherds. Therefore, a piece of cloth is distinct
from a jar. But a jar always depends upon pot-sherds. Hence,
a jar is not (yuta-siddha) independent of pot-sherds. The eter-$622
Nyayamanjari
nal substances like an atom are always independent. But non-
eternal substances are relatively independent. Hence the word
"'yuta-siddha' admits of the two shades of meaning. Again, the
Vaišeşikas hold that the all-pervasive substances, e. g., the sky
etc. have no mutual contact. Such a hypothesis is not accepted
by all. It is their own affair. The Vaišeşikas should only abide
by this decision. But the others will not be bound down by it.
The objects which exist independently of one another (yuta-
siddha) may be distinguished from one another. They may
come into being independently of others. Their mutual diffe-
rence may be cognised by us. This is the import of the term
'yuta-siddhi' used in the Vaiseșika literature. The above meaning
of the term 'yuta-siddhi' throws light on that of the term
‘ayuta-siddhi'. Its meaning should be contrary to that of the
-term 'yuta-siddhi'. Thus the term 'ayuta-siddhi' means non-
independence, and non-difference. Thus the two objects which
are said to be ayuta-siddha cannot be related to each other.
Thus, the relation of inherence holding between parts and a
whole should be discarded.
Kumārila Bhaṭṭa has also said to this effect. If the substra-
tum of a universal does not come into being beforehand and
does not stand unrelated to a universal to be located upon
it then it cannot be united with a universal. If the indepen-
dent existence of the substratum of a universal at the initial
stage is admitted then the assumption of a yuta-siddhi becomes
illogical. The Vaišeşikas admit that an atom comes into con-
tact with the two ubiquitous substances such as the Sky and
Time. But such an assumption owes its origin to mere idle
imagination. We shall not discuss the minor details of the
Vaišeşika system. Therefore, it is not reasonable to hold that a
distinct relation subsists between a universal and its sub-
stratum.
But the logicians, adept in the art of reasoning, hold that the
relation holding between a universal and its substratum is
that of rūpa (character) and rūpin (object characterised).
This hypothesis is not sound.
What does the word 'rupa' convey? Does it mean an attri-
bute like whiteness etc.? Or, does it signify the form of an
object? Or, does it stand for the nature of an object? If itObjections against the accepance of a universal
623
conveys an attribute such as whiteness etc. then a universa!
should belong neither to the colourless air and to the internal
organ nor to an attribute and to an action. If it means the
form of an object then a universal should not belong to the
formless objects such as an attribute etc. If it stands for the
nature of an object then a universal becomes identical with
the substratum of a universal since the nature of an object is
never cognised as different from an object. There is only verbal
difference between the nature of an object and an object but
there is no material difference between them. Moreover, what
is this rūpa, Is it a substance? Or, is it a property of a sub-
stance? Or, is it a distinct substance? We have alrealy pointed
out that it is not a distinct substance. It is not property of a
substance since the property of a substance is not presented to
us as distinct from the substance itself. If it is held that the
property of a substance is identical with the substance then the
so-called relation between them has no logical justification for
its existence. We have already discussed the point. The Vedic
scholars even after mature thinking cannot clearly define the
relation holding between rupa and rūpin and distinguish it from
the relation of conjunction
from that of inherence. It is
merely a verbal device. New terms have been only used. But
there is no new object corresponding to it. There is no need of
continuing this topic any more.
Moreover, does a universal wholly occupy all spaces? Or,
does it wholly belong to all particulars only? It is omni-
present then a white horse should be presented to us as a
horse. An elephant should be grasped by us as a camel and
so on. If the above hypothesis is subscribed by them then the
overlapping of universals becomes inevitable. This amounts
to a logical crisis. The upholders of the hypothesis may con-
tend thus: As a group of particulars can only manifest a
particular universal so there will be no overlapping of univer-
sals though all universals are omnipresent. The body of an
animal consists of many limbs. A mutilated limb should mani-
fest a universal. Each limb should have manifested the said
universal. The universal should be perceived in each limb
of the body of a particular animal. But it is not so perceived.
Moreover, a universal is a partless whole. As such it cannot624
Nyayamanjari
be held that the particular part of a universal is manifested
by the particular limb of the body of a particular animal.
Moreover, there is nothing to determine that the universal of
cowness pervades the entire body of a particular cow. Again,
if the body of a particular animal be the manifestor of a
universal like a lamp then the universal cannot belong to the
body which is its manifestor. (An object which is manifested
by a lamp cannot belong to a lamp). On the contrary, we
discover a law from our experience that an object which is
not perceived everywhere is not omnipresent. For this reason
we arrive at the conclusion that the universal of cowness
cannot be all-pervasive. But if it is held that a universal
belongs to the body then we admit that the above criticisms
do not apply to this hypothesis. But it does not stand above
all criticisms. If a calf is born today we cannot recognise it as
a cow. The reason of this non-recognition is as follows. When
the calf was in the womb of a cow it did not possess a body
at the earlier stage of embryonic life. No universal belonged
to it at that stage. As soon as it had been born, a universal
came to reside in it. A universal cannot be transferred from
its place of residence to some other place since it remains.
inactive all through. Even, if it is admitted that a universal
comes from some other place then how is it that it does
not desert its old place of residence! When it comes over to a
new place it does not come piece meal. Again, it does not
partially reside in its substratum. In other words, how can
it wholly occupy both the places old and new? A series of
such fresh problems will crop up. They will give a rude shock
to this hypothesis.
Kumarila Bhatta holds that a universal is an entity and is
both identical with and different from its locus, i. e., a parti-
cular. Every object is presented to our consciousness as
possessed of two characters viz., specific and generic. We
distinguish, an object from all other objects because of its
specific character. We also comprehend all objects as one
because of its general property. An object cannot produce
these two different ideas in our mind if these two characters
do not belong to it. If an object is exclusively particular then
it cannot produce a general idea in our mind. If an object isLocus of a Universal Denied
merely universal then it cannot produce an idea of distinction
or exclusion in our mind. One cannot suggest that one of
these two ideas is erroneous as it is constructed by our imagi-
nation. The ideas of generality and particularity (uniqueness),
produced by an object, are never contradicted. So these
ideas are not erroneous. Those who hold that they are not
true commit a mistake.
625
Let us compare an instance of error with the double ideas
produced by an object and mark their difference. When we
take the rays of the sun for water the rays of the sun are not
presented to our consciousness. The character of water
replaces that of the rays. But the idea of particularity does
not present that of generality. The idea of generality does not
also present that of particularity. There is no opposition be-
tween these two ideas. There is only co-ordination between
them. These two features are simultaneously presented to our
consciousness. But in case of the indeterminate perception
of an object these two features are not presented to our cons-
ciousness as distinct.
The hypothesis, propounded by Kumârila, is not based upon
sound logic. Kumärila himself has stated that an object
possesses mutually incompatible characters. In the face of
such a statement we restrain us from being vociferous in
pointing out his defects. In other words, as he has exposed
his own defects so we are not to point out his mistakes.
Kumärila's hypothesis amounts to this: What is universal
is particular; What is one is many; what is eternal is non-
eternal; and what is is not. He says something which nobody
has experienced. He may say so. But it does not sound well.
Some philosophers hold that as contrary characters are experi-
enced in an object so there is no opposition. Such a state-
ment is not tenable. Nowhere such contrary characters are
noticed in an object. In other words, no object possesses
general and particular characters. Our experience does never
reveal the general character of an object. Under the influence
of various imaginations men, being confused, entertain the
above hypothesis. Let them dwell in the domain of error.
But it is a truism that an object cannot have different charac-
ters since every object has only one character but the other626
Nyayamanjari
character is imaginary. The judgment which refers to
persistent element should not be taken as true by the sound
logicians.
An exclusively particular is immediately sensed by us. It
involves no reference to other objects. A particular which
excludes itself from all other objects is only real. Thus the
specific character is only real. But its general character is not
real. It is a construction of our imagination.
a
Without examining the character of our experience whether
it is true or not, it will be wrong on our part to admit that an
object has two-fold character since we experience the double
characters of an object.
If we entertain a belief in the non-existence of an object
then only on the strength of this belief we cannot hold that the
knowledge of the said object is false. But this knowledge
should be tested by the canons of logic by the sound thinkers.
No object, having many characters, is grasped by an inde-
terminate perception. How can a character which is held to
be common to many particulars be cognised to be such without
making a reference to other objects? In other words, if we do
not compare an object with other objects, perceived by us, we
cannot find out the common element.
A universal resides in many particulars. If these particulars
are not recognised, a universal, belonging to them, cannot be
grasped. But sense-knowledge cannot recognise it.
Those who hold that a universal is sensed do not know
well the character of sense-knowledge. With the purpose of
advocating monism they do not admit that particulars are
only sensed. As particulars are only sensed so universals are
not objectively real, i.e., they do not belong to particulars.
Concepts are Possible Even if Existence is Denied to Universals
Now, if existence is denied to universals, how do you explain
a common idea, i.c., a concept, viz., 'a cow' as referring to
particular cows such as Śābaleya etc.? Such an idea is merely
constructed by our imagination. It does not owe its origin to
objectively reals. Our opponents hold that universals are
objectively real. A common element belongs to these universals,
viz., existence etc., since all universals are accepted to be desig-Possibility of Concepts even on denial of Universals
627
nated as universals. In other words, the common element of
universality belongs to them. The so-called common element is
due to some other factors. It is subjective but not objective,
Oh long-lived one! If you say so then some factors may be
easily found out and the concept 'cow' which is shared by every
judgment referring to a particular cow will take the place of
the universal of cowness. In other words, there are no universals
which are held to be objectively real. The concept 'cow' explains
everything which the universal of cowness is supposed to do.
Now a question may be put to the Buddhists. What is the
character of this Upadhi? The Buddhists reply that an upādhi
is the rendering of the same service. As a particular cow carries
load, service, i.e., from the pragmatical stand-point, all cows
considered individuals render a distinct service. Being afraid
of perceiving difference all objects are taken as one. As there
is a distinction between the service of a cow and that of a white
horse so there is no such noticeable difference between the use-
fulness of syrup and that of molasses. Now the Naiyāyikas raise
a question that though the difference between the second pair
of objects is not much yet they do not perform the same func-
tion. The Buddhists reply that as they look alike so they are
taken as one. The Naiyāyikas press their point and say that
they do not look alike. The Buddhists give a rejoinder to this
question thus: What you say is true. But people ordinarily
judge that all kinds of molasses produce the same effect. Being
guided by this impression they hold that they look alike i.e.
they neglect their difference of forms. Though we perceive their
difference yet we judge them all as a cow. So they are taken as
the same. We neglect their differences and take them as one.
Similarly, all kinds of molasses are taken as one. This answer
has been given by a section of the Buddhists.
As in the subsequent stage of judgment they are taken to be
one so the perception of differences at the primary stage of
knowledge is overlooked. As the judgments which follow the
distinct perceptions of individual cows are similar so we assume
that these individual cows possess an identical element.
In fine, the Buddhists say that an upādhi is the source of
similar judgments. For this reason, a universal does not actu-
ally exist.628
Nyāyamanjari
The Naiyāyikas join issue with the Buddhists and hold that
if the existence of a universal is denied then how does one
go to employ words and infer? Because one cannot employ a
word if he does not know the relation holding between a word
and the object denoted by it and one cannot infer if he does
not know the relation of universal concomitance obtaining
between the probans and the probandum. If a word denotes.
only an individual object then it is not possible to know the
relation of denotation subsisting between a word and its mean-
ing. Again if the relation of universal concomitance holds bet-
ween a particular probans and a particular probandum then we
cannot draw a conclusion since deduction presupposes genera-
lisation. Do you know the relation between all words and all
particular objects denoted by them? Do you know all the
relations of universal concomitance which hold between all
individual pairs of probans and probandum.
We cannot know all such relations since individual objects
which belong to different times and spaces are infinite in num-
bers. Hence all objects of the world are beyond' the range of
our experience. We cannot select a representative individual
and discovering the relation of denotation or that of universal
concomitance can serve our purpose. If we do so, we are liable
to commit a fallacy. Suppose we know that this word denotes
this particular object and this probans is universally connected
with this probandum. When this word is heard some other
particular object may be signified by it. Similarly, when the
probans in question is seen some other probandum may be
inferred. So we are liable to commit a fallacy.
We have learnt that this word conveys this particular
meaning. But we also learn that the word in question also con-
veys another individual meaning. In case of inference, a
probans sometimes points to some other individual probandum.
But if we do not know that the relation of denotation holds
between this word and this particular object and that the rela-
tion of universal concomitance obtains between this particular
proban and the particular probandum then the word cannot
signify the object and the probans cannot point to the proban-
dum in question. The sum and substance of the argument ofPossibility of Concepts even on denial of Universals
the Naiyāyikas is that the hypothesis of a universal is necessary
for the possibility of verbal and inferential knowledge.
The Buddhists meet the above objection thus: The objection,
raised by the Naiyāyikas, would have been pointed if the pro-
bans and a word had been related to an exclusively particular
real. According to the Buddhists the meaning of a word and the
probandum are constructed by our imagination. As they are
not real objects so the Naiyãyikas do not squarely solve all
problems concerned.
629
The Naiyāyikas raise a deeper objection against the above
superficial solution. They urge that if the relation of denotation
does not belong to a word which is sensed by all and if the
relation of universal concomitance does not belong to a probans
which is also sensed by us then as the processes of verbal and
inferential knowledge involve the fallacies of regressus ad
infinitum etc., so nobody will betake himself to these processes
of knowledge to communicate his idea or to prove something.
Now let us clearly state the objection raised by the Naiya-
yikas against the Buddhist hypothesis indicated above. In order
to follow the import of a statement one should be conversant
with the convention that the constituent words denote these
meanings. In other words, verbal knowledge presupposes the
knowledge of the meaning of words. If the meaning of a word
is only an inference then verbal knowledge presupposes inferen-
tial knowledge as its necessary condition. A syllogistic argument
consists of propositions. Each proposition consists of terms. The
meaning of each term should be grasped. But its meaning is an
inference. Again, this inferential knowledge presupposes verbal
knowledge. Verbal knowledge, again, depends upon inferential
knowledge. The inferential process consists of propositions. Each
proposition is constituted by terms. The meaning of each term
is to be ascertained. The meaning of a term is an inference.
Again, the same processes are to be repeated. Thus, verbal
knowledge will surely lead to a regressus ad infinitum. More-
over verbal knowledge presupposes inferential knowledge as its
condition and inferential knowledge presupposes verbal know-
ledge as its condition. So, it is a glaring instance of circular
reasoning. In case of inference induction is an indispensable
condition of inferential knowledge, i.e. deduction. Again, induc-630
Nyayamanjari
tion presupposes deduction as its invariable condition. The
second deduction also presupposes induction and so on ad
infinitum. It is an instance of regressus ad infinitum. Moreover,
induction presupposes deduction and deduction presupposes
induction. So it is also a glaring example of circular reasoning.
The Buddhists meet this objection with the remark "Do not
argue like this. Why do not you follow our stand-point? We
have repeatedly tried to impress our point of view upon your
mind. Verbal and inferential knowledge refer to imaginary
objects. As concepts do not point to real objects so the above
objections do not affect our position.
The vindication of conceptualism a negative general image.
The Naiyãyikas subject the Buddhist hypotheses to apoha
(a negative general image) to severe criticism. They point out
that if concepts do not refer to a real common element then
inferential and verbal knowledge should be declared null and
void. The Buddhists say in reply to this objection that concepts
surely refer to a common element but this common element is
not objectively real. What is this unreal common element? It
is an exclusion of the other of itself. Non-non-A is the common
element of A. It does not belong to the external world. A con-
cept refers to such an object. When a negative image is cognised
the knower imagines that it belongs to the external world.
Words denote these negative general images. For this reason
the Buddhists hold that a word denotes the exclusion of the
other of the object denoted by it. This hypothesis amounts to
this that concepts do never refer to real objects. If you ask
"why" then our answer is this that perception is the super-
excellent source of knowledge and that there is such part of a
real object as will be revealed by the other sources of knowledge
on the failure of perception,
The function of conceptual knowledge is to negate the other
futures which may be wrongly attributed to an object. The
mother-of-pearls is mistaken for silver owing to the similarity
of their properties. In order to negate silverness attributed to
the mother-of-pearls the services of a true judgment that it is
not silver are required. Similarly, though a particular cow, viz.,
Sabaleya, etc. is completely grasped by our indeterminate
perception which is free from imagination and is non-erroneousRefutation of Apoha-a negative general image
yet the otherness of a cow may be attributed to her due to
some conditions. In order to cancel the attributed character
the judgment that this is not a non-cow is necessary.
But no judgment like this can grasp the real nature of a
cow since she has been previously cognised. Now the objectors
may contend that an object is characterised by various charac-
teristic features. Some of them have not been grasped by the
earlier perception. They are now grasped by the judgments.
Such a contention is baseless. A thing-in-itself may be charac-
terised by various characteristic features. If a characteristic is
not grasped then it will remain undetected for ever since it is
impotent to characterise its substantive. The characterization
brought about by the characteristic features is not different
from the thing itself which is characterized. So whenever a
thing which is characterized by these characteristic features
is grasped all the characteristic features are grasped. As the
complex character of a thing-in-itself is a given fact so the said
function of judgments to know a particular characteristic
feature is futile. This is the view of a section of the Buddhists.
63 I
A thing-in-itself has many characteristic features which are
adjectival in their character. These adjectives have power to
mould it. The change which is imparted to it is identical with
itself. This change is effective. Whenever the thing-in-itself is
apprehended it is cognised along with its changed form. Hence,
if a particular characteristic feature of the thing-in-itself
remains uncognized then it amounts to this that the changed
thing-in-itself with all its adjectives has not been grasped. How
is it possible? The transformed character of the thing-in-itself
does not remain uncognized. In fine, this is the conclusive por-
tion of the Buddhist hypothesis.
The refutation of a negatire general image (apoha)
Kumarila Bhatta has measured his swords with the Buddhist
hypothesis that a word denotes a negative general image. The
sum and substance of Kumärila's critical remarks may
be put
thus : The word 'apoha' denotes an exclusion. An exclusion
is negation. No negative object is independently grasped like a
jar. So it should have been mentioned as a dependent object.
Now, it should be found out what is the locus of the said exclu-632
Nyāyamanjari
sion, i.e., negation. An exclusively particular real cannot be
the locus of the exclusion in question since it always stands
unrelated to imagination. Subspecies like Sabaleyatva, etc.,
cannot be the locus of the exclusion of the other of a cow since
it is only excluded by the exclusion of the other of Sabaleyas
only. If the Buddhists accept the above suggestion then a cow
cannot be logically distinguished from the exclusion of the other
of Sabaleyas. In other words, we fail to draw a distinction
between a cow and non-non-Śäbaleya since Sabaleya is only
not non-Śābaleya. Other cows such as Bāhuleya, etc., are non-
Sabaleya but they are not non-cows. Or, if the Buddhists hold
that the exclusion of non-cows belongs to all individual cows
then this thesis does not stand to reasons since if all cows are
not comprehended then the exclusion of non-cow is not at all
grasped. All individual cows are countless as they occupy diffe-
rent spaces and times. For this reason all individuals of the cow-
class cannot be put together by a hundred years. Hence the
exclusion of non-cow cannot exist as a logical entity apart from
all individual cows. Therefore we should think of a new exclu-
sion of non-cow which is a common property of all individual
cows and which wholly resides in each individual cow. Now
if we are frank in our expression of idea then we should hold
that cowness is the locus of the exclusion of non-cow.
If we admit the existence of cowness then why should we take
the trouble of assuming the concept of the exclusion of non-
cow ? Moreover, our point of criticism will be missed if you
think that the exclusion of non-cow cannot be admitted since
it has no locus to stand upon. You should note the point of
criticism that such an exclusion cannot be admitted because
there is no possibility of knowing all individual cows simulta-
ncously. According to the Buddhists the words such as ‘a horse',
etc. do not signify a positive object. They all convey negative
meanings. The meanings are grasped as negative objects. The
Buddhists will adopt the same procedure to comprehend the
exclusion of the other of these objects. The same criticism holds
good in every case and sets at naught their hypothesis. There-
fore in no case a concept can point to a negative general image.
Indeterminate perception, according to the Buddhists, is such
awareness as is not associated with imagination. But this pieceRefutation of Apoha-a general negative image
633
of awareness cannot be communicated to others. Thus, all the
worldly transactions should come to a stop.
Moreover, all words such as SŚäbaleya, etc., denote negative
meanings. They cannot be distinguished from each other. And
as such they will be considered as synonyms.
Now, the Buddhists may argue that there will be no diffi-
culty in distinguishing one 'apoha' (a negative general image)
from another since all such images possess marks of distinction.
Such an argument will not hold water since they cannot be
mutually distinguished. If they had been mutually distinguished
from one another then they would have been reals like exclu-
sively particular points of reality. Now, the Buddhists may
counter-charge the Naiyāyikas with the following remarks that
all words denoting universals should also be taken as synonyms
as all universals stand for generality. Such a counter-charge
does not make an appeal to reasons since these universals are
positive objects and are accepted to be many, being mutually
different. But as apohas are merely negative in their character
so they are not mutually different. Now, the Buddhists may
adopt a new line of defence and hold that, these apohas will
be mutually different since the locii such as a white horse and
Śābaleya, etc. on which they stand possess marks of distinction.
Such a defence is not tenable since it has been shown that the
said locii cannot contain apohas. Again, if the Buddhists hold
that an apoha which stands upon a particular locus is different
from another apoha which has another locus to stand upon
then apohas should be treated as particulars and be marked
off from one another. If they admit them to be such then
apohas should lack the character of being general. Now, the
Buddhists may adopt another line of defence and hold that
apohas may be distinguished from one another on the strength
of their function of negating different objects and the words
denoting apohas will not be synonyms. Such a defence is not
sound since such a distinction is indirect, being based upon
negative function. The distinction which the objects to be
negated possess cannot be transferred to apohas since the
objects to be negated are not presented to our consciousness as
positive ones but the other of a particular object. The saidNyayamañjart
other has not a definite shape since all the others are not grasp-
ed by us. As the other in question is vague so the exclusion
which negates it is also indeterminate. Moreover, some objects
which are marked by otherness are very remote and lie beyond
the reach of our knowledge. In that case how is the exclusion
of such others at all possible? If the 'other' has not a distinct
character then the exclusion of the other becomes incompre-
hensible. Let us take an example to illustrate the point at issue.
The exclusion of non-cow lacks a distinct character since the
term 'non-cows' denotes everything excepting cow. Therefore
it is a vague term. An exclusion of non-cow is also indefinite
in its character since it is impossible to comprehend the fult
extent of non-cow.
634
Even if we admit the Buddhist hypothesis that apohas differ
if the objects to be negated are different then apohas will be
taken as identical when the objects to be negated are the same.
Let us take two terms for the better understanding of our point
of criticism, viz, ‘a cow', and a 'horse'. Now we are to deter-
mine the meaning of these two terms by the exclusion of their
other. The meaning of the term 'cow' is to be determined by
the exclusion of non-cow (other than a cow). And the meaning
of term (horse) is to be fixed up by the exclusion of non-horse
(other than a horse). 'Non-cow' and 'non-horse' comprise
within their denotation many objects such as elephants, etc. in
common. Only horses do not fall within the denotation of non-
horse and cows remain outside the denotation of non-cow. The
term 'cow' excludes only horses as the distinct object to be ex-
cluded and the term 'horse' excludes only cows as the distinct
object to be excluded. These two objects constitute the mutual
differentia of the above two terms.
We should also bear in mind in this connection that the ob-
jects denoted in common by the terms 'non-cow' and 'non-
horse', form the majority. In this case if the Buddhists hold
that the terms 'cow' and 'horse' are different since the objects.
excluded by them are different then it may be at once pointed
out to them that they convey the identical meaning since the
majority of objects excluded by them are identical. We have
already shown that the term 'cow' excludes only horses overRefutation of Apoha-a general negative image
635.
and above the common objects which are excluded by the term
"horse'. Similarly, the term 'horse' excludes only cows besides
the common objects which are excluded by the term 'cow'.
Considering the objects which are excluded by the terms 'cow,
and 'horse' the major portion of them is the same. If we
seriously judge the negative meanings of these two terms then
we should arrive at the decision that their negative meanings.
are identical. Now, the Buddhists may argue that as the nega-
tive meaning of the term 'cow' contains a horse as its distinc-
tive element so it is definitely determined. Such an argument
is not convincing. The term 'lion' also excludes a horse. Hence
a lion might be taken as a cow.
Now, the Buddhists may take up a new line of defence. If
they hold that the term 'cow' denotes only an exclusion of non-
cow but does not make mention of a horse as the distinct ob-
ject to be excluded then they make a wrong statement since
each and every item which falls within the denotation of non-
cow is incomprehensible, the range of denotation being in-
finitely large. There is no reason of placing them together under
a single collection since the objects which are comprised within
the denotation of non-cow such as horse etc. do neither occupy
the same space nor coexist.
Now, the Buddhists may press their point that the reason.
behind the assembling of all objects denoted by the term 'non-
cow' rests with the term itself. If this is their contention then
it is really deplorable since the positive meaning of the term
'cow' is at first determined and then the meaning of the term
'non-cow' is grasped as it is a correlative term, involving a
constant reference to the object to be negated (excluded) by
itself. If the positive meaning of the term 'cow' is already esta-
blished then is there a reference to non-cow for the finding out
of the meaning of the term 'cow' at all necessary? Is there any
necessity of excluding non-cow? But for the proper under-
standing of the meaning of the term 'cow' the Buddhists have
pleaded for the negative process.
Now, we see that without having recourse to the negative pro-
cess the meaning of the term 'cow' is comprehensible. If this
is so then the hypothesis of non-cow is gratuitous. The Budd-
hists may argue in favour of their hypothesis of an apoha that-636
Nyāyamanjari
a particular cow is only an established fact but not the universal
of cowness. Such an argument is not tenable. A particular is
a point of reality. It cannot be communicated to others by
means of a word. The Mimâṁsakas haves tated that if a uni-
versal is a necessary assumption for the understanding of the
meaning of a term then the attempt at the framing of the
hypothesis of an apoha is futile.
Now, the Buddhists may contend that the apoha 'non-non-
cow' denotes all cows without an exception. Such a hypothesis
involves an irrefutable fallacy of circular reasoning. If the mea-
ning of the term 'non-non-cow' is understood then that of the
term 'cow' is grasped and, again, if the meaning of the term
'cow' is intelligible then that of the term 'non-non-cow' is
comprehensible. In fine, the critics hold that as an apoha is
incomprehensible so it is impossible to distinguish one apoha
from another by means of a reference to difference in the ob-
jects negated by them. Do we negate particulars of a class by
means of an apoha? Or, do we negate a whole class in an abstract
-a general character, i.e., a universal? Nobody can negate a
particular of a class since a particular transcends the scope of
the conceptual process of negating. Moreover, no particular is
denoted by a term. Now, if the Buddhists hold that the object
to be negated bears a general character then though it is nega-
tive in its character yet it must be admitted to be generic at
the same time. Why do you hold that an apoha is the negation
of a negation? Are you not aware of the import of the phrase
'the negation of a negation'. When one negation cancels ano-
ther negation the resultant of this counter-negating process is
a positive object. Thus the meaning of a word is not negative.
It is a positive object.
Now, another question flashes in our mind. It is this: Does
the exclusion itself of the objects to be excluded such as a
horse, etc., differ from them? Or, does it become identical with
them? If the Buddhists hold that the said exclusion has a
specific character by means of which it distinguishes itself from
the objects negated then it will be accepted as a positive ob-
ject. One cannot characterize a negation. Hence, no verbal
transaction is possible with it. One can only make a statement
about a positive object and communicate it to others. If the.
Refutation of Apoka-a general negative image
Buddhists say that an apoha is possessed of a specific character,
i.e., a mark of distinction then it is surely a positive object
since a positive object is only predicated and communicated to
others by means of a proposition. If the Buddhists hold that an
apoha and the object negated by it are one and the same thing
then the term 'cow' and 'non-non-cow' should be synonymous
since both these two terms denote negation. Moreover, if a term
denotes merely an exclusion (apoha) then the proposition that
this lotus is blue will lose all its significance since the relation of
identity holds between the subject and the predicate and the
relation of identity cannot be maintained in this case. A nega-
tion cannot predicate another negation. Two distinct negative
terms cannot point to the same object. There is no such real
object as is referred to by the two negations as their substratum.
Though the Buddhists hold that the points of reality which
are exclusively particular are objectively real but they trans-
cend denotation. No other objects are real. Hence the relation
of negation with reality is not at all possible. Moreover, the
Buddhists deny existence to the relation of denotation which
holds between a term and the object denoted by it.
637
As the negative meaning of the words 'existent' and 'know-
able' is impossible to find out so they do not denote 'apohas'.
Nobody is aware of an unreal object as other than an existent
object and of an unknowable object as other than a knowable
object. If the objects to be excluded are necessarily presented
to our consciousness then they must be taken as existent and
knowable. Thus the term 'existent' and 'knowable' can exclude
neither non-existent and unknowable objects nor existent and
knowable objects. What is beyond the reach of our consciousness.
cannot be negated. Therefore, the Buddhists cannot hold that
the object to be excluded has an imaginary being since if the
object to be excluded is a construction of our imagination then
the object to be excluded ceases to be unreal and unknowable
but becomes knowable.
We should also examine the meaning of the word 'apoha'. It
will certainly mean the exclusion of non-apoha. What is the
nature of non-apoha? (If every word denotes an apoha then
non-apoha is certainly unknown something). If the Buddhists
say that non-apoba is not at all possible then why is it not possi-*638
Nyayamanjari
ble? If it does not exist then what remains to be negated? There-
fore, the word conveys no meaning. How do you account for
the negative particles 'not' (nañ), etc.? In the sentence "It
does not exist" what is the meaning of the particle 'not'. How
do the preposition and a group of indeclinables (conjunction
etc.) known as nipāta denote apoha. It is difficult to establish
that a verb denotes a negative meaning. In the sentence "He
-cooks" the verb 'cooks' cannot have a negative meaning.
Now, the Buddhists may revise their thesis and hold that only
-common nouns denote apoha. All words do not denote apoha.
The Mimāṁsakas ask 'How do they explain words other than
-common apohas' then how will the Buddhist reconcile revised
thesis with their initial proposition that all words denote apohas.
Why do the Buddhists cherish so much hatred against the view
that common nouns denote universals which are not conceptual?
Words other than common nouns are either meaningless or de-
notative of concepts. Let common nouns share the same lot.
Why do the Buddhists mark an exhibition of their ignorance
propounding the thesis that words denote apohas?
The Buddhists hold that a sentence signifies mere conceptual
knowledge, i.e., agreement or difference between coucepts.
They flatly deny that a sentence points to the meanings of words
mutually related. Very well, let words denote concepts. Why do
they insist upon propounding the thesis that words denote
apohas?
(In this connection we shall refer to some other points which
have not been explicitly mentioned by Jayanta. The 'negative'
particle 'not' broadly denotes two meanings, viz., emphatic
denial and bare denial. If the negative particle 'not' denotes an
apoha then these two meanings cannot be made out. The word
'nipăta' requires an explanation. A word which does not convey
its own meaning which is not associated with that of a verb as
identical with that of another word in a sentence is called a
nipäta. Its meaning is also distinct from that of inflexions. A
nipata may admit of many meanings. The nipata 'ca' admits of
three meanings. It may convey the sense of 'and' or that of
'only' or that of 'because'. If the nipâta 'ca' denotes an apoha
then many sentences containing 'ca' will be meaningless. Pre-
positions which are affixed to verbs and are devoid of independent639
Buddhist Hypothesis of Apoha Answered
meanings are called upasargas. They cannot denote apoha. A
verb in the active voice denotes an activity of its agent (its nomi-
native case). If it denotes an apoha then there will be no rela-
tion between the verb and its nominative case).
Denunciation of the hypothesis of universals and advocacy of the
hypothesis of apohas
The Buddhists now review the criticisms of apoha, offered by
the Mimäinsakas. The Mîmāṁsakas have made those remarks as
they are innocent of the views of the Buddhists.
If an apoha is a positive object and belongs to the external
world then the cobwebs of your arguments rightly entangle the
Buddhists. But an apoha is not so as the Mimāṁsakas think of
it. But, according to the Buddhists, an apoha is an inner object
since it is a form of consciousness. Now, if it is an inner object
then what will be the fate of your arguments, demonstrated by
proposition? In other words, your arguments will be pointless.
Does it mean that an apoha is that awareness of an object
which includes the object in itself ? Such a statement is not
exact. An apoha is neither inner nor outer but it is distinctly
other than both consciousness and its object.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas raise a question and ask, "If someth-
ing is neither an internal nor an external object then it should
be unreal. How do the Buddhists hold that the meaning of a
word is such an unreal object, viz., an apoha ?”
A reply to the above question is as follows. The Buddhists
say, “As we have not appeared on the scene with the intention
of establishing the reality of meanings of words so how do you
frame a charge in this manner? As it belongs neither to the
inner world nor to the outer world so it is held to be unreal
and imaginary. Now, you may ask, "What is its exact chara-
cter ?" Our reply is this that it is referred to by a judgment
which is a construction of our imagination and that it is merely
a vague form which is attributed to knowledge. The Mîmām-
sakas ask-if an external object does not stand in front of a
perceiver then the form of which object is referred to by a
judgment as its predicate? We beg to point out in reply to the
above question that the suggestion of the Mimamsakas does not- 640
Nyayamanjari
hold good that the form of a sensible object is only referred to
by a judgment as its predicate. The reason behind our reply is
as follows. An object which is exclusively particular is sensed
by us. But when we have a true sense-perception of an object
it is not presented to our consciousness as excluded from all
other objects. We have stated before that an object as excluded
from all objects is referred to only by a judgment of perception.
Or, as a judgment of perception judges about the image of a
point of reality so it fails to reveal a real object, i.e., an exclu-
sively particular but reveals only an exclusion."
Now, the Mimāṁsakas raise a strong objection against the
above solution, offered by the Buddhists. They point out that as
an exclusion and the object which is excluded by it are identical
so an exclusion and a point of reality which is excluded from
all other objects are one and the same object. Thus they draw
the conclusion from the above premises that judgments of
perception refer to points of reality as they refer to an exclu-
sion. They remark that judgment of perception should enjoy
the same status as an indeterminate perception, i.e., pure sense-
perception. The Buddhists give a reply to this objection. They
hold that such a remark is baseless. Judgments of perception
do never refer to the points of reality. An exclusion which is
referred to by a judgment of perception is not real. But it is
merely an imaginary form which is attributed to the subject of
a judgment. If the said exclusion were real and belonged to the
point of reality then the above objections would have been true.
But the exclusion in question is not so. This point has been made
clear already.
Some objectors raise a new objection against the above
conclusion of the Buddhists. They say that an awareness of
exclusion involves three factors, viz., it refers to the object which
is excluded, to those objects from which it is excluded
and to the objective ground of exclusion. As a judgment of
perception which is held by the Buddhists to refer to exclusion
does not reveal these three factors so how can it be a judgment
about exclusion? The Buddhists meet this objection. They hold
that the above objection will hold good if the perceiver of
exclusion expresses his judgment of perception in the proposition
"I behold the object as excluded from all other objects."641
Buddhist Hypothesis of Apoha Answered
But the corresponding proposition does not assume the above
form. Therefore, the objection, raised by some objectors, does
not hold good.
The Mimāṁsakas press forward their objection. They hold
that it is unreasonable to hold that judgments refer to imagi-
nary forms. But the reasons which have been advanced by the
Buddhists in favour of the hypothesis that a judgment refers to
an exclusion are inconsistent. If the Buddhists admit the truth
of the above finding then why do they indulge in sophistry and
mystify apoha?
The Buddhists meet this objection and solve the problem
thus: The determinate perception of a cow follows in the wake
of its indeterminate perception. It refers to its class-name, viz.,
cow and to its universal, i.e., cowness and to such other
features. The perceptual judgment of a cow is expressed by the
proposition that this is a cow. Similar judgments also refer to a
negative form which excludes the object in question from others.
cow' assumes the form
Thus the proposition "This is a
This is not non-cow.' But the proposition "This is a cow'
does not assume the form "This is other than a horse, a cat
and such other objects.' This judgment of perception does not
refer to the point of reality. There is no real object such as a
universal in this world. For this reason an exclusion from
others than the object in question is referred to by a judgment
of perception. The above reasons indicate that a judgment has
only a passing reference to the negative form. This is what the
Buddhists say. This statement does not mean that an apoha is
the direct object of perception.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas urge their point in criticism against the
Buddhists thus: According to the Buddhists what is perceptible
is other than non-perceptible and is also other than its homoge-
neous objects. This is the true character of a thing-in-itself which
is sensed by us. An object which is referred to by a judgment is
presented to our consciousness as other than its heterogeneous
objects. But a thing-in-itself is never presented to our conscious-
ness in such a manner. A judgment involves a necessary reference
to an exclusion from non-objects. But it does not involve a
reference to an exclusion from homogeneous objects. But no
regulator which determines the cognate character of knowledgeNyayamanjari
is discovered. Oh, intelligent one ! do not entertain the thought
that judgments which are constructed by our imagination are
not determinate. What determines an object distinguishes it
from all homogeneous and heterogeneous objects. This distinc-
tion is presented to our consciousness. If such two-fold
distinction is revealed by imaginary knowledge then it becomes
determinate knowledge in all respects. In that case, all other
forms of imaginary knowledge and words should point to such
well-defined objects. But it is not a correct statement of facts. If
the above view is true then why does the image of a cow,
produced by the word 'cow' distinguish a cow from heteroge-
neous objects but not from homogeneous objects? Words and
judgments, constructed by imagination, have the same import.
For this reason, it is held that words denote an exclusion from
objects other than itself, i.e., a negative image-an apoha.
The negative image in the form that this is an exclusion of
all other than this is constructed by our imagination and is
attributed to the image of the thing-in-itself. As it is an attri-
bution so it does not belong to the external world. As it is not a
form of consciousness so it does not belong to the inner world.
For this reason you take this apoha as negation which belongs
to the external world. And as you are a fool so you talk your-
self hoarse, finding fault with the hypothesis of apoha without
rhyme or reason. An apoha is undoubtedly referred to by a judg-
ment. But a judgment which judges about a positive object or
about a negative object does not judge about apoha. An apoha is
judged by a distinct type of judgment. Hence it is neither a
positive object nor a negative one. (This hypothesis of apoha has
been propounded by Kamala Sila in his Tattva-samgraha. The
commentator holds that an apoha is not a positive object as its
form does not belong to the outer world. It is not negation
since it is determined as a real object. T.S.p.361). It is present-
ed to our consciousness as distinct from both positive and
negative objects, determinate in its character and similar to
external objects. It is not reasonable to hold that these three
features belong to any external object. When a judgment has
a positive predicate the copula implies the relation of iden-
tity. But if a judgment has an apoha as its predicate then the
relation of identity does not reasonably hold between the subject
642Buddhist Hypothesis of Apoha Answered
and the predicate since the relation in question has no scope
there. Moreover, in a negative judgment an apoha cannot be
identified with negation since an apoha is determined as a real
object and its identification with negation is self-contradictory.
When a cow is perceived and judged that this is a cow but not a
horse, an apoha has a well-defined character. There is a cow but
not a horse, an apoha has a well-defined character. There is no
element of indetermination in it. We cannot determine an
object without negating other objects. A judgment which
involves an apoha must have a necessary reference to an exclu-
sion from all other than itself. It becomes impossible to deter-
mine an object if exclusion does not come to its aid. If it is
impossible for exclusion to extend its help to determination
then our knowledge enters into the sphere of a doubt. If a
doubt envelops an object then it will be never determined. If
externality is denied to an apoha then the different judgments
which refer to the same apoha will be an idle repetition of the
initial judgment referring to the apoha in question. In order
to avert this difficulty an apoha should be considered as an
external object. Even if we subscribe to this amended hypoth-
esis, the possibility of such repetition is not ruled out. There-
fore, an apoha should not be taken as an external object.
Therefore, the original hypothesis that an apoha is neither
external nor internal stands to reasons.
643
An apoha is neither an external object nor an internal
object. It has got only an attributed form. It appears to be an
external object. If it does not bear the stamp of exclusion on
the face of it then it will not be similar to an external object.
Our experience is the ultimate result from which we can trace
back the hypothesis that judgments of imagination refer to
exclusion.
Though all words such as a cow, a horse, etc., are employed
ab initio to denote positive abjects yet the logicians settle their
meanings that they are employed to point to the exclusion of
all other than themselves. According to these logicians it has
been stated that the interpreters of words accept the negative
meanings of words after much deliberation but the employers
of words do not do it. The negative meaning of a word is
called an apoha. It is neither internal nor external. It isNyayamanjari
something different. It is an ascribed form. As it is fashioned
by the shadow of exclusion so it is called a negating object,
i.e., an apoha. This view is based upon the hypothesis that
an unreality is presented to consciousness. Or, an imaginary
image is only a from of consciousness. It is a mere idea having
no object to represent. The distinct shape of each idea is
fashioned by variety of impressions though its distinct individual
character is not due to difference in real external objects which
are supposed to produce the different ideas. As ideas appear
as external objects so all our worldly transactions are carried
on by means of them. As they carry the stamp of exclusion on
their face so they discharge the function of negative. This
view presupposes the externalisation of our consciousness.
644
Now, some objectors raise an objection against the above
solution of the problem. The upholders of both hypothesis,
viz., the presentation of unreality to our consciousness and
the projection of consciousness to the external world agree to
the proposal that judgments do not refer to the real objects.
How do we carry on transaction with the real objects? The
Buddhists say in reply to this that when the things in them-
selves such as grasses etc. are sensed by a person he feels no
desire for taking hold of them since desire at the root of voli-
tional reaction and motion is not provoked by pure sense-per-
ception. If you ask 'Why', then we submit what we have got
to say. The external thing-in-itself is bereft of a name, a
universal etc. A name or a universal is a construction of our
imagination. It is an attribution. The real thing-in-itself
seems to be identical with the imaginary object. Let us explain
how this identification takes place. After the sensing of the real
thing-in-itself, the sensible object, a judgment having a name,
a universal, etc. as its predicate follows in the wake of it. The
perceiver thinks that he has acquired the true knowledge of the
thing-in-itself. In other words, he fails to detect his own
mistake and believes that he knows the real object.
The reason behind the identification of the thing-in-itself,
the sensible object, which is beyond the reach of imagination
with the imaginary object which is possessed of a name, univer-
sal, etc. is nothing extraordinary. We are firmly impressed
with their identification because the determinate perception of645
Buddhist Hypothesis of Apoha Answered
an object closely succeeds its indeterminate perception, i.e., pure
sense-perception. Being misled by the quick succession of events
of perception the perceiver forgets the momentary character of
a thing-in-itself and believes that he knows the sensible object.
This wrong identification is at the root of his movement. The
sum and substance of the Buddhist hypothesis is that the iden-
tification of a sensible object with an imaginary one supplies
us with the key-note of the movement of the percipient. Non-
discrimination of the difference of the sensible thing-in-itself
from the imaginary object which is endowed with a name;
a universal, etc. is responsible for the identification of the one
with the other. If this account of the Buddhists is taken to be
true then does the ascertainment of the non-difference of the
two said distinct objects amount to their identification? When
we mistake the mother-of-pearls for silver as we fail to distin-
guish between them so we cannot merely assert that they are
different. Similarly, we are not in a position to assert that
sensible object is different from the imaginary object. The
determination of the non-difference of the two events of per-
ception presupposes the simultaneous presence of the said two
perceptions as its condition. But when pure sense-perception
takes place the determinate perception of the imaginary object
is conspicuous by its absence. Therefore, pure sense-perception
cannot condition the said determination of non-difference. The
determinate perception of the imaginary object cannot produce
the above determination of non-difference since a judgment of
perception cannot refer to the sensible thing-in-itself. For this
reason, it is stated that owing to the non-apprehension of
difference between the two objects the person who judges an
object moves for it. The thing-in-itself, a sensible object, which
has practical efficiency is also found out since all the subsequ-
ent events are causally linked up with the sensible thing-in-
itself. The thing-in-itself is the source of pure sense-perception
which generates determinate perception. Movement follows in
the wake of this determinate perception. This is what the Bud-
dhists mean to convey.
A perceiver senses the thing-in-itself which is at the root of
all sorts of perception. Though the subsequent judgment of
perception propels him to bring the objects of perception yetNyayamanjarī
he gets at the real object when he obeys the dictates of his
determinate perception. Let us cite an example to illustrate the
point in question. Suppose there is a gem inside a bamboo-
stick-box. This gem emits its rays through the intervals of the
sticks. A man mistakes the rays for a gem. He moves for it.
He is crowned with success. In other words, he gets at the
real gem. But if there is no real object at the root of his per-
ception then an illusory judgment becomes his motive force
which sets him in motion. He becomes disappointed when he
moves for it. Suppose, a person mistakes the flame of a lamp
for a gem. He proceeds to have it at the instance of his illusory
perception. His hopes are baffled. But if a thing-in-itself is at
the root of one's perception then he who is innocent of the
real nature of things thinks that he has seen the real object
by means of his determinate perception not referring to the
real object and has got at the object when he has acted in
accordance with the finding of the said perception. This im-
pression of the person is not based upon the true knowledge
of a real object. (A judgment is not true apprehension. Pure
sense-perception is true. As it is not mixed up with imagination
so it does not impel one to action. A judgment of imagination
can only prompt one to an action). The Buddhist logicians
hold that an object referred to by a judgment is not real and
that an object which is real is never referred to by a judgment
which impels a perceiver to activity. When a perceiver percei-
ves an imaginary object and believes it to be real he moves
towards it. From the above discourse it is clear that the Budd-
hists should interpret the determination of an object in terms of
the non-discrimination of difference between a real object and
an imaginary one. Thus, the perceiver identifies the real object
with the imaginary one, moves towards it and gets at the real
object. So we say that an ordinary person transacts his worldly
business in this way. On the other hand, a critical thinker has
got to carry on his worldly transactions like a common man.
An image which catches a likeness of exclusion is designated
as an apoha. It is held by the Buddhists as the meaning of a
word. But as an ordinary man cannot adequately analyse the
content of his awareness so he mistakes an apoba for a uni-
versal.
646Proof of the reality of Universals
All the laws which govern the location or non-location of
universals upon their locii, (i.e. their complete or partial stand-
ing upon their locii) equally apply to apohas. But there is a
sharp distinction between an apoha and a universal. It is this
that an apoha is unreal.
Though all drugs have the same specific property yet all of
them cannot cure alike diseases, viz., fever, etc. But a parti-
cular drug can do it. Similarly, though all particulars, having
no universals to mark off, are theoretically capable of producing
the same effects yet distinct particular produces a distinct
effect. The Buddhists mean to say that the Naiyāyikas postu-
late universals on the basis of the assumption that a distinct class
of particulars produces a distinct class of effects. This assump-
tion is superfluous. But it should be assumed that the capacity
of producing the same effect does not belong to all particulars.
The positive aspect of this assumption is that a distinct parti-
cular produces a distinct effect.
647
According to the Buddhists though an apoha is unreal yet it
is not true that it cannot be characterized by adjectives, etc.
Therefore, the Naiyãyikas should not subscribe to the hypo-
thesis that the meaning of a word is a universal, or the form
of an object or a particular.
The proof of the reality of universals
The above objections against the reality of universals are
thus met with. Does an apoha get the preferential treatment at
your hand because a word does not denote an external object
such as a universal, etc., owing to its non-existence or because
experience testifies to the existence of an apoha? We find no
reason to pick a quarrel with you on the point whether an
apoha is experienced or not since you hold that an apoha is
experienced by you. This does not imply that a universal
does not exist. As you hold that a distinct thing-in-itself is an
object of pure sense-perception which is neither a doubt nor
an error so we hold that a universal is an object of non-errone-
ous perception.
Is it a royal edict that the initial perception is only connected
with the thing-in-itself but the subsequent perception is not so
connected? Or, let the initial perception be the source of trueNyayamanjari
knowledge. But how do you say that it reveals only its chara-
cteristic feature but not its generic character ?
We shall not kill our time in detecting the content of pure
sense-perception since pure sense-perception is very short-lived.
On the one hand, you hold that sense-perception reveals
only the peculiar trait of an object but, on the other hand, we
state that perception reveals also the generic character of a
thing. If we go on disputing like this then how shall we
settle matters? It will not be settled by one taking one's oath
since an affidavit has no jurisdiction over this matter. Conse-
quently we should take into consideration the working of per-
ception which extends over a longer period and solve the
problem on its finding. In other words, we should accept the
existence of generic character as sense datum. In this context if
you hold that the first sense-perception reveals only individual
features then how does a judgment of perception refer to its
generic character?
The Buddhists cannot hold that the judgment in question
is a piece of verbal knowledge but not a piece of perceptual
knowledge. Verbal knowledge is always caused by the know-
ledge of a word. The name of an object plays no part in
producing its determinate perception. Even if the name remains
unknown the determinate perception of an object takes place.
The perceiver is directly aware of the generic character of the
said object. Let us illustrate the point in question. A Decca-
nise while perceiving a series of similar fleeting things has
discovered a common element which is equally shared by the
past and the present things. He has perceived a persisting
common element. If a person who is innocent of the relation
of denotation, i.c., does not know the name of a new class of
objects, sees many strange objects at a place then he sees their
generic and specific characters.
648
Moreover, whenever the four fingers of a person come in
contact with the eyes of a person he sees them and understands
their common and peculiar features. If this is so, how do you
say that the individual trait of a thing is only visualised?
Moreover, a person saw as individual cow called Śübaleya
in the past. At a later period he sees another individual cow
Bihuleya by name. Experience says that he remembers Saba-Proof of the reality of Universals
leya which was seen before. (We cannot explain the remem-
brance of Sabaleya if no common property belongs to these
two individual cows. It is unreasonable to hold that a common
element is not grasped. How can we remember an individual
on beholding another individual which is entirely different
from the first?
649
As a person remembers an individual cow seen before on
beholding another individual cow so we think that he has seen
a common property which belongs to both of them. We shall
also add that even if we behold another individual cow, i.e.
other than the seen one then we recognise it that it is that
cow. We have also proved that this piece of recognition is true.
We shall discuss this point at a greater length when we shall
refute the doctrine of universal flux. So we hold that the per-
sisting common element is referred to by the judgment of reco-
gnition. As our perception reveals the mutual difference of
individuals so the said judgment does not refer to individuals
since they cannot be identical.
If we place some paste of sesame seeds or of pulse seeds by
the side of heaps of sesame seeds and pulse seeds then we do
not see with our eyes individual seeds in the paste. But we
grasp with our sense-organs the common element belonging to
the seeds and the paste. Therefore when we have an indeter-
minate perception of an object we perceive both the characters,
specific and generic. Hence it is not wise to deny existence to
universals. At the stage of initial perception the common and
the peculiar traits of an object are presented to us. Hence the
generic and the specific properties are real.
Now, the Buddhists may ask the Naiyāyikas: 'Is the generic
property sensed in the form that this is common? The Naiya-
yikas also put this question to the Buddhists: 'Is a thing-in-it-
self also sensed in the form that this is different?' Though a
universal is sensed by us yet it is not recognised as such, i.e. as
a common element. At that stage our apprehension of a uni-
versal is not determinate. We are not aware of our apprehen-
sion because the substantive is not cognised in an expressible
form. If we sense a universal but fail to introspect our sensing
then we firmly assert that we have failed to acquire a distinct
apprehension of the individuality of a thing-in-itself. But it is a650
Nyayamanjari
matter of great regret that the Buddhists distinctly apprehend the
exclusive character of a thing-in-itself by means of pure sense-
perception.
The Buddhists ask, 'How can you know a universal as a
common persisting element? How are all individuals to which a
universal belongs as their common property cognised?' The
Naiyāyikas give a retort to the Buddhists thus: 'How is an
exclusion grasped? As you are aware of all objects excluded
from the thing-in-itself in question so we are conscious of all
objects which are subsumed under the same class.' In other
words, the method of apprehension is the same, i.e., the
Buddhists and the Naiyáyikas have got to face the same diffi-
culty.
The Buddhists contend that a thing-in-itself can never be
sensed as devoid of both specific and generic characters. They
also add that if the Naiyāyikas hold that it can be done then
they should define the object of indeterminate perception. The
Naiyāyikas hold that when an object is indeterminately per-
ceived it cannot be expressed in a proposition. In other words,
as this apprehension is not determinate so there is no clear-cut
distinction between a subject and a predicate. How can it be
expressed in a proposition? But the perception which is gene-
rated by this determinate perception bears evidence to both the
characters of an object. It reveals its individuality (i. e. specific
character) and a universal (the generic character the persisting
common element). Therefore those who are thoughtful admit
that each real object has two characters, unique and common.
These two (the Sauträntikas and the Vaibhãşikas) who hold
that things-in-themselves have only one character, i.e., they
have merely peculiarity, are great fools.
The refutation of objections against the Reality of universals
One of the main objections raised by the Buddhists against
the reality of universals that two incompatible characters can-
not co-exist in the same locus at one time is not tenable. In
this case no incompatibility subsists between a universal and
the individuality of a thing-in-itself since no such incongruity is
known to us. Let us take an example of opposition existing bet-
ween the two judg.nents having the same object. When we651
Objections against the reality of Universals Answered
mistake a piece of the mother-of-pearls for silver we cannot
cognise the yonder object in the form that this is the mother-
of-pearls and silver. But when one of the predicates is contra-
dicted we cognise the other predicate. But in the present case
such a contradiction takes place. (Let us explain the argument
of Jayanta Bhaṭṭa). Suppose there is a yonder object, say, the
mother-of-pearls. Its specific character is not observed by us.
We attribute silverness to it. We cognise it in the form that
this is silver. When this judgment is contradicted we are able to
cognise it in its true character. Here the yonder object cannot
be both the mother-of-pearls and silver. The individuality of a
thing-in-itself and its generic character (a universal) are not
incompatible with each other. They, without contradicting each
other, co-exist in one and the same individual. Let us cite an
example of such co-existence of the two characters in the same
locus. A jarness and earthness co-inhere in an individual jar.
A jar is a member of the jar-class. So it has the specific charac-
ter of jarness. It is also an earthen pot. Hence it has got the
generic character of earthness. So specific character and generic
one co-exist in the same locus. These two characters are not
incompatible with each other. Similarly, the peculiar trait of
an object is not necessarily incompatible with its generic chara-
cter. We are to reply upon the evidence of our perception for
our decision in this matter. It cannot be formally decided that
individuality is incompatible with the generic character).
Because whenever there is contradiction between two predicates,
one predicate is presented to our consciousness, contradicting
the other one. In the present case there is no such contradiction
between peculiarity and generality. So there is no need of assu-
ming such contradiction between them. If we behold light and
darkness as compresent in the same locus then who can say that
one is incompatible with the other? But as their compresence
in one and the same locus at the same time is not observed so
they are held to be incompatible with each other. But as indivi-
duality and generality are not observed to be incompatible so
they are not incompatible.
Moreover, the awareness of the individuality of an object does
not falsify that of its generality. The apprehension of the indivi-
duality of an object does not prevent the appearance of that of•652
Nyayamañjari
Its generality and vice versa. The sum and substance of this verse
is that there is no opposition between individuality and gene-
rality.
Kumârila in his Slokavärttika has said to this effect. An
object has variegated colour. We may show one of its colours
which we intend to do. Similarly, if an object has two characters
then these two characters are noticed in it. Hence, we determine
that the relation of identity-in-difference holds between an
object and its characters. (Kumärila means to say that the uni-
versal as an abstract one is different from an individual. Hence,
a universal is both identical with, and different from, an indivi-
dual).
Therefore, in this manner as the relation of identity-in-diffe-
rence has been determined to exist so let us subscribe to the
hypothesis of Kumārila and hold that every object in this world
has two characters, peculiar and generic. But we think that
Kumärila, the great, dreading the cob-webs of sophistry in the
shape of the problem of relation existing between an individual
and a universal, has admitted the truth of the hypothesis of the
relation of identity-in-difference. Let us take no notice of it. We
feel no necessity of criticising it.
We hold that a universal is not identical with the individual
to which it belongs and that it is different from an individual
which possesses it but still the individual is its locus. The
Buddhists in their treatises have recorded many problems regar-
ding the relation of a universal with an individual. All of them
will be solved by the majestic influence of perception. Perception
alone will negate all the arguments of the Buddhists against the
possibility of relation between an individual and a universal.
(We see with our own eyes that a universal stands upon an
individual. So a universal must be somehow related to an indivi-
dual, the locus of it. But a universal consists of no parts. It is
absolutely partless. It cannot partially stand upon its locus. It
simultaneously inheres in all locii. We learn all these facts from
perception. Hence, the logic chopping of the Buddhists is
thoroughly meaningless).
The Buddhists have stated that as the mutual difference
existing between a lotus flower and a myrobalan is noticed so
no difference of a universal from an individual is observed byObjections against the reality of Universals Answered
653
us. (The implication of this argument is that an individual is
non-different from its universal). We have met this argument
thus 'The awareness of a universal is different from that of
an individual. (The implication of this answer is that if they
were identical with each other then they would not have been
presented to our consciousness as different. The same object is
not presented to our consciousness in a different manner). The
second argument of the Buddhists against the distinct identity
of a universal is that as a universal does not occupy a space
distinct from that of an individual so they are not different. Let
us clarify the objection raised by the Buddhists. A jar is diffe-
rent from a piece of cloth because a jar is sometimes seen at a
place where a piece of cloth does not exist though they may
sometimes co-exist in the same locus. But a universal does never
keep itself apart from an individual, its locus. We never see it
exist separately. Therefore, a universal is not distinct from an
individual, the locus of the universal in question. The argument
is not cogent since we cannot perceive a universal if an indivi-
dual, its locus, is not perceived. As a universal always finds
its locus in an individual so a universal, unrelated to an indi-
vidual, is not observed. It is not a truism that a universal-in-
itself is not seen because it does not exist. As a universal
stands upon an individual, its locus, so it is not noticed at a
spot where an individual does not exist. Do not think for this
reason that a universal is not distinct from an individual.
The third objection raised by the Buddhists against the
distinct identity of a universal that as the relation subsisting
between a universal and an individual, its so-called locus,
a universal is non-different from an
is not logically tenable so
individual, its locus. We give a reply to the objection thus : A
universal wholly stands upon each of its locii. You may contend
that if a universal wholly stands upon a particular locus (an
individual) then it should not be noticed in another locus
(another individual). Then we say by way of reply that whom
shall we chastise for this! It is a fact that it is also perceived
in other individuals. How shall we conceal its perception from
you ? A universal has no parts. How can we say that it parti-
ally exists in the different individuals. You may ask, “Does a
universal stand upon some other locus ?" We answer your652
Nyayamanjari
its generality and vice versa. The sum and substance of this verse
is that there is no opposition between individuality and gene-
rality.
Kumarila in his Ślokavārttika has said to this effect. An
object has variegated colour. We may show one of its colours
which we intend to do. Similarly, if an object has two characters
then these two characters are noticed in it. Hence, we determine
that the relation of identity-in-difference holds between an
object and its characters. (Kumārila means to say that the uni-
versal as an abstract one is different from an individual. Hence,
a universal is both identical with, and different from, an indivi-
-dual).
Therefore, in this manner as the relation of identity-in-diffe-
rence has been determined to exist so let us subscribe to the
hypothesis of Kumārila and hold that every object in this world
has two characters, peculiar and generic. But we think that
Kumarila, the great, dreading the cob-webs of sophistry in the
shape of the problem of relation existing between an individual
and a universal, has admitted the truth of the hypothesis of the
relation of identity-in-difference. Let us take no notice of it. We
feel no necessity of criticising it.
We hold that a universal is not identical with the individual
to which it belongs and that it is different from an individual
which possesses it but still the individual is its locus. The
Buddhists in their treatises have recorded many problems regar-
ding the relation of a universal with an individual. All of them
will be solved by the majestic influence of perception. Perception
alone will negate all the arguments of the Buddhists against the
possibility of relation between an individual and a universal.
(We see with our own eyes that a universal stands upon an
individual. So a universal must be somehow related to an indivi-
dual, the locus of it. But a universal consists of no parts. It is
absolutely partless. It cannot partially stand upon its locus. It
simultaneously inheres in all locii. We learn all these facts from
perception. Hence, the logic chopping of the Buddhists is
thoroughly meaningless).
The Buddhists have stated that as the mutual difference
existing between a lotus flower and a myrobalan is noticed so
no difference of a universal from an individual is observed byObjections against the reality of Universals Answered
653
us. (The implication of this argument is that an individual is
non-different from its universal). We have met this argument
thus 'The awareness of a universal is different from that of
an individual. (The implication of this answer is that if they
were identical with each other then they would not have been
presented to our consciousness as different. The same object is.
not presented to our consciousness in a different manner). The
second argument of the Buddhists against the distinct identity
of a universal is that as a universal does not occupy a space
distinct from that of an individual so they are not different. Let
us clarify the objection raised by the Buddhists. A jar is diffe-
rent from a piece of cloth because a jar is sometimes seen at a
place where a piece of cloth does not exist though they may
sometimes co-exist in the same locus. But a universal does never
keep itself apart from an individual, its locus. We never see it
exist separately. Therefore, a universal is not distinct from an
individual, the locus of the universal in question. The argument
is not cogent since we cannot perceive a universal if an indivi-
dual, its locus, is not perceived. As a universal always finds
its locus in an individual so a universal, unrelated to an indi-
vidual, is not observed. It is not a truism that a universal-in-
itself is not seen because it does not exist. As a universal
stands upon an individual, its locus, so it is not noticed at a
spot where an individual does not exist. Do not think for this
reason that a universal is not distinct from an individual.
The third objection raised by the Buddhists against the
distinct identity of a universal that as the relation subsisting
between a universal and an individual, its so-called locus,
is not logically tenable so a universal is non-different from an
individual, its locus. We give a reply to the objection thus : A
universal wholly stands upon each of its locii. You may contend
that if a universal wholly stands upon a particular locus (an
individual) then it should not be noticed in another locus
(another individual). Then we say by way of reply that whom
shall we chastise for this! It is a fact that it is also perceived
in other individuals. How shall we conceal its perception from
you? A universal has no parts. How can we say that it parti-
ally exists in the different individuals. You may ask, "Does a
universal stand upon some other locus?" We answer yourNyayamanjari
question with the remark: 'Your logical acumen is wonderful.
You demand that an example is to be given in every case as we
cite an instance to strengthen our syllogistic argument.'
.654
If you ask "What is the name of this relation?" then we
can this much say that it inheres in its locus but we do not
know its proper name. We have also got to submit something
in this context that the relation which subsists between two
inseparable objects is called inherence. The Buddhists also join
issue with the Naiyayikas and hold that the relation of
inherence which holds between two inseparable objects has
been discarded since it has been proved that it involves logical
contradictions. A reply to this objection is this that the relation
of inherence cannot be dispensed with. The two objects which
are held to be inseparably connected with each other cannot
be taken as identical since the awareness of one is different
from that of another and the difference in awareness cannot be
explained if the corresponding object is not different. The two
objects which are held to be different on epistemological
grounds do not occupy different spaces. (Let us cite examples
to illustrate the above point of view of the Naiyāyikas. A piece
of cloth inheres in threads. A jar inheres in its parts, i.e., pot-
sherds. A piece of cloth does never exist apart from threads.
But threads exist independently of a piece of cloth. A thread
inheres in its minute parts. But a piece of cloth does not inhere
in them. A jar always inheres in pot-sherds. It can never exist
apart from them. But a pot-sherd inheres in its parts. A jar
does not inhere in them (these parts of pot-sherds). Though
the parts of a whole can exist independently of a whole yet the
whole cannot exist independently of its parts. Hence, as both
the whole and its parts cannot exist independently of one ano-
ther so they cannot be held to occupy distinct spaces. We can-
not also hold that a piece of cloth identical with threads, its
constituents and that a jar is identical with its parts, viz., pot-
sherds). In such cases, where the two objects occupy the same
space but are distinct from each other a distinct relation sub-
sists between them as they are presented to our consciousness
as related. This is called the relation of inherence.
The above relation holds between a whole and its parts and
a substratum and its attributes. We shall prove later on that aObjections against the reality of Universals Answered
whole is different from its parts and the substratum of attributes
is different from its attributes. In these two cases as they occupy
no separate spaces so there is no doubt about the fact that they
are inseparably connected.
655
The Buddhists take an exception to the relation existing bet-
ween an individual and a universal on the ground that if the
individual does not come into existence independently of its
relation with its universal then it cannot be related to a universal
since a relation presupposes its relata. If a relatum does not
exist, a relation cannot take place. If the Naiyāyikas admit that
an individual exists prior to its relatedness then it is a case of
relation which subsists between the two separable relata. Thus
the thesis of the Naiyâyikas that the two relata are inseparable
does not stand to reasons. This point has been answered by the
great teachers of the Vaiseșika system. They hold that when-
ever an individual comes into existence it becomes related to its
universal. We do not give this answer simply following the
convention of our school. But we say this because uncontra-
dicted experience lends its mighty support to it. Only on the
strength of our own convention we do not hold that no ubiqui-
tous substances are related to one another. We say this because
it is impossible for them to be united with one another by a
tie of relation. One cannot come in contact with another
because there was no inter-space between them. The relation of
conjunction takes place only when one comes in contact with
another with which it has not been united. An ubiquitous sub-
stance inheres in none since it is self-sufficient. We have no
experience as to the truth of the hypothesis that an omnipre-
sent substance stands upon another such substance. We feel no
need of stretching out this point.
The relation which holds between a wreath and a piece of
thread, between the neck of an animal and a piece of rope and
between such other objects is different from that which holds
between an individual and a universal and between an attribute
and a substance, etc., since a universal and an attribute, etc.
have no parts. Again the Buddhists have pointed out an defect
in the hypothesis of the relation of inherence that the existence
of the relation of inherence in its relata cannot be rationally
explained. This defect does not attract our notice. Moreover,656
Nyāyamanjarī
they have put forward a dilemma, viz., either a universal is.
omnipresent or it exists only in its individuals and subjected.
the hypothesis to a severe criticism. The dilemma is not strong
enough to smash this hypothesis. Experience is omnipotent. We
honour the evidence of experience and frame a hypothesis in
the light of our experience. In other words, our suggestions or
conjecturs are based upon sound observation.
We admit that all universals wholly inhere in every locus, i.e.,
in every individual without an exception. In other words, all
universals are omnipresent. But a universal is not perceived in
every locus since a distinct individual is the manifestor of a uni-
versal but is not available in every place.
It is a well-known order of things that a particular individual
manifests a distinct universal. There is no exception to this rule.
Whenever the particular individual is perceived at a spot the
universal manifested by it is also perceived there.
A universal is omnipresent but is not perceived everywhere.
Whenever an individual which manifests a universal exists there
the universal menifested by it, is also perceived.
Is there any proof that a universal occupies other spaces and
does not solely inhere in individuals subsumed under a parti-
cular class? The universal of cow-ness has not been seen at a
spot. If an individual cow is brought there the said universal is
also perceived there.
As one can drag a body but not the soul so one can bring an
individual cow to a spot but not the universal of cow-ness along
with it. So, you will be compelled to admit that the universal
of cow-ness existed at a spot where an individual was absent.
Whenever a distinct individual is seen a universal is also mani-
fested. For this reason, if a universal is once manifested at a
spot then it will not be perceived there at other times (i. e.,
when an individual which manifests it will be absent from the
spot). The manifestation of a universal takes place at the spot
where a distinct individual is perceived. So, a universal is not
seen at a spot where its manifestor does not exist.
Though the universal of cow-ness is shared by all individuals
yet some thinkers hold that the class of individual cows is the
special locus of it. So, the calf which sees the light of day to-657
Objections against the Unreality of Universals Answered
day is cognised as a cow since everybody recognises it to be
such.
Whenever an individual is born it becomes united with a uni-
versal since the union with a universal and the birth of an in-
dividual takes place simultaneously. A universal does not reside
in its locus before the beginning of the locus. A universal does
not come to its new locus from an old one. But the material
cause from which the locus of a universal comes into being
enforces its union with a universal. If one questions: 'How
does it take place?' then he finds fault with the cause of ano-
ther effect. In other words, he does not follow the operation of
the law of causation.
Now, we put a question to you. A bull is tawny brown. A
cow is black. She eats green grass. The pair procreates a white
calf. How does an event like this take place?
As an individual in which a universal finds its locus is not
perceived if it does not possess attributes such as colour, etc.,
so if a locus does not possess attributes such as colour, etc., then
a universal, located upon it, is not perceived. If we frame a
hypothesis of universals in the manner described above then how
does a series of contradictions indicated by our objector
affect it?
If we subscribe to the hypothesis of an exclusion from non-
cows in lieu of the universal of cow-ness then it does not silence
serious questions. How does a calf (a thing-in-itself) which is
born to-day become excluded from non-cows? In other words,
if a calf is excluded from non-cows as soon as it is born then it
becomes also united with a universal as soon as it is born.
In fine, we beg to submit the following: You should give up
the tendency of demonstrating your skill in destructive criti-
cisms. You should follow the track of universal experience of
the world of real objects. Then you should suggest such types
of real objects as are not exposed to blemishes. You should
follow the right way of thinking. Do not be impervious to rea-
son and unreasonably obstinate.
As our experience of a particular remains ever uncontradicted
so our experience of a universal does never meet with contradic-
tion. It has been already stated that the concept of a universalNyāyamanjari
involves no contradiction. As we cannot deny existence to a
particular so we cannot deny existence to a universal. As we
perceive a particular with our sense-organ so we perceive a uni-
versal. Hence, we cannot hold that a universal is a creation of
our imagination. A universal is not an inference. We do not
infer it from an effect. If we had subscribed to this view then
we would have been taken to task since an effect may be other-
wise explained. As a universal is directly cognised so the above
objection is absolutely baseless. If a logician holds that the idea
of continuity or persistence is due to a distinct power but not
due to a universal then what is this distinct power? Is it eternal
or non-eternal? Is it dependent upon or independent of a parti-
cular? Is it sensed by us? Or, is it transcendental to our sense-
organs? If we deny existence to a universal then the above pro-
blems arise in our mind and press for their immediate solution.
Considering all these aspects of the problem the distinguished
logicians subscribe to the hypothesis that a universal exists with-
out diving deep into the matter. This is merely a superficial
account of the hypothesis of a universal.
Now, a fresh problem arises in our mind. As the Naiyāyikas
hold that distinct universals such as the universal of cow-ness
etc. stand upon distinct groups of individuals so the Buddhists
may as well hold that some individuals of a particular group
produce a common idea i. e., some individual cows produce
the idea of cowness and that all individuals of a group are not
required to produce it. This alternative suggestion does not hold
good since the distinct character of an idea is only explained by
a distinction in the character of its corresponding object. If they
hold that the conditions of the said idea being different, the
idea is different then the Naiyãyikas may as well say in reply
"You are agreeable to assume a distinct condition. But why do
cherish hatred against assuming a distinct object viz., a univer-
sal?" If you admit the truth of the general law that a distinct
idea has a corresponding distinct object then existence cannot
be denied to a universal.
658
Now, the Buddhists take an exception to this view. They hold
that though a universal does not stand upon other universals yet
they produce a common idea. Why are the Naiyãyikas partial
to universals? In other words, the Buddhists find out an excep-Objections against the Unreality of Universals Answered
659
tion to the above general law and challenge its truth. The Budd-
hists advance another argument to disprove the hypothesis that
a word denotes a universal. They argue thus:-Suppose there
are fifty objects of the same kind. We count them one after ano-
ther as one, two, three, four and so on up to fifty. But if you
hold that the number belongs to a universal but not to an indivi-
dual then you are to count each one of them as fifty. This is
absurd. Hence, the hypothesis of a universal has no justification.
If the idea of an army without noticing elephants, horses etc.
or that of a forest without noticing certain kinds of trees such
as dhava, khadira (catachu) etc. arises in our mind then it
turns out to be a false one. On this ground shall we hold that
the idea of a jar shall also be wrong? Let us clarify the above
argument of Jayanta. We employ the words 'army', 'forest' to
signify their proper denotation. If we see a crowd of men and
call it an army then the word has been wrongly used. Similarly,
if we see a row of trees in a garden and say that this is a forest
then the word 'forest' has been wrongly employed. The ideas
conveyed by these words are also erroneous. In some cases, if
we wrongly employ a word then it does not mean that in every
case we wrongly use a word. Similarly, if some ideas are wrong
then it does not mean that every idea is erroneous. If a judg-
ment is contradicted then it is false. If one holds that a univer-
sal belongs to the universal of existence then the proposition is
false since no universal belongs to a universal such as the universal
of existence. "The genesis of a false judgment is traced to some
conditions. They are responsible for the attribution of a predi-
cate to a subject. But the idea of cowness cannot be framed by
means of individual cows with the help of some conditions. This
is merely a very short statement of arguments in defence of the
hypothesis of a universal.
Kumarila has said to this effect:
As 'existence belongs to the different objects so it is called a
common property of all of them. Or, as it produces the same
idea so it is called a common property.
Now, the Buddhists say that as the different individuals have
got the same practical efficiency so it seems to us that they po-
ssess a common property. As they serve the same purpose so
they produce in our mind the idea of oneness. The drift of thisNyayamanjari
argument is this that without assuming a universal the idea of
oneness may be explained. No doubt you have stated a rival
hypothesis but it does not stand upon sound logical ground
since the basic hypothesis that the different causes have the same
practical efficiency has not yet been established.
The Buddhists have also stated that concepts are identical
since the causes of them are always the same. Such a statement
is not logically sound. A concept it not the joint product of
many sense-perceptions. But each concept follows in the wake
of a sense-perception. Hence one concept is different from
another concept. Thus concepts are many. Concepts have no
distinct part to play so that they may make the impression that
they are the same. How do the Buddhists know that they are
identical? The identity of concepts is not sensed since sensible
objects are only sensed. The identity of concepts is not a sensible
object. The Buddhists may hold that the identity of concepts is
established by means of a distinct concept. The Naiyāyikas will
also point out that the above solution is not satisfactory since all
concepts point to an imaginary object only or they cognise the
form of an imaginary object only. But they are not competent
enough to grasp their identity or distinction. Now, they should
argue like this. All concepts reveal such forms as cannot be
mutually distinguished. Hence they are held to be one. Suppose,
an individual cow the 'Sabaleya' is sensed. This sense percep-
tion produces a concept. It reveals the general form of a cow.
Another individual cow is sensed. The second sense-perception
also produces another concept. But this concept does also reveal
the same form. As these concepts fail to reveal a distinct object
so the objects which are revealed by concepts cannot be distin-
guished from one another. Hence, though sense-perceptions
which produce concepts are different yet concepts present
themselves in such a manner that the distinct identity of their
causes cannot be traced. Sense-perceptions, having lost their
marks of distinction, become fused into one.
660
The above argument is not convincing. As concepts are
fleeting phenomena of consciousness so they are mutually
distinguishable, But the distinct character of forms which they
reveal are not made out. Is the form of a concept distinct from
a concept itself? Or is it identical with the concept itself?Hypothesis of a Concept
661
This question should be answered at first. If it is distinct from a
concept then it is nothing but a universal in a different name.
But the Buddhists may contend that a universal is real whereas
the form of a concept is unreal. Hence, the form of a concept is
distinct from a universal.
Such a contention is not tenable, since no sound argument
has been advaneed to negate the reality of a universal. Again,
if it is held that the form of a concept is identical with the
concept itself then these forms are mutually different as these
concepts are and they cannot be unified. In that case how can
the fusion of antecedent sense-perceptions into one be justified?
Oh fool ! you do not admit the existence of a universal. But
when you have been asked 'How do the similar concepts
arise ? You have said 'Because sense-perceptions produce the
same effect. viz. similar concepts'. None but a mad man can
give an answer like this. Hence it is foolish to state that pheno-
mena of consciousness which produce identical phenomena of
consciousness are identical.
The Refutations of the Hypothesis That a Concept Points to the
Exclusion of its other
The Buddhists have an incoherent statement to establish the
hypothesis that concepts point to and words denote the ex-
clusion of their other. They hold that proofs other than percep-
tion are not so powerful that they will discover properties of an
object, non-sensed by perception. Hence concepts and words
function to negate the other forms attributed to the real image
of an object. For this reason concepts refer to and words denote
the exclusion of their other. Such a defence is really insignifi-
cant.
An object which has been sensed in every possible way cannot
be held to be not perceived. The logicians of the Nyāya school
hold that knowledge which reveals what has been known is also
true. If the doctrine of universal flux is refuted then it is not
unreasonable to hold that an object which has been already
grasped by us at a particular point of time and space may also
be known to us in a different place and at a different period of
time. Moreover, the Naiyāyikas hold that a substratum possesses
a good number of properties and all of them are not simulta-662
Nyayamanjari
neously perceived by a person. Some of its properties are
grasped by a particular proof. Some of them will be detected
by a different proof and so on. A substratum is one. But it
acquires various properties, capacities being accompanied by
various accidental accessories. These properties or capacities
according to a substratum are secondary ones. Why will a
substratum change its identity every moment because of its
changing aspects ?
Or, suppose, if a substance is grasped in its entirety by an act
of sense-perception and then is determined again by a number
of perceptual judgments then will these judgments be futile?
Can we conjecture on this account that determinate perception
points to some thing which remains outside the scope of sense-
perception? Certainly, we cannot indulge in a conjecture like
this. Suppose, the thirst of a person has been quenched. Hence,
the lunar orb is of nouse to him. Can we therefore imagine that
the lunar orb is silver ? It is a wild goose chase. In other words,
we cannot imagine that concepts point to the exclusion of their
other. And thus we arrive at the conclusion that concepts point
to and words denote real external objects which are not mere
exclusions from their other. If this conclusion is accepted then
we see nothing wrong with criticisms offered by Kumārila
Bhaṭṭa.
In order to meet the charges brought by Kumarila against
the hypotheses of Apoha the Buddhists have revised their origi-
nal theses and made a new suggestion that concepts point to an
image having imaginary form which is tinged by the rejection
of real exclusion. They also hold that words also denote such
an imaginary image. We cannot carry on worldly transactions
with such an image.
What is known by the name of a concept is conciousness. It
is stainless by its very nature. It does not become impure
without coming in contact with something else. The existence
of some colouring matters must be postulated in order to
tinge it. They may be either internal impressions or external
objects.
If it is held that the colouring matter which tinges conscious-
ness is neither internal nor external then it is a great artful
dodge engineered by the cunning fellows. Only objects truly663
Hypothesis of a Concept
characterize consciousness since impressions, being effectuated
by the consciousness of objects, cannot characterize conscious-
ness.
Thus consciousness must be characterized only by objects
though they may exist in a distant place. But an imaginary
object which exists nowhere cannot characterize consciousness.
It is merely an idle conjecture. The form of an imaginary
object cannot be attributed. Judgments which follow senseper-
ception in quick succession re-do the work of sense perception.
They cannot create objects which are excluded. The Buddhists
may hold that they refer only to exclusion. The Naiyāyikas take
an exception to this view. They point out that as all sensible
objects are other than their homogeneous and heterogeneous
objects so both sense-perception and determinate perception
should refer to exclusion. Why should the judgment of per-
ception only refer to an exclusion? The Buddhists may argue
that if both types of perception refer to an exclusion then the
judgments of perception should be futile as they simply repeat
the work of sense-perception. Such an argument does not hold
good. If the Buddhists hold that judgments of perception are
true but futile owing to the fact that they merely refer to the
known objects then the Naiyāyikas may agree with them in
this point of criticism. The Buddhists may also hold that these
judgments point to some other objects in order to free them
from the charge of being futile. This much they may be allowed
to hold. But the Naiyāyikas have no faith in the Buddhist thesis
that the judgments of perception only refer to the exclusion from
the heterogeneous objects but not to that from the homogeneous
objects.
As there is no distinction between the exclusion from the heter-
ogeneous objects and that from the homogeneous objects so the
hypothesis that judgment of perception only refers to one of these
two types of exclusion does not hold good. If judgments of per-
ception refer to both types of exclusion, i.e., from the homogeneous
and the heterogeneous objects then they should reveal only parti-
culars like sense perception. If this be so then we shall not be able
to communicate that a word denotes a class of objects, on induc-
tive conclusion and so on since the relation of denotation, univer-
sal concomitance, etc. presuppose universals as their terms.664
Nyayamanjari
Thus verbal knowledge, inferential knowledge and so on should go
to hell. If the said exclusion is an external object then the des-
tructive criticisms, offered by Kumarila, will threaten the
Buddhist hypothesis like thunder. If concepts are internal phe-
nomena then they cannot characterize consciousness. If they
are neither external nor internal objects then they are merely
empty words, Have such objects some degrees of reality or not?
If they are absolutely unreal objects such as the horns of a hare
they have no practical efficiency. Weshall follow the path already
chalked out to refute the presentation of unreal objects and cri-
ticise the hypothesis in question from that standpoint. A real
object should be either internal or external. Hence, the new
path, devised by the Buddhists, in order to escape from the
charges laid down by Kumärila. is perilous. Hence one should
postulate objects corresponding to his judgments. If concepts
refer to external objects then it is reasonable to hold that they
are related to existence or non-existence imported by some
other words. When we hear a word, viz., a cow, the awareness
of a universal flashes in our mind. But the universal is not
presented to our consciousness as related to existence or non-
existence. It requires some sort of relation to existence or non-
existence for its complete determination, That is why some other
words are employed. The essential feature of an object is its
everlasting property. It does not change. If the essence of an
object is determined then it excludes itself from that of another
object. A jar is always a jar. It does never hecome a piece of
cloth. But from the above remark we cannot hold that a
concept merely refers to negation, i. e., an exclusion. No need
of dilating upon this point.
The Concluding Portion of the Proof of a Universal
All such transactions take place with regard to external ob-
jects. How do the Buddhists explain the movement of a person
for an object? They say in reply that a perceiver moves for an
object because he identifies a sensible object with a conceptual
one. What is the character of this identification? If they hold
that the identification in question stands for the non-detection
of difference between a sensible object and a conceptual one
then this state of mind resembles that of a person who has fallen665
Meaning of a Word
into a swoon. If the Buddhists hold that an object which has
not been determined inspires movement then it is a sensible ob-
ject. In that case, an apoha (an exclusion of heterogeneous ob-
jects) has got no function to play. The Buddhists may hold
that concepts are presented to our consciousness in their nega-
tive character. In that case when a perceiver goes near an
object why does he with his mental powers unimpaired move
for it?
If the Buddhists hold that a conceptual object appears to one
as a sensible one then it is a case of illusion but not that of non-
discrimination. An illusion having no ground does not take
place. Moreover, this knowledge is not contradicted like the
mistake of the rays of the sun for water. As there is nothing to
contradict it so it is not an illusion.
Why do you say that one comes across an external object
when he is propelled by a mistake just like a person who gets
a gem, being misled by its rays? Suppose, a person mistakes
rays of a gem for a gem moves for it and acquires it. Similarly,
why do the Buddhists say that when a person is guided by the
light of a concept and moves for an object he gets an external
object. It is consistent with the canon of logic that a person
gets an external object because the judgment of perception is
true. That is why the Naiyâyikas incline to discuss the topic
that a word denotes an individual, its form and a universal.
If the existence of external objects is established then the
Buddhists who disregard the distinction between imaginary and
independently real external objects are put to silence. Now the
meaning of the word 'cow' is discussed. The subject matter of
our discussion is 'Does it stand for the form of a cow or its
universal?'
Subject of inquiry: The meaning of a word such as a cow etc.
When is the meaning of the word 'akṛti'? It denotes the
form of an individual i.e. the organisation of limbs of an
individual. Those who follow the foot-steps of Jaimini hold
that the word 'Akṛti' denotes a universal. But the Naiyãyikas
do not accept the said interpretation since in the Nyāya-Sūtra
a distinction has been drawn between jâti and ākṛti.666
Nyayamanjari
Jaimini in his Mīmāṁsā Sūtra negates the rival view and
holds that äkṛti denotes a universal since the form of an
animal is useful in a sacrifice but if a universal were abso-
lutely different from a form in the above case, it would be
absolutely useless. Sabara, the commentator on the Mimāṁsā
Sūtra, sticks to the same interpretation since he says that
a universal which is characterised by the form of an animal
i. e. the arrangement of its limbs viz. dewlap etc. is useful
in a sacrifice. Kumărila has elaborately explained this point
in his Sloka-vārttika.
:
Kumārila says A universal is akṛti. The etymological
meaning of the word 'akṛti' is that it is such as determines an
individual. A universal determines an individual. Therefore
a universal is denoted by the word 'akṛti'. A universal is
the common property of all individuals. It is the source of
the idea of oneness i. e. a general idea.
The author of the Nyâya-sutra holds that the primary
meaning suggests that a form is distinct from a universal.
Hence he is of the opinion that the word ‘ākṛti' denotes the
form of an individual but not a universal. An ordinary per-
son also holds that the word 'akṛti' signifies an orderly
arrangement of limbs of an individual. Merits reside in him
who has a beautiful form. Hence, the word 'äkṛti' primarily
denotes the orderly arrangement of limbs.
We should now discuss whether the form of an individual
is denoted by a word or not. Like the followers of Jaimini we
should not disregard 'ākṛti' which is also one of the possible
meanings of a word viz. an individual, a form and a
universal.
The establishment of the hypothesis that a word denotes only an
individual.
These who hold that an äkṛti is one of the meanings of a
word have stated, "It is well known to all that the meaning
of a word is ascertained by the two methods viz. the use of a
word by a speaker and the understanding of its meaning by a
listener. Let us explain, the condensed statement. An experi-
enced person employs a word to communicate his idea since
it is significant. He employs the word 'cow' to convey a parti-Hypothesis of a word denoting an Individual
667
cular sense. A listener grasps the intended meaning from the
word. The meaning which he understands is that of word. The
experienced persons use the word 'cow' in order to convey
a definite meaning. The listeners make out the exact mean-
ing from that word. The meaning which they grasp is that of
the word 'cow'. The experienced persons do not employ the
word 'cow' to signify an animal having manes. But they
intend to mean an animal having dewlap etc. Hence it is clear
that the word 'cow' signifies a particular form. The word
'cow' is used to mean such an object as is sensed by us. The
form of an object is perceptible. Our sense-organs point to the
fact that the form of a cow is distinct from that of a horse.
There is no doubt about the truth of the statement that the
form of an object alone distinguishes the object itself from
another. If the perceptible object constitutes the meaning of
a word then the form of an object should be its meaning. The
form of an object should be indirectly related to actions such
as the act of sending etc. through the medium of an indivi-
dual. This is the sum and substance of the thesis put forward
by those who hold that the form of an object constitutes the
meaning of a word. The above hypothesis does not stand the
scrutiny of reasoning since the form of an object varies in
every individual. It is not possible for one to know the rela-
tion of denotation holding between a word and all forms of all
individuals belonging to a class. Does the said relation hold
between a word and a few forms or between a word and all
forms? Can the äkṛtivādins solve this dilemma? If they hold
that the above relation holds between a word and a few forms
then as the word also signifies those forms to which it is not
related so the knowledge of these forms conveyed by it is false.
If the word is related to every form then an infinite number
of relations is to be postulated. The word 'cow' does not
denote a particular form viz. the form of Sabaleya since it
also denotes the form of Bahuleya which excludes that of
Śabaleya. We cannot find out a single common form which
belongs to all individual cows scattered over the three worlds
and relate it with a word since the individual forms are infi-
nite in number. For this reason we cannot hold that a word
denotes the form of an individual. Moreover, the form of an668
Nyayamanjari
object is not related to an action such as the act of sending
etc. An individual is taken from one place to another but not
its form. (The form of an individual is nothing but the diffe-
rent conjunctions of its limbs. It is an attribute. So it is not at
all related directly to an action).
On hearing the sentence "Bring a cow" an intelligent person
does not bring an object which bears the form of a cow viz. the
picture of a cow or an earthen cow.
Let us now examine the hypothesis that a word denotes only
a universal. Now the following question is put to the up-
holders of the above hypothesis. According to them a univer-
sal is all-pervasive. If one says "Bring a cow" then why does
he not bring an earthen cow? The universal of cowness as
well belongs to an earthen cow, being itself ubiquitous. A reply
to the above question is as follows: When one says, "Bring a
cow" why does not the listener bring an elephant ? Because a
universal is all pervasive. Now, the upholders of the above
view raising the above problem solves it in the following man-
ner: Though a universal is present everywhere yet it is not
presented to our consciousness as such. No individual can
manifest all universals. A particular individual manifests a
particular universal. This answer is not satisfactory. We regret
to point out that it is only an animal, having dewlap, etc.,
which manifests the universal of cowness. That is why when
we say "Bring a cow" an earthen cow is not brought since an
earthen cow does not manifest the universal of cowness. More-
over, as an earthen cow bears the stamp of a cow so if one
says "Bring a cow" then he who holds that a word denotes
only a universal cannot prevent the listener from bringing an
earthen cow. Another point may also be added to the list
of criticisms directed against the above hypothesis. If a word
denotes only a universal then the proposition "A cow is white"
becomes meaningless. The above proposition does not accord
with the order of reality. The colour 'whiteness' qualifies the
object denoted by the word 'cow'. If the word 'cow' stands for
the universal of cowness then the relation of identity which
holds between a noun and an adjective cannot hold between
the colour 'whiteness' and the universal of cowness. The colour
*whiteness' does not belong to the universal of cowness. ThoseHypothesis of a word denoting an Individual
who hold that the relation of identity holds between a noun
and an adjective should say that the colour of whiteness is re-
lated to an individual which the said colour belongs to. The
upholders of the hypothesis that a word denotes only a univer-
sal subscribes to the view that the relation of identity holds
between a noun and an adjective. Therefore, they should accept
the hypothesis that a word denotes only an individual.
If an individual constitutes the meaning of a word then some
sort of relation may be established between an individual and
an act to be performed by the dictate of the Sastras. If a
universel is the primary meaning of a word then the relation of
denotation is easily grasped. If a form is the meaning of a
word then it is related neither to an action nor to a word. Why
does an äkṛti (a form) constitute the meaning of a word? We
should now determine which of the two, viz. a universal or
an individual constitutes the meaning of a word. The upholders
of the hypothesis that a word denotes only an individual say
to this effect.
669
An individual should constitute the primary meaning of a
word if we take into consideration the consistency of the mean-
ing of a word with injunctions governing the performance of the
Vedic rites. If a universal is denoted by a word then injunc-
tions with regard to cutting, killing, sprinkling, etc. become
irrelevant since nobody can cut, or kill or sprinkle a universal.
Moreover, there are injunctions which enjoin thus: "One should
make a gift of 6 articles, of 12 articles, of 24 articles, etc."
In these cases the number six, etc., cannot be connected
with a universal. If we do so, it will be repugnant to the actual
order of things. If an individual is denoted by a word then
the meaning of a word fits in well with an injunction. Hence,
only an individual constitutes the meaning of a word. There
is another point in favour of this hypothesis. In a sacrifice if an
animal is offered to a deity but it manages to escape then an
injunction runs to the effect that another anímal of the same
class, having the same colour and age, should be slain. If a
universal had been the primary meaning of a word then the
killing of another animal would not have been possible. Another
animal which has been brought now possesses one and the same
universal. Hence, it cannot be qualified by the word 'another.'670
Nyāyamanjari
But if an individual is the primary meaning of a word then
the animal which has been brought will be well described as
distinct from that which has filed. But if a universal is the
meaning of a word then the universal, belonging to the animal
which is being brought, being identical with that belonging to
the former one, the adjective ‘another' will not be applicable.
Hence, an individual constitutes the meaning of a word.
If an individual is denoted by a word then the bringing to-
gether of animals, the increase of number, their reduction of
number, the killing of them and the relation of ownership, etc.,
are consistently explained.
This meaning is not well conveyed if it is held that an indi-
vidual is the secondary meaning of a word. If the straight path
is available one should not go by a curved one.
We shall also establish the point that though a word conveys
an individual yet it has also secondary power of expressing a
universal. Thus the apprehension of assuming an infinite
number of relations and that of misrepresenting objects will
disappear.
Moreover, some other logicians (the Naiyāyikas) admit that
words denote perceptible objects. A universal is not the only
object which is perceived. Therefore you must admit that an
individual is only conveyed by a word. Whenever a listener
hears a word he knows only an individual.
The followers of Jaimini do not subscribe to the hypothesis
that a word denotes only an individual. The criticism offered
by them is as follows: The primary meaning of a word is either
a mere individual or an individual characterized by a universal.
A mere individual does not constitute the meaning of a word
since no speaker employs a word to denote any individual and
no listener hearing the word 'a cow', understands any parti-
cular cow. The upholder of the hypothesis may modify his view
and hold that the word 'a cow' denotes an individual cow,
characterized by the universal of cowness which is the common
property of all cows. In this case, the word 'a cow' denotes the
universal of cowness but not an individual cow. If you ask 'why'
then listen to our argument. If a word merely denotes an indi-
vidual then we cannot employ it to convey another individual.
If we convey a particular individual by a particular word and671
Hypothesis of a word denoting an Individual
employ it again to express another individual then we shall
hold that its meaning is a common property, shared by all in-
dividuals but not a particular individual.
Now, the upholder of the above hypothesis defends himself
thus 'As another individual is also nothing but an individual so
the word 'a cow' has been employed to express an individual but
not a universal. Such a defence does not hold good. If the
word 'a cow' is employed to express a mere individual then it
should also be used to convey a particular white horse since
it is an individual. Now, the upholder of the above hypothesis
may argue that the word ('a cow') is employed to convey only
that meaning which it has been found to be employed to
denote. In other words, nobody employs the word 'a cow' to
convey a white horse. Hence it does not denote a white horse.
The argument may be met thus. Nobody has used the word 'a
cow' to convey a new born calf since it has not been found to
be employed in that sense. For this reason, our acquaintance
with the usage of words does not justify the hypothesis that a
a word denotes an individual. It is not also possible to learn
from usage that the said word denotes each and every indivi-
dual. If we subscribe to the hypothesis that a word denotes
only a particular then on hearing the word 'a cow' we should
determine that this is only a particular cow but not that this
is also a cow. We cannot employ a word at our sweet will if
there is nothing to regulate its meaning. Therefore, if a word
is employed to convey a particular object then there should be
some regulating factor to determine its employment. Now it
may be said that the word 'a cow' is employed to convey an
individual which the universal of cowness belongs to. In other
words, the universal of cowness regulates the use of the word
'a cow'. Let us examine the solution in question. Does the
universal regulate the employment of the said word, being
itself known or unknown ? It cannot regulate, remaining
unknown since if it could then the word would become too
wide to denote any and every object. If it is held that the
universal of cowness is known from the word 'a cow' then we
point out that the word 'a cow' is at the outset related to the
universal of cowness by the relation of denotation since there672
Nyayamanjari
is a well-accepted rule that a qualified object is not at all
known if the qualification is not grasped.
Now, the upholder of the above hypothesis may say in his
defence that the word 'a cow' imparts the knowledge of an
individual cow as a substantive and that of a universal as a
predicate. Such a defence is not tenable since a word is brought
to bear the great burden. A word will not be saddled with so
heavy a load but there is no other alternative left to them for
the explanation of the presentation of an individual. Do not
think "we are concealing the awareness of an individual though
it is conveyed to us. We are also concealing the awareness of
a universal though it is presented to us". Universal ex-
perience bears witness to the presentation of both objects. The
power of conveying both objects viz., an individual and a
universal is too heavy a load for a word. The awareness of any
one of them points to that of another. If we accept this sugges-
tion then does the word 'cow' denoting a universal indicate
an individual or does it signifying an individual point to a
universal? When one is to choose between these two alternate
suggestions he arrives at the conclusion that a word denotes
a universal since a universal, qualifying an individual, is
firstly presented to our consciousness. When a universal is
conveyed by a word the awarness of an individual follows from
it. Thus, the hypothesis that a word has power of expressing
both objects is not accepted.
Well, as we know from the word 'dandi' (a clubman) both
the substantive and the predicate so on hearing the word
'cow' we shall also understand that the individual cow is a
noun and the universal of cowness is an adjective which
qualifies it. For this simple act of communication does it carry
a heavy load ? Our criticism is as follows. The example, cited
by the upholders of the above thesis, has no bearing upon the
point in question. The word 'daṇḍi' is derived from a stem
with a suffix attached to it. Hence it may carry both senses.
The stem in question is 'danda'. It denotes an adjective. The
suffix 'in' which is attached to the stem has the sense of
sion. It denotes a noun. But the same logic does not apply to
posses-
the word 'cow'. In the above example the word 'dandi' does
not denote an adjective and the word 'daṇḍa' does not denoteHypothesis of a word denoting an Individual
673
a noun. In other words, the word 'daṇḍa' is not a single word.
It consists of two elements which are as good as two words. But
in the case of the word 'cow' which has been compared it is a
non-composite word which consists of no parts. It stands for
either a noun or an adjective. If it denotes a noun and has got
to convey the sense of an adjective then it may do it on receiv-
ing the aid of some other sources of knowledge. But it has no
innate power of expressing an adjective. But if the word 'cow'
denotes only an adjective then it may point to its noun since
the universal of cowness which is an adjective does not stand
unsupported. As it must stand upon a locus so it helps to infer
the said locus. We are not to blame if we say like this. Every-
body knows that when a word is pronounced an individual is
presented to our consciousness. Now, a doubt arises in our
mind is an individual directly communicated to our mind by
a word or, is it known to us by the medium of a universal?
The distinction between these two cases of knowledge is not
perceived by us. The problem in question is to be solved by
means of an argument. We are to take a lot of troubles to prove
that a word simultaneously denotes two meanings viz. a noun
and an adjective. We do not also know that it successively con-
veys two senses viz., it conveys the first meaning at the outset,
stops for sometime and then conveys the second meaning. If
there is no word to denote an individual. But we know for
certain that the knowledge of a universal is due to a word.
The Naiyāyikas do also admit that a judgment presupposes the
awareness of a predicate as its antecedent condition. Kanāda
has also stated thus:-The colour 'whiteness' inheres in a sub-
stance. When we know that the said colour is in a substance
we know that the substance is white. The awareness of the white
colour inhering in a substance and the judgment that the sub-
stance is white are causally connected.
Well, as the word 'dandi' conveys the sense of a noun as
well as an objective so from the word 'cow' we shall be able to
learn an individual cow as a noun and the universal of cowness
as its adjective. But why do you say that it would be a heavy
load on the part of the word 'cow' to convey these two mea-
nings? A critic points out that the example in question is mis-
matched. In the above example the word 'dandi' consists of674
Nyayamanjari
two parts, viz., the stem and the suffix. As it admits of two
parts so one part conveys the noun and the other one communi-
cates the adjective. The word 'daṇḍa' constitutes the stem to
which the suffix 'in' having the sense of 'matup' suffix, has
been attached. The stem denotes an adjective and the suffix
stands for a noun. The word 'dandi' does not denote an ad-
jective and the word 'daṇḍa' does not denote a noun. But here
the word 'cow' is a single one. It may convey either a noun or
an adjective but cannot convey the both. If it is to convey an
adjective while conveying a noun then it should receive the
help of another source of knowledge since none can aseume that
the word 'cow' has power to convey both the noun and the ad-
jective. But if the word 'cow' denotes only an adjective then the
universal of cowness which is an adjective cannot stand unsu-
pported. It must have a support to stand upon i. e., requires a
noun to qualify. The metaphysical logic casts its shadow upon
the science of grammar. It conveys a noun by implication. If
we hold this view, we do not violate the logic of grammar.
Every body knows from his own experience that whenever a
word is uttered an individual is presented to our consciousness.
We have no conclusive direct knowledge that an individual is
directly communicated to us by a word but not implied by a
universal. Consequently, a doubt arises in our mind, viz.,
either an individual which is a noun is conveyed by a word or
it is implied by a universal, the meaning of a word. The doubt
in question is to be solved by means of logical discussion. It is
a very difficult task for us to carry out that a word denotes
both a noun and an adjective as its primary meaning. More-
over, no experience of us bears an evidence to the hypothesis
that a word denotes a meaning at the outset, stops for some-
time and then denotes another meaning. Our experience says
that the awareness of an individual is produced by that of a
universal even if there is no word to convey the noun. Hence
the awareness of an individual is generated by the medium of
a universal. The source of the knowledge of a universal is a
word. This is the final conclusion we arrive at.
You, the Naiyāyikas, have also admitted the truth of the
hypothesis. Kaṇāda says “The colour 'white' inheres in a subs
tance. If we are aware of the fact that the colour 'white' inheresHypothesis of a word denoting an Individual
675
in a substance then the judgment that the substance is white is
framed. There is casual relation existing between the awareness
of the white 'colour' inhering in a substance and the judgment
that the substance is white."
It has been stated that as the verbs, viz., to cut, to kill, to
sprinkle etc., are related to individuals so an individual consti-
tutes the primary meaning of a word. The statement is falla-
cious since in some cases verbs are also syntactically connected
with verbs. An example is as follows:-The Vedic text "one
should prepare fire in the shape of a hawk" is the example in
question. It may be contested that an individual is only sub-
servient to a Vedic rite, i.e., an action since a universal, a
formless being, cannot be serviceable. Such a contention does
not hold good. The reason behind the above criticism is as
follows. In the above rite a hawk is not mentioned as instru-
mental to it just as an animal is referred to as instrumental to a
Vedic rite in the Vedic text 'pasunā yajeta'. The designation
of a Vedic rite as fire is the title of this section. The wording of
this text purports to convey that a hawk should be constructed
after observing a few rites. A real-a bird hawk cannot be
created by observing a few rites. We also remember what has
been stated in the chapter devoted to the naming of fire. It
has been stated that a hawk cannot be created by piling bricks.
But fire is so prepared that it assumes the form of a hawk.
Hence a universal is subservient to a rite but not an individual.
Now, it may be contested that the resemblance of fire to a
hawk will be constructed. Such a contention does not hold water
since resemblance is not a thing to be done. What is similar
to a particular hawk is also dissimilar to another hawk. Hence,
dissimilarity accompanies resemblance. The objection that
a universal being formless, is not subservient to a rite is baseless.
Though an attribute and an action are formless yet their efficacy
in connection with the performance of some rites it acknow-
ledged. Let us cite an example. One purchases a red cow. One
offers libation into fire going round it. We shall also prove that
a universal is also indirectly related to an action since an indi-
vidual is implied by a universal. Hence the verbs, viz., to cut,
to kill, to sprinkle etc. are indirectly related to a universal.676
Nyāyamanjari
A rite which is practicable by means of an individual,
implied by a universal, is said to be practicable by the univer-
sal itself just as an action which is performed by the body and
the sense-organs is asserted to be done by the soul that dwells
within the body.
Let us clarify the example quoted above. The soul is the
enjoyer of the fruit of all actions. It is the doer of all actions.
But as it is formless so it gets everything done by means of its
associated body and sense-organs. It cleans the twigs of a fig-
tree carefully, observes the sacrificial ghee, and does such other
things through the instrumentality of its body and sense-organs.
Thus it becomes the agent of an action, i.e., a doer. Similarly,
a universal performs an action through the help of an indi-
vidual and becomes instrumental to an action.
Hence the Mimāṁsakas hold that a universal is instrumental
to an action. But it performs its action through the acvitity of
something else just as the formless and static soul becomes the
doer of an action.
A few rites which require the service of a individual for its
completion have been cited. They are as follows. One should
make six gifts. If an animal dedicated to a god in a sacrifice
runs away then another animal bearing a close resemblance to
it should be killed. A universal is instrumental to these rites
through the medium of an individual. Following the same line
of thinking growth, reduction and aggregation etc., may apply
to universals. Again, if we hold that a word denotes a universal
then the relation of denotation holding between a word and
a universal is easily cognised. If a word denotes an individual
then it should be admitted that a word denotes an infinite
number of individuals. (All individuals belonging to a class are
denoted by the same word. Hence, the power of denotation
belonging to a word is infinite. Again if it is held that a Word
denotes only an individual then a word is wrongly used
since it is employed to convey an object which it does not
denote. There are the possible defects which vitiate the hypo-
thesis that a word denotes an individual. The hypothesis in
question is not exposed to them.
It has been also objected that a word denotes a perceptible
object and that a universal is not the exclusive object of per-Hypothesis of a word denoting a Universal Refuted
677
ception. The sum and substance of this objection is that a word
cannot denote a universal only.
This objection has been met by Kumārila, the author of
Slokavárttika. He holds that a concrete object having various
properties is the object of our perception.
Kumärila in his Śloka-värttika raises a prima facie objection,
viz., if a perceptible object has various properties then why
should a word denote a universal only? He says in reply to
it that a word cannot denote an object having various proper-
ties. All words denote objects, having a direct reference to a
universal.
There is not a single word which is logically conceived as
competent to denote an object having various properties. It is
not also easy to grasp the relation of denotation holding bet-
ween the word and the object having various properties. Thus,
we should restrict the power of denotation and hold that a
word denotes only a universal which is one of the various
properties of an object. This hypothesis stands upon sound
logic. Hence, a universal is the only primary meanig of a
word. This is the essence of the hypothesis that a word denotes
only a universal.
The Refutation of the Hypothesis that a Word Denotes a Universal
The above hypothesis is going to be refuted. A universal
does not constitute the primary meaning of a word (i.e. pada)
used in a sentence. A pada is the combination of letters with
an inflexion attached to it but is not a mere stem. The law of
grammar holds that a stem and an inflexion
their mean-
express
ings which are mutually related. When an inflexion such as the
second case-ending etc., is attached to a stem the meaning of
an inflexion is presented to our consciousness derived from a
word as a substantive and that of a stem denotes a universal
then the meaning of an inflexion cannot be related to a uni-
versal. A universal cannot be a case. It has got no gender
masculine, feminine or neuter. Moreover, it cannot be marked
with a number such as 'two', 'three' etc.
Now, the upholders of the above hypothesis may contend
that all these difficulties will be solved because an individual
is the secondary or implied meaning of a word. The Naiyãyikas678
Nyayamanjari
join issue with them and point out that the above solution is
not satisfactory. A word is once uttered or employed. It parti-
ally expresses a meaning by its primary power and then again
conveys a different meaning by its secondary power. The
secondary meaning, conveyed by it, is related to case, number
and gender and is presented to our consciousness. This order
of the presentation of a meaning in its relational character is
not borne out by our experience. (A word once uttered com-
pletely expresses its meaning. It does not gradually convey its
meaning. Such an expression of meaning goes against the
grammatical law).
It will be improper on our part to relate the meaning of an
inflexion with a universal. It looks like a contradictary injunc-
tion that one should wet with fire. As the meaning of an in-
flexion is related to a male so the meaning of an inflexion is
related to a universal through the medium of an individual.
Though the relation is not direct yet why will not it be logi-
cally tenable? When an inflexion conveys its meaning it does
it as related to the meaning of a stem, viz, a universal. But
it is not the aim of an inflexion to convey its meaning as related
to the secondary meaning of a stem since if it does so, there
will be no uniformity in conveying the primary meaning of a
word. The Mimāṁsakas hold that as it is impossible to establish
a relation between the primary meaning of a word and that
of an inflexion so the meaning of an inflexion is related to an
individual. Such a defence is not tenable. A soul is logically
called the author of an action since it has consciousness, voli-
tion etc. But a universal is eternally static and is in no way
related to a process. So in grammar a universal is never used
as a case. Hence how will the meaning of an inflexion be rela-
ted to a universal? It can in no way be related to a
universal.
The number such as one, two, etc., is said to be syntactically
related to a universal. But the former does not belong to the
latter. The number belongs to such a substratum with which
it is not syntactically connected.
No body experiences that a number is indirectly related to
a universal through the medium of an individual. If a number
is not related to an individual at first then it is logically absurdHypothesis of a word denoting a Universal Refuted
for it to be related to a universal. Such a gradual development
of knowledge actuated by the necessity of removing inconsis-
tency is not experienced.
An individual which is the generator of an action, is marked
off by a universal and is qualified by a number etc., is
denoted by a word. A universal does not constitute the
primary meaning of a word.
The Mimâmsakas have held that a universal is directly
related to a Vedic action. They cite an example, viz. 'One
should arrange fire in the shape of a hawk.' In this case the
form of a hawk has been mentioned. There is no reference to
a universal. Hence a universal is not directly subservient to
an action.
679
The Mimamsakas have said that the pile of bricks containing
fire does not bear a resemblance to a particular hawk since if it
is similar to one hawk then it may be as well dissimilar to another
hawk. The argument of the Mimāṁsakas is not convincing
because the universal of hawkness is formless and it is highly
inconsistent to hold that the said pile is similar to a universal,
It is as good as to say that it is similar to the sky. The example
in question does no service to them. It simply represents their
evading spirit.
There are many other verbal usages such as 'Give a cow'
etc., in which an individual having the universal of cowness is
syntactically connected with the verb 'to give'. So the learned
men hold that the primary meaning of the word 'cow' is only
an individual possessing the universal of cowness.
A word primarily denotes one characterized by a universal.
It is not logical to hold that the meaning of inflexion is at first
related to an individual and then becomes related to an indivi-
dual and then becomes related to a universal. If we hold this
view then the process of denoting a meaning by a word involves
much complication and becomes round about. So this view is
not correct.
If we subscribe to the view that the primary meaning of a
word is an individual characterized by a universal then the
use of cases in apposition finds justification. If we do not
subscribe to this view then the co-ordination subsisting between
a subject and a predicate cannot be explained.Nyayamanjari
So, a word denotes the possessor of a universal. Now, the
Mimāṁsakas raise an objection to this hypothesis. What is the
exact meaning of the word ('tadvān' having that)? The literal
meaning is that this has that. The demonstrative pronoun
"this' stands for a near individual. Hence the meaning of the
word amounts to an individual having a universal. If it
denotes particular then the hypothesis is open to the same
charge that a word has an infinite power of conveying meaning
and has unjustifiably wide denotation, i.e., it denotes objects
which fall outside the sphere of its denotation. But as there is
no word to denote a universal so a universal cannot be used
as an objective. If the opponents hold that a word denotes
both an individual and a universal then they load a word with
the heavy burden of conveying two distinct objects. We have
already discussed this point.
The Naiyayikas meet this objection thus. The etymological
meaning of the word 'tadvan' is that this has that. But will
the demonstrative pronoun 'this' not stand for a distinct
particular such as 'śābaleya'. Moreover it does not denote all
individual cows in the universe. But it stands for any individual
cow, the substratum of the universal of cowness but does not
mean a distinct individual cow such as śabaleya. As the word
"tadván' denotes the substratum of a universal, e.g., the
universal of cowness, so the relation of denotation holding
between the word 'cow' and all individual cows is grasped by
us. Again, as the common property of the meaning of the word
'cow' is the universal of cowness so the above charges that a
word has infinite power of denoting objects and has unjustifi-
ably wide denotation become pointless. Again, we do not
admit if a word does not denote noun without denoting
its adjective. So we do not overburden a word with the weight
of its meaning. As we simply grasp the relation of denotation
holding between a word and the locus of a universal so how
much is the weight of meaning on the part of a word is to carry.
There are a few charges which are levelled against some
hypothesis viz. if a universal is not distinct from its locus then
a word cannot denote both an individual and a universal etc.
But they do not effect our hypothesis since all these objections
are squarely met with.
680Hypothesis of a word denoting a Universal Refuted
: 681
Moreover, perception does not reveal a universal only. A
universal is a property of its substratum viz. an individual.
Perception reveals both, víz. an individual and a universal.
When a word is employed to denote an object of perception
how is it that it denotes only a universal? Therefore we arrive
at the conclusion that if a word is employed to denote an
object as is perceived then a word should also mean the same
object. There should be perfect coordination between the
meaning of a word and the content of an act of perception.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas raise an objection against the above
solution. They point out that a substantive and a predicate
are not simultaneously perceived. The Naiyāyikas even do not
admít such a perception. The direct awareness of a predicate
and a judgment are causally related to each other. Hence, the
sense perception of a universal takes place at first. Hence a
word should also denote a universal at the out-set. Therefore,
it has a reference to a universal for the relation of denotation
informs of it. Hence, the primary meaning of a word is a
universal but not an individual.
The Naiyâyikas say in reply to the above objection. It is
not a truism that a predicate is only perceived but not the
substantive. Both the subject and the predicate are perceived.
Whenever a universal is perceived the sense-object contact in
the shape of conjunction cum inherence is required. For this
reason whenever a sense-organ senses a universal it senses an
individual, the locus of a universal. We do not say that an
individual is only perceived and its substratum is an inference.
If we think with the Mimãmsakas then we should admit that our
sense organ senses an attribute but the substance which
possesses it is an inference. But there is no such provision in
the logical code of the Mimamsakas. Hence we hold that the
substratum of a universal is also perceived. As there is perfect
co-ordination between the meaning of a word and the content
of perception so it is not logical to hold that a word denotes
only a universal.
Kumarila has stated that a word is always employed with the
main purpose of conveying a universal, the element of an
object since if we hold that a word denotes only an individual
then we are to admit that a word has infinite power of denoting682
Nyayamanjari
innumerable individuals and when it conveys its meaning it
transcends its power of denotation. But we are not to face the
difficulty of meeting all these objections if we hold that a word
denotes the locus of a universal. Therefore we should not
impose limitation upon the meaning of word, subscribing to
the hypothesis that a word denotes only a universal. The
Mimāṁsakas may further contend that a word and the corres-
ponding perception of its meaning do not refer to the same
object. If we admit that they do so then the knowledge derived
from a word will be identical with that derived from sense
organs. But it is a fact that these two pieces of knowledge are
not identical. The reason behind their non-identity is this
that when we perceive an object we grasp all its specific.
features but when we know an object through a word we do
not have such a detailed knowledge. Hence, the distinction of
verbal knowledge from perceptual one is established. The
same opinion has been expressed by an expert thus:-"A man
who has been burnt differently feels the actual contact of fire
with his body." In other words, the knowledge of the meaning
of the word 'burning is entirely different from the actual
experience of burning The drift of the expert opinion is this
that there is a gulf of difference existing between perceptual and
verbal knowledge. Its underlying suggestion is this that a word
denotes only a universal.
Now a question arises in our mind. It challenges the truth
of one of the previous conclusions reached by the Naiyãyikas.
If verbal knowledge is widely different from perceptual one
then how will they stick to the hypothesis that the different
pieces of knowledge, derived from various sources of knowledge
in some cases point to one and the same object? In other
words, how will they explain the hypothesis of Pramāṇa-
samplava? An answer to the above question is as follows. The
objection, raised against the hypothesis of pramāṇasamplava,
has already been met. Though we admit that there is a gulf of
difference existing between perceptual and verbal knowledge
since the former one reveals all the details of the specific
character of an object and the latter one does not do it yet
these two pieces of knowledge refer to the same object as they
refer to the same substratum. Again, ever if we refute theHypothesis of a word denoting a Universal Refuted
683
hypothesis of Pramāṇa-samplava then it does not follow that
a word denotes only a universal but not the substratum of
a universal. Moreover, if it is admitted that a word denotes
only a universal then the word 'a cow' and 'cowness should
convey the same meaning. There should be the judgment that
cowness is white like the judgment. "A cow is white". The
suffixes 'tva' 'tal' etc. conveying an abstract property should
only signify the meaning of the stem to which they are attached.
like the word 'câturvarṇya'.
If the Mimamsakas think that the word 'cow' denotes the
universal of cowness but implies an individual then it is
contrary to reason to hold that the word 'cowness' (gotva)
which has been derived from the word 'go' with tva 'suffix',
denoting an abstract property, attached to it exclusively
denotes a universal. A universal, detached from an individual,
is never found out.
If you hold that when the word 'cow' is heard the universal
of cowness is known as associated with the universal of cowness
but when the word 'cowness' is heard a universal-in-itself is
only known. If you hold this view then you come round our
path. If it is held that a universal having a locus to stand
upon is denoted by a word then it amounts to this that a word
denotes the locus of a universal, otherwise, a universal having
a locus to stand upon cannot be asserted. When we intend to
express only a universal as independent of its locus we use
words ending in suffixes viz. tva, tal etc. Patanjali in his
Mahābhāṣya has said as the concrete objects are denoted by
nouns so nominal suffixes such as tva, tal etc. are attached to
these nouns. Let us explain with reference to a familiar example.
A universal belongs to a 'cow'. The word 'cow' denotes a con-
crete individual. It consists of two parts viz. (1) a class-cha-
racter, the specific character of all individuals belong to the
class of cow and (2) exclusively particular. The word 'cowness'
is employed only to express its class character. The nominal
suffix 'ncss' is attached to the noun 'cow'. The word 'cow' is
employed since the universal belongs to it. The above remark
of Patanjali gives evidence to the hypothesis that a word denotes
the substratum of a universal. We have already stated that in
the preposition "A cow is white" the relation between the sub-684
Nyayamanjari
ject and the predicate is squarely explained if we subscribe to
the hypothesis that a word denotes a concrete individual. i.e.
an individual possessing a universal. A concerte individual
stands for a representative individual.
The Proof of the function of a Word to Denote an Individual
The Mimāṁsakas hold that a sentence, in the subjunctive
mood, does not refrain from conveying its meaning until and
unless all the minor details which are necessary for the prin-
cipal act are expressed. Similarly, you are to admit that a
word does not completely convey its meaning until and unless
it expresses an individual. As a word signifies an individual by
the uninterrupted process of conveying its meaning so an indi-
vidual is also included in its primary meaning.
The Mimamsakas hold that words in a sentence always reveal
their meanings as interconnected with one another. These words
do never convey their meanings in an isolated manner. There-
fore, they should say that a word reaches the culminating point
to convey its meaning when it communicates a particular.
Moreover, universals do not get themseleves inter-connected
without a reference to particulars. The Mimāṁsakas cannot
also hold that the disconnected universals are communicated to
us by their denotative words since according to them words do
never present disconnected objects as their meanings to our
mind. As the word 'Gangayam' in the sentence 'Gangayam
Ghoşah' (there is a village of cowherds on the banks of Ganges,
the river) indicates a place, adjacent to the flowing river 'Gan-
ges', on the strength of its secondary meaning so the word
'cow' in the sentence "A cow is white" does not mean as indi-
vidual cow by means of its secondary meaning. This criticism
is quite clear from our experience.
The meaning of a word is learnt if we carefully understand
the meaning of the said word noting its usage by the experienc-
ed persons. We learn from the usage that words like cow etc.
signify concrete individuals i.e. substract of universals.
The author of Nyaya-sutra says that the meaning of a word
consists of an individual, a universal and a form. In the above
sutra there is a particle 'in'. It has been given in the Sütra in order
to determine something. What does it determine? It determinesFunction of a word denoting an Individual
the selection of a particular meaning as a principal one from the
meanings according to the merit of a particular case. Though a
concrete individual constitutes the meaning of a word yet in
some cases the universal plays the important part and a particular
occupies a subordinate position. Let us cite an example "A cow
should not be injured." It is universal prohibition. This prohi-
bition applies to all cows. In some cases an individual plays the
most important part and the universal sinks down into a subordi-
nate position. Let us cite examples viz. "Untie a cow", "enchain
a cow" etc. In some cases, a form occupies the central
position, a particular has a subordinate place and a universal
is conspicuous by its absence. Let us cite an example viz. cows
from powdered rice should be prepared. If we use sentences in
order to create mere forms then universals do not belong to
earthen cows and similar objects though the universals are all
pervasive. The absence of universals from such objects has been
already established. Hence, the meaning of a word is a concrete
individual. It is impossible for a few words to denote univer-
sals. They merely denote particulars. Words like the sky etc.
constitute examples of such cases. There are proper nouns such
as Dittha etc. which are well known as names. They stand for
individuals since objects which they mean are devoid of univer-
sal. So, a word like Dittha is called a dravya-Sabda (the
name of a substance).
685
Those who hold that a universal belongs even to an indivi-
dual which admits of imaginary distinctions should also hold
that a universal resides in the individual known as Dittha
since there are several individuals designated by the name
Dittha'. Why are you so opinionated? As there exists no such
universal as skyness so there exists no universal as Ķitthatva.
There is no scope for the vise to indulge in pure imagination
with regard to this topic.
There are a few abstract nouns. They signify only attributes
characterized by species which exclusively belong to them.
There are some other abstract nouns which stand for attributes
but imply substances by their secondary sense since in some
categorical propositions a term denoting a substance is used as
a subject and a term, denoting an attribute, is used as a686
Nyayamanjari
predicate and a copula which stands for the relation of identity
unites them.
Words like scent, sound, taste etc. signify only attributes
having specific characteristic features. They never imply
substances. The proposition that a lotus is scent is never used.
Scent is never used as a predicate which is asserted of a lotus
since no body says that rice is scent and a mango is taste. There
are some words such as Sukla etc. which signify attributes but
imply substances. It is seen that in order to convey a white
substance the word 'white' is only used. But when we associate
with the word 'white' with the word 'attribute' the word 'white'
does not imply a substance as its power of implying a substance
is restricted. These words like words having suffixes indicative
of abstract qualities (whiteness etc.) exclusively denote attri-
butes. A horse has white colour. Whiteness is in a horse. White
colour and whiteness denote one and the same thing.
There are two kinds of verbal nouns. Among verbal nouns
some denote nominative case of a verb, some objective case,
some instrumental case, some other cases. But some verbal
nouns exclusively denote verbs. The above ones refer to a verb
at the outset and then signify a substance which is connected
with it. The word 'păcaka' (a cook) is an example of the first
type of words. Though the connection with a verb is not directly
noticed yet it has capability of being connected with a verb.
The experts noticing such capability use such words.
When we use words like pãcaka (a cook), läāvaka (a cutter)
etc., we do not mean to say that a cook is cooking and a cutter
is cutting. We call a person a cook or a cutter even when
he does not cook or he does not cut. We have noticed usages
even in the absence of a verb.
A verbal noun of course denotes a verb. But it does not
denote it as a process which is in the making. It denotes it as
an accomplished fact. There is no reference to the different
stages of an act which precede and succeed. A verbal noun
which is derived from a root in the passive voice with a suffix
attached to it has a double character. It looks like a substance
as well as like a verb. When it represents the verbal character
it does not mean that everything has been done and nothingFunction of a word denoting an Individual
remains to be done. So it has been said that it looks like
a verb.
The first step towards the understanding of a word is that
the one of its use and its primary meaning are not one and the
same thing. Let us take an example viz. the word 'pacaka'. The
act of cooking gives us the cue of its use. The nominative case
of the act of cooking is its primary meaning.
L
There are a few words which are derived from a root in the
passive voice with kṛt suffix attached to it. The cue of their use
is identical with their primary meaning.
Thus we have stated the primary meanings of nouns. But we
shall discuss the meaning of verbs later on.
We learn from the general usage and from the passing
acquaintance (with a few illustrations) that prepositions, inde-
clinables and nouns admit of various meanings. In most cases
prepositions are prefixed to verbs. There is a general rule that
some indeclinables become prepositions when they are prefixed
to verbs. Some prepositions are annexed to nouns e.g., pra-
vayaḥ. It means one who has advanced in age. Other preposi-
tions modify verbs and determine their meanings in various
ways. The above view has been expressed by some thinkers.
687
When a root is prefixed by different prepositions it admits of
various meanings. If the root hr is prefixed by the preposition
'vi' then it amounts to the root 'to play'. If it is prefixed by the
preposition 'a', to eat becomes its meaning. If it is preceded by
the preposition 'sam', it is identical with the root 'to kill'. If it
is proceded by the preposition 'pra', it signifies the act of
beating. If it is preceded by the preposition 'pari', it is synony-
mous with the root 'to give up'.
Sometimes we see that a preposition, preceding a root
cancels its meaning. Let us take an example viz., prasthita.
(started). The primary meaning of the root 'stha' (to stay) is
to stop all motion. When it is prefixed by 'pra' it expresses the
sense of going. An adverb should not contradict the original
meaning of the root which it is expected only to modify.
An abjective which characterizes a noun but does not mar its
sense is a true adjective. This is our view. An abjective does
not repudiate the meaning of its noun.
Whenever a preposition is connected with a verb it brings688
Nyayamanjari
about a change in the meaning of the original root. As it does
so it becomes an adverb. Though a root acquires the power
of
conveying various meanings, being associated with a preposition
yet it being thus associated, conveys a definite meaning. The
function of a preposition is this that it channelizes the meaning
of a root. But it does not permit a root to express any meaning
in an unrestricted manner. For this reason a preposition is an
adverb.
We shall not discuss the point either a preposition denotes a
meaning or indicates it since it is irrelevant to the issue in ques-
tion. By the joint method of agreement and difference the mea-
ning of a word it ascertained. If a root is preceded by a preposi-
tion then it conveys a certain meaning but if it is not preceded
by the same it does not convey the same meaning. Do the pre-
positions denote a meaning? Or do they indicate it. We shall
not enter into this discussion, There are a few indeclinables
such as 'ca' etc., which express the sense of conjunction. There
are a few prepositions which are used independently of verbs.
An example of the type of prepositions is this "Brkşam prati
dyotate". The meaning of such prepositions will be determined
by usage and common sense. This topic requires no futher dis-
cussion.
Some thinkers hold that this word conveys this meaning. Or,
if a particular meaning is communicated by a particular word
the meaning is denoted by it. There are persons who have the
power of understanding but cannot make out the meaning of a
word. In order to make them understand we quote a few exam-
ples. We have said something to establish the validity of verbal
knowledge. In other recondite works the nature of a word and its
meaning have been elaborately discussed. We feel no necessity
of discussing the same topic over and again since the subject-
matter is very extensive. Now, we find leisure of discussing other
topics. When we have established the existence of universals we
have said that words are related to external objects. In the
meantime by this little endeavour our labour has been crowned
with success.
The Finding of the Meaning of A Sentence.
We have ascertained the meaning of a word. We just nowMeaning of a sentence
discuss the meaning of a sentence. The scholars hold diverse
views on this topic.
689
The Rival Hypotheses on The Meaning of a Sentence.
(1) Some logicians hold that a sentence cannot refer to ex-
ternal objects. It refers to ideas in their non-relational cha-
racter. Though the ideas are not mutually related yet they
appear as external objects standing in relation to one another.
(2) Some other logicians hold that the relation which takes
place among the meanings of words in a sentence is real but not
imaginary. A sentence refers to external objects. (3) A diffe-
rent batch of logicians holds that a sentence refers to the exclu-
sion of the contrary of its apparent meaning. When we say that
it is white we mean thereby that it is not black. (4) Another
sect of logicians conjectures that a sentence without taking the
risk of being denied points to the relation holding among parts
of speech, and holds that their meanings are arranged in order
of their position viz. principal and subordinate and that the
principal act which is accomplished with the help of accessory
case-endings is signified by a sentence. (5) Some other logicians
suppose that a sentence signifies the operation of an agent
directed toward an end, it is known as the meaning of the verb
'karoti' and it is also designated as bhāvanã. The optative suffix
lín denotes a particular kind of operation. It is called sabda-
bhāvanā. It has an injunctive force in it. It impels a person
to activity which is directed towards an end. It is also called
an injunction. (6) Someother logicians point out that if the
lin suffix denotes the above two meanings then it violates the
law of parsimony and suggests that a sentence signifies an injun-
ction. The injunction should be performed. It impels persons
to activity. The followers of this school of thought are divided
in their opinion. (a) The first batch of disciples admits that
the suffix lin impels persons to action since they are aware
of its impelling force. These disciples also hold that the other
function of the suffix lin is not presented to our consciousness.
The view that a sentence prescribes the performance of any act
enjoined or not is too weak to maintain. Therefore an act which
has been enjoined should be observed. (b) Someother disciples
subscribe to the view that when we understand something as690
Nyayamanjari
our duty we also make out that the scripture orders us to dis-
charge it. Hence, an injunction impels us to discharge our
duty. A person engages himself in fulfilling his duty when he
knows it to be such since when a man knows that it is his duty
he moves for accomplishing it. (7) Some other logicians hold
that a new enterprise is denoted by a sentence. So, these diffe-
rent hypotheses are at variance with one another. Let us see
which one is correct.
The View that a Sentence Denotes an Idea :
Some logicians hold that no real external object is denoted by
a sentence since if a real external object is denoted by a sen-
tence then is it different from the meanings of its constituent
words or not? One cannot say in the affirmative since the
difference of the meaning of a sentence from those of its consti-
tuent words is grasped by no body. In the sentence "Gauh
śukla ānīyatām" (a white cow may be brought) the constituent
words are 'gauḥ', 'śukla' and 'aniyatâm'. The word 'gauḥ'
stands for a universal. The word 'śukla' denotes an attribute
viz. whiteness. The word 'anīyatām' signifies an act. Is the
meaning of a sentence identical with that of each word or
with the collective meaning of all words? This problem is to
be solved at the outset. Nobody will say that the meaning of
a sentence is identical with that of each word since no body
grasps the meaning of a sentence in this way since the meaning
of the word 'gauḥ' alone cannot constitute that of the above sen-
tence. It is not also possible to hold that the collective meaning
of all words constitutes that of a sentence since the collection
of the meanings of the words is not possible. How does the
collection take place? Does it occur because the different meanings
exist? Or, does the apprehension of their meaning combine
them? We cannot say that the meanings of the different words
combine together because they exist since all objects which are
denoted by words exist but no body comes across a distinct
sentence which refers to all of them. Therefore it is difficult to
ascertain a definite and distinct meaning of a sentence. The
objects, denoted by words, are not combined by means of their
ideas or awareness since ideas of objects or their awarenesses do
not simultaneously arise in our mind. When we form the ideasA sentence denotative of an idea
of an object the idea of another object is conspicuous by its ab-
sence. Thus the simultaneity of two ideas is not possible. More-
over the letters which constitute each word are the real means
to the appearance of the idea of an object corresponding to a
word. These letters do not simultaneously come into being and
co-exist. Therefore, how will the collection of objects, denoted
by words, be possible through ideas?
Moreover, do all the meanings of words which assemble to-
gether constitute the meaning of a sentence, being themselves
related to one another or not? We cannot say in the negative
since a cow, a horse, a man, an elephant and so on are not
seen to constitute the meaning of a sentence since they remain
unrelated to one another. It is also difficult for one to establish
the relation between two objects since the relation between
the two objects presupposes their correlation. But an object
does not refer to another one since they are unconscious. Ideas
are also not correlative since they have only momentary exis-
tence. They cannot also unite objects with a tie constituted by
themselves. For this reason a relation cannot constitute the
meaning of a sentence. The objects or their ideas are not
mutually related since the reason behind their non-relation has
been stated before.
691
If we follow the above reason then the hypothesis that the
negation of the contrary is the meaning of a sentence will also be
refuted. (A cow cannot produce the judgment that she is not a
horse). The idea of an object cannot convey the negation of
its opposite since this hypothesis is not logically tenable (The
ideas enjoy momentary existence. Hence, they are not com-
petent enough to convey such a judgment as its meaning).
Kumārila has also said to this effect.
In the sentence "A cow is white" if the word 'cow' denotes all
sorts of cows viz. white, black, red etc. and if the idea of a cow
produces that of white then the idea of white can negate the
idea of non-white or can relate itself with that of a cow.
Though the idea of white has a reference to that of a cow yet
no relation subsisting between them (these two ideas) is grasped
by us.
Kumarila has also subjected the thesis to the same criticism,
Though there is correlation between the two ideas or objects692
Nyayamanjari
yet no relation subsisting between them is grasped by us. A
relation is really significant if it is one of the following ones viz.
the causal relation, conjunction, inherence etc. No such relation
is detected by us. If it is held that co-existence is one of such
relations then it may also be pointed out that it is too wide
(Kumārila means to say that as the idea of white co-exists with
many other ideas so the said relation will also take place bet-
ween the idea of white and any other idea).
In some cases, adequate words do not denote the relation
which subsists between the meanings of words. Hence, it is no
better then non-existent. In a sentence which conveys either the
identity of one object with another or the relation holding bet-
ween two objects no word is found to denote either of them.
Hence, neither the said identity nor the relation is the meaning
of a word. If they are not conveyed by words then they cannot
be the meaning of a sentence. Again if a word is given in the
sentence to denote either of them then confusion becomes worse
confounded. Does the sentence. "The white cow be brought the
relation" convey any sense? Hence the hypothesis that a sen-
tence points to external objects as its meaning is absolutely
absurd. Hence, an idea which appears to be the relation of the
external objects may be the meaning of a sentence. The people
transact all their worldly business by means of it.
This is the sum and substance of this hypothesis.
The Refutation of the Hypothesis that an [dea is Conveyed by a
Sentence:
The above hypothesis is not logically tenable since the exis-
tence of external objects has been erewhile established. An idea
which appears to be the relation of external objects cannot be
the meaning of a sentence since having established the reality
of external objects we have commenced to bestow our considera-
tion upon the meaning of a sentence. Now, we have no time to
discuss the hypothesis that the meaning of a sentence is nothing
but an idea. The upholders of the above hypothesis say that the
meaning of a sentence is not the aggregate of the meanings of
its constituent words. Very well, let us put a question to them.
We ask them to give an answer. If one utters the word 'a cow',
it produces an idea in our mind. Again if one utters the sen-A sentence denotative of an idea Refuted
693
tence "Bring a white cow," it also produces an awareness in
our mind. Do the word and the sentence produce in our mind
the same idea? or, do they produce different ideas? If you
answer the first question in the affirmative then you say some-
thing which is contrary to our experience. But you may say that
these two ideas are different. They are not different if their
corresponding objects are not different. So, you will be com-
pelled to admit that the objects referred to by these two ideas
are distinct. Thus, the object conveyed by a sentence is distinct.
It constitutes the meaning of a sentence. If a word denoting
an attribute or a verb is only uttered along with the above noun
i. e. a cow then a distinct meaning is conveyed by the two words
combined. The expert grammarians hold that when the volume
of the meanings of a word increases it is called the meaning of
a sentence. Again, it is not a fact that the relation holding among
the meanings of words is not presented to our consciousness.
When we employ a sentence "A cow' a horse, a man and an
elephant exist", the meanings of its constituent words are present-
ed to our consciousness as unrelated to one another. In other
words, they are independently presented to our consciousness.
But when we employ the sentence "let a white cow be brought"
the meanings of its constituent words are not presented to our
consciousness as unrelated to one another. We shall elaborately
discuss later on how a relation presents itself to our consciousness
and what is the means of its presentation. In fine, we arrive at
the conclusion that a sentence communicates an external object
to us but not an idea. In other words, its meaning is objective
but not subjective.
Though a sentence refers to an extra mental object yet one
should not hold that it conveys merely a negative sense in the
shape of the negation of the contrary of its predicate since the
meaning of the sentence referred to is presented to our consci-
ousness as a positive object and the above negative sense pre-
supposes the relations holding between the meaning of its con-
stituent words. (Let us now clearly state the above hypothesis
and its criticism. The sentence "The cow is white" conveys the
sense that the cow is not black. 'Black' is the contrary of 'white'.
When we say "The cow is white" we do not assert the predicate
'white' of the cow. But we simply negate the contrary of theNyayamanjari
predicate. The critics point out that the proposition "The cow
is white" consists of the main terms viz. 'cow' and 'white'. The
first one denotes the subject and the second one denotes the pre-
dicate. If the relation which subsists between the subject and
the predicate is not presented to our consciousness then the
above negative sense will not be presented to our consciousness.
If we do not know that the cow is white then we cannot under-
stand that she is not black. If we know that whiteness inheres
in the cow then we are in a position to grasp that blackness
does not inhere in it. The knowledge of the absence of blackness.
presupposes the presence of whiteness).
When the word 'cow' is used it produces an awareness of all
cows. If the word 'white' is syntactically connected with the word
'cow' then it excludes the connection of the word 'black' with the
word 'cow'. Therefore, you cannot hold that a sentence conveys
only the sense of an exclusion. The very knowledge of the
relation of the predicate with the subject throws light upon the
exclusion of the contrary of the predicate from the subject. When
we know that the meaning of the term denoting the subject of a
proposition is related to that of the term denoting its predicate,
we grasp the complete meaning of the said proposition, i. e., a
sentence. When we understand the complete meaning of a sen-
tence the exclusion of the contrary of white, viz., the black,
etc., may be implied by the same sentence. If such an implied
meaning takes place, let it take place. But on account of this
implied meaning we cannot hold that a sentence conveys only
a negative sense. i. e., communicates the exclusion of the con-
trary of its predicate.
694
The Demonstration of the Hypothesis that a Sentence Conteys Some
thing Which is to be Accomplished Because of its Importance
From the above criticism it is clear that a sentence conveys a
positive sense and the meaning of a sentence is other than our
ideas. Now, some thinkers hold that a sentence points to some-
thing which is to be done. They purport to convey the follo-
wing idea. The meanings of words constituting a sentence have
mutual reference. Their mutual relationship creates an atmosp-
here which renders their mutual reference favourable. Hence,
it is the current view that the meaning of the constituentA sentence denotative of something to be accomplished
words of a sentence, being related to one another, form the
meaning of a sentence.
The meanings of words are not mutually related if they are
not arranged in the relation of the principal and the subordi-
nate. We are to determine which one of them is principal and
which ones are subordinate. If a verb does not find a place in
the sentence then a sentence cannot be used since a verb being
not uttered, the requirement of a listener is not fulfilled. In
cases of worldly transactions in order to satisfy the requirement
of a listener a sentence is employed. We also make out the
meaning of vedic sentences as we do in cases of ordinary sen-
tence used in mundane transactions. From a verb we know
that an object which is to be accomplished is its meaning and
that the object consists of parts standing in the relation of prior
and posterior in time. We also learn that a verb does not
communicate the sense of an accomplished fact. In a sentence
there are words denoting accomplished facts and a word which
signifies an object to be accomplished. Let us now discuss their
mutual position in a sentence. Does a word which stands for
an accomplished fact occupy the principal position? Or, does a
word which signifies an object to be accomplished occupy the
principal position? Having bestowed due delibertion on the
matter we learn that accomplished facts are taken as means in
order to realise the object to be accomplished. An object to be
accomplished should be done and hence it occupies the superior
position. It is the meaning of a sentence. It is not distinct from
the meaning of a verb.
Whenever we are aware of an object to be accomplished by
us it points to the means which are required for its realisation.
An object to be accomplished is directly related to some of these
means, i.e., some means are proximate. Some means are indi-
cated by words which do not occur in the sentence. Some means
are pointed by some other sentences. Some means are revealed
to us by passages occurring in other contexts. Some means render
their indirect assistance to realise the object to be accomplished.
Some means are abandoned by the object to be accomplished
though they stand in close proximity but lack capacity. Though
some means stand in a remote place yet the object to be acco-
mplished attracts them since they are capable of bringing it
695696
Nyayamanjari
about. An act (an object to be done) which is performed by
a host of objects denoted by case-endings rendering proximate
or remote help to it is the meaning of a sentence.
[On hearing the injunctions such as "One should sacrifice",
"One should make gifts," "One should pour libation," "One
should study the Vedas" and so on a person who is impelled
to action knows that this action should be performed and he per-
forms it. The word which reveals qualifications for a person
wishing to perform an action implies the agent who is required
for the performance of an action. Thus it makes us understand
that an agent has usefulness in his action. It purports to convey
that this person is the agent of this particular action and this
action is to be completed by this person. In that case an agent
forsakes its principal position in a sentence since an agent is a
means to an action but not vice versa. An agent is also known
to us the executor of an action. A sentence also advises a person
to this effect that he should do this. If you ask "Why does a
person perform an action?", then our rejoinder is that the sen-
tence which enjoins a person to do is regarded by him as the
valid source of knowledge. One has been ordered by the in-
junctive sentence, "One should perform this action". If a
person who has been thus ordered does not perform the prescri-
bed action then he will transgress an injunction, i.e., an ob-
ligatory duty. One discharges his duty because he has conviction
in the validity of the scriptures. A man who does not covet for
the fruit of an action performs an action because he is goaded
by the habit of performing actions. This habit strengthens his
attitude of indifference towards the worldly objects. This atti-
tude being confirmed, he gradually negates the reality of all
worldly objects. Thus, he acquires the highest qualification for
realising the Absolute. As he qualifies himself so he acquires a
deep insight into the subtle truth. The highest qualification,
acquired by him, enables him to grasp the summum bonum of
life. If we are to discuss this matter then we are to prolong
this topic to a greater length. Let us cut short this discussion for
the present. The drift of this section is that as an action plays
the most important part in a sentence so it is the meaning of a
sentence. Jaimini says "That which does for another is seșa
(subsidiary). A substance, the attribute of a substance and theA sentence as denotative of the result of an action
697
consecration of a substance occupy a subsidiary position in a
sentence. But a sacrifice, its result, viz, heaven, etc., and a
person who enjoys the result are not regarded as seşa." The
inner significance of Jaimini's sūtra is that a substance, the
attribute of a substance and the consecration of a substance
render a service to an action but an action assists none. In
other words, an action is an end in itself but not a means to an
end. Thus it is not subsidiary.
The Demonstration of the Hypothesis that a Sentence Points to the
Result of an Action Since the Fruit of an Action is Superior to the
Action Itself:-
The criticism of the above thesis is as follows. Why does an
action occupy the principal position in a sentence? Does it
occupy such a position by its intrinsic nature? Or does it ac-
quire the position by verbal authority?
If we think over the problem from the realistic point of view
then we find the superiority of the fruit of an action. No intelli-
gent man undertakes a fruitless action.
Though a person is enjoined by the Vedas or directed by his
superiors or commanded by his king to do an action yet he does
not betake himself to it when he is not confident of his success.
A dullard carries out the order of his superiors either in order
to avoid a slap or in order to gain a sweet-meat. In other
words, a fool indiscreetly undertakes an action either out of fear
or out of greed.
The Mimamsakas re-examine their criticism and hold that
they will not decide the question of superiority from the reali-
stic point of view but from the linguistic point of view. They
attach the highest authority to the verbal knowledge. The know-
ledge which is communicated to them by words is taken as
valid. Let us take an example,viz., a king's servant (rāja-puruşa).
If the actual order of things is taken into consideration then a
king occupies the most exalted position, being the ruler of the
world. The wretched person who serves him earns his livelihood
obeying his will. But if the superiority is decided from the
linguistic point of view then the servant occupies the superior
position in the compound word. The reason is that in a tat-
puruşa compound the sense of the last member predominates.Nyayamanjari
Similarly, in case of the above injunctions viz. "One should
sacrifice", "One should make gifts", "One should pour liba-
tions" etc. an action has been emphatically enjoined. The sense
of an action predominates in those injunctive sentences. But
one who is desirous of heaven should sacrifice. Now why the
clause "Who is desirous of heaven" has been given? Does it
not point to the fruit of an action ? Let the question of superi-
ority be settled. An agent has been mentioned for the purpose
of an action. In other words, an agent is a means to an end.
The end is an action. But if an action is done and a result is
produced in the natural order of things then let the result be
produced. Let an agent put forth his energy for the fruition of
his action. But the above injunctive sentences do not attach
prominence to the fruit of an action. The statement that if an
action is performed then the result itself follows is significant.
What is the significance of the word itself? It purports to
convey that an action is not a means to an end, viz., the result
of an action.
698
The above contention of the Mimāṁsakas is not logically
sound. If they interpret the injunctive sentence "Svargakāmo
Yajeta" in the above manner then it will be difficult syntacti-
cally to connect the word "Svargakāmaḥ" with the verb 'yajeta'.
The Mimamsakas meet the objection with the following re-
mark. The word in question denotes the subject of the sentence.
A subject is a means to an action but not vice versa. The cri-
tics point out that the word 'svarga-kāmaḥ' does not stand for
the subject. It refers to one who qualifies himself for the en-
joyment of the fruit of an action. But nobody is known to be
desirous of heaven from his very birth so that he may be enga-
ged in the action as an agent. The literal meaning of the word
"Svarga-kamaḥh" is either of the following two. A man who has
a longing for heaven is called 'Svarga-kāmaḥ.' Or, a man who
wishes for heaven is called 'Svargakamah'. The two senses of
the above term clearly state that a person who has set his heart
upon heaven is Svargakāmaḥ.
Now, let us discuss how heaven, the object of desire,
is syntactically connected with the verb. Does it render visible
or invisible help to the verb?699
Heaten incapable of assisting an action
Heaven does not visibly assist the verb :
The sentences, viz. "Sandal is heaven," "Damsels, sweet
sixteens, are heaven" imply the identity of heaven with subs-
tances like Sandal, damsels, etc. Hence the word 'heaven'
denotes a substance. Jaimini holds that if substances are related
to the object of a verb then they, assisting the object of a verb,
are related to the verb. As sour milk and other such objects,
being an accessory matter, render assistance to an action so
heaven indirectly contributes its help to the action in question.
Desire, also, has its contribution in this matter because it
exercises influence upon the collection of materials which are
a means to the action in question. Thus it benefits an action.
The benefit which such desire renders to an action is visible
since a person moves for collecting materials, being induced
by such desire.
The view in question is not sound since the word 'heaven'
does not denote a substance since it denotes bliss but not a
substance. The very sandal is not heaven to a person who is
afflicted with cold. But it is said to be heaven by him who is
oppressed by the heat of summer. The very lady is designated
as heaven by an erotic person. But she is not so to a person
whose passion has subsided. Thus heaven invariably denotes
bliss but not a substance. As heaven is not a substance so it
is not a means to action. Some thinkers imagine that the peak
of the gold-mountain is heaven since no other place is an
abode of infinite bliss. Such a place is not a means to the said
action since nobody can have an access to it and the articles
like sour milk etc. are not available there.
Heaven does not render invisible help to an action :
If one imagines that our inner organ is an ocean and
concentrates his mind upon this imaginary object then he
acquires merit and thereby benefits an action. Similarly, desire
for heaven will generate merit and through this invisible result
help the act of sacrificing. Such an assumption is far-
fetched. Heaven is infinite bliss. Bliss is not a means to an
end. But everything else is a means to bliss which is an end in
itself. Hence, heaven is not a means to a sacrifice. But a sacri-
fice is a means to heaven, Thus as the above sentence does not700
Nyāyamanjari
enjoin a means to a sacrifice so the word 'Svarga-kāmaḥ' (one
who desires heaven) is not syntactically connected with the verb
since it does not communicate an agent. If you ask, "How is it
connected with the verb ?" then we say that the word stands
for one who enjoys the fruit of an action.
Who enjoys the fruit of an action ? He who is entitled
to own the result of an action enjoys it. He who is capable of
producing an action has right to enjoy its fruit. Now, the
Mīmāṁsakas may contend that the agent of an action is only
entitled to enjoy its fruit. They suggest that an adhikarin is a
karty. In other words, the word 'Svarga-kamaḥ' stands for
an agent. The word 'svāmī' suggests an agent but does not
denote a person. In order to be the owner of the result of an
act the person must possess capacity. A person does not
acquire the right of ownership simply because he happens
to be an agent. The relation which holds between an action
and a person is not distinct from that which subsists between
a case-ending and a verb. (This is the contention of the
Mimāṁsakas) (The Naiyáyikas reply). A person knows at
first that it is his duty and he is capable of discharging it.
Thus a person, being aware of the ownership relation, enters
into the case relation. In other words, he is conscious of the
case-relation afterwards.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas raise another point against the
above decision. They say "You do not deny existence to the
case-relation as the upholders of the thesis that a word denotes
only a universal refuse to believe the awareness of an indivi-
dual. But how will you prove that the case-relation is subse-
quently presented to our consciousness?" Some thinkers give
an answer to this question. They hold that the person requires
no further qualification, viz. his distinct relationship with the
verb since he has been already mentioned as qualified. A
person who possesses the requisite qualifications of an agent
viz. capacity etc. becomes the agent of an action.
If a person does not possess such qualifications then he
has no right to enjoy the fruit of an action. For this reason,
we hold that a person who possesses the requisite qualifi-
cations is the real agent. Mere agency does not confer upon
a person the right to enjoy the fruit of an action. Thus a701
Heaven incapable of assisting an action
person who desires heaven acquires the said right. If he
performs an action with the purpose of attaining heaven then
he thinks "Let heaven be my enjoyable object. How can I
attain heaven, and being prompted by this aspiration longs
for heaven as his goal. Hence, the performer of a sacrifice
is mentioned as one who desires heaven. If that action does
not lead to heaven then an opposite idea is presented to our
mind viz. he desires heaven but performs a sacrifice. He longs
for one thing but does another thing. Such a critical attitude
of our mind may develop. Therefore, if it is not admitted
that an action is a means to one's desideratum then a person
who desires heaven cannot engage himself in that action. If
a person is not entitled to an action then he can in no way
be connected with it. So when one deserve the fruit of a
sacrifice he who desires heaven goes to perform a sacrifice.
The title does not accrue to a person if the causal relation
does not subsist between the act of sacrifice and heaven.
Hence, we must admit that heaven is the end and the act of
sacrifice is a means to it. Therefore an action, being a means
to its fruit-the end, cannot maintain its principal position in
a sentence. We cannot hold that the sentence which con-
tains a verb signifying this action purports to convey the
action as its meaning. Jaimini has also said to this effect :-
"When an action is performed in order to realise an object
an action occupies a subordinate place, being itself accessory.
Say, 'Which action is the meaning of a sentence?" Do
you say that the act of sacrifice, the meaning of the root
'yaj', is the meaning in question? Or, do you say that the
said action is conveyed by a suffix attached to the root? Of
these two suppositions what is conveyed by a root is a means
object of desire. Hence, the action which is conveyed
by a root occupies a subordinate place. This position has
been already made clear. The meaning of a suffix becomes
that of a sentence when it is presented to us only as
to the meaning of a root and the object of desire. In no other
way it is presented to our consciousness. Our rival thinkers
also approve of this hypothesis. Hence, we hold that no
sentence purports to convey an action as its principal mean-
ing. We believe that this view is shared by all.
means700
Nyayamanjari
enjoin a means to a sacrifice so the word 'Svarga-kāmaḥ' (one
who desires heaven) is not syntactically connected with the verb
since it does not communicate an agent. If you ask, "How is it
connected with the verb?" then we say that the word stands
for one who enjoys the fruit of an action.
Who enjoys the fruit of an action ? He who is entitled
to own the result of an action enjoys it. He who is capable of
producing an action has right to enjoy its fruit. Now, the
Mimāṁsakas may contend that the agent of an action is only
entitled to enjoy its fruit. They suggest that an adhikärin is a
karty. In other words, the word 'Svarga-kamaḥ' stands for
an agent. The word 'svami' suggests an agent but does not
denote a person. In order to be the owner of the result of an
act the person must possess capacity. A person does not
acquire the right of ownership simply because he happens
to be an agent. The relation which holds between an action
and a person is not distinct from that which subsists between
a case-ending and a verb. (This is the contention of the
Mīmāṁsakas) (The Naiyāyikas reply). A person knows at
first that it is his duty and he is capable of discharging it.
Thus a person, being aware of the ownership relation, enters
into the case relation. In other words, he is conscious of the
case-relation afterwards.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas raise another point against the
above decision. They say "You do not deny existence to the
case-relation as the upholders of the thesis that a word denotes
only a universal refuse to believe the awareness of an indivi-
dual. But how will you prove that the case-relation is subse-
quently presented to our consciousness?" Some thinkers give
an answer to this question. They hold that the person requires
no further qualification, viz. his distinct relationship with the
verb since he has been already mentioned as qualified. A
person who possesses the requisite qualifications of an agent
viz. capacity etc. becomes the agent of an action.
If a person does not possess such qualifications then he
has no right to enjoy the fruit of an action. For this reason,
we hold that a person who possesses the requisite qualifi-
cations is the real agent. Mere agency does not confer upon
a person the right to enjoy the fruit of an action. Thus a701
Heaven incapable of assisting an action
person who desires heaven acquires the said right. If he
performs an action with the purpose of attaining heaven then
he thinks "Let heaven be my enjoyable object. How can I
attain heaven, and being prompted by this aspiration longs
for heaven as his goal. Hence, the performer of a sacrifice
is mentioned as one who desires heaven. If that action does
not lead to heaven then an opposite idea is presented to our
mind viz. he desires heaven but performs a sacrifice. He longs
for one thing but does another thing. Such a critical attitude
of our mind may develop. Therefore, if it is not admitted
that an action is a means to one's desideratum then a person
who desires heaven cannot engage himself in that action. If
a person is not entitled to an action then he can in no way
be connected with, it. So when one deserve the fruit of a
sacrifice he who desires heaven goes to perform a sacrifice.
The title does not accrue to a person if the causal relation
does not subsist between the act of sacrifice and heaven.
Hence, we must admit that heaven is the end and the act of
sacrifice is a means to it. Therefore an action, being a means
to its fruit the end, cannot maintain its principal position in
a sentence. We cannot hold that the sentence which con-
tains a verb signifying this action purports to convey the
action as its meaning. Jaimini has also said to this effect
"When an action is performed in order to realise an object
an action occupies a subordinate place, being itself accessory.
Say, 'Which action is the meaning of a sentence?' Do
you say that the act of sacrifice, the meaning of the root
"yaj', is the meaning in question? Or, do you say that the
said action is conveyed by a suffix attached to the root? Of
these two suppositions what is conveyed by a root is a means
to the object of desire. Hence, the action which is conveyed
by a root occupies a subordinate place. This position has
been already made clear. The meaning of a suffix becomes
that of a sentence when it is presented to us only
to the meaning of a root and the object of desire. In no other
way it is presented to our consciousness. Our rival thinkers
also approve of this hypothesis. Hence, we hold that no
sentence purports to convey an action as its principal mean-
ing. We believe that this view is shared by all.
as a means702
Nyayamanjari
As a person is more important than the result to be attained so he
may be the meaning of a sentence:
Let us now follow the logical development of the above
two hypotheses. Why do you say that a result is signified by
a sentence? Why do you discard the hypothesis that an action
is the meaning of a sentence? The reason is that it occupies
a subordinate place. This logic applies to the case of a result
also. A result is also subordinate to a person since it serves
the purpose of a person. Heaven is not attained by itself. A
person endeavours to attain it. But everybody desires all
objects as they are to be enjoyed by him. As they are desired
by a person so they do not occupy a principal position in a
sentence, Jaimini has stated that a result is also not promi-
nent since it serves the purpose of a person. Now, the logical
conclusion which is suggested by the above discussion is this
that a person who performs a sacrifice should be the meaning
of a sentence. He uses freedom and leans upon none. The
Mimamsakas point out that the above conclusion is not satis-
factory. A person is also used as a means. He is engaged in
consecrating posts made up of fig trees. The height of a post
made up of fig tree is measured by that of a person. Thus a
person is required to some action. Jaimini also holds that a
person is a means to an action.
The refutation of the hypothesis that an action or a person is signified
by a sentence:
If we admit the authority of Jaimini then we are in a
fix. We do not know what we shall do. Let us clearly state the
problem. One acts in order to have a result. A result in its
turn serves the purpose of a person. The aim of a sacrifice is
also to complete an action. If the wheel of prominence
revolves in this fashion then which of them will occupy the
principal position in a sentence? Which will be the meaning
of a sentence ?
Our answer to the above problem is as follows. A person
is not the meaning of a sentence since there is a divergence
of opinion regarding the hypothesis that a person is signified
by a verb-not to speak of the hypothesis that a person is
signified by a sentence. Why do you say that the agent, i.e.,Hypothesis of an action signified by a sentence Refuted
the performer of an action is not signified by a verb? Accor-
ding to the rule laid down in Pāņini's, grammar a lakāra (a
verb in all its tenses) signifies an agent. Why shall not we
hold that an agent is signified by a verb? What is the mean-
ing of the term (lakara)? Pänini enjoins that when
present tense of a verb is to be indicated lakara assumes the
form of lat. When an agent is to be communicated the suffix
*sap' is attached to it. A verb takes an inflexion in the second
person when it is syntactically connected with a pronoun
standing for the second person. A verb takes an inflexion in
the first person when it is syntactically connected with the first
person, a pronoun indicating the first person. A verb takes
an inflexion in the third person when it is syntactically connec-
ted with the third person. The inflexions which indicate the
third person are 'tip', 'tas', and 'jhi'. In order to indicate the
plural number of a person the terminal inflexion which is
attached to a verb has a definite form. To indicate the dual or
the singular number of a person the terminal inflexion, attached
to a verb, has a distinct form. Thus, each number has been
distinctly indicated by a separate sentence. The sūtras which
enjoin cases, number and case-endings should point to syntacti-
cal unity as they all refer to one and the same substantive. The
sentence "One person cooks" has been interpreted by the auth-
orities on grammer thus: As the number of the nominative case
of the verb (to cook) is singular so the terminal suffix 'tip' is
attached to it. If there are two nominative cases of the verb
(to cook) then the terminal suffix 'tas'is attached to it. If the
nominative cases of the verb (to cook) are more than two then
the terminal suffix jhi' is attached to it. Thus it is clear that
the number of the nominative case is conveyed by a verb with
a suffix attached to it but not the nominative case. Hence, how
is it that the nominative case of a verb, i. c., an agent, is con-
veyed by a verb? There is no need of elaborately discussing the
subject matter of another science. Therefore, a person who per-
forms an act is not the meaning of a sentence. The result pro-
duced by a verb, is not the meaning of a sentence since the
dilemma that a result is either an accomplished object or not
cannot be solved. If a result is an accomplished fact then the
703704
Nyayamanjari
designation does not properly apply to it since it has been men-
tioned non-accomplished object of desire.
The Proof of the Hypothesis that Bhāvanā is the Meaning of a Sentence
If an accomplished fact is not a result then a result is to be
brought into being. In that case, we cannot imagine that a
result cannot be produced. Therefore, the Mīmāṁsakas pro-
pound the hypothesis that an activity is the meaning of a sen-
tence. This activity or process leads on to a possible result.
Hence, it is bound up with past, present and future times.
The Determination of the Nature of an Activity:
What is a bhāvanā, i. e., a process. A bhavana is that which
brings into being an object to be produced. The result, viz.,
heaven etc., is to be produced since it comes into being. What-
ever comes into being is also brought into being. Our experie-
nce teaches that whatever comes into being is the nominative
case of the verb, 'to be'. Whatever is either eternal or unreal
does not come into being. Kumārila Bhaṭṭa says to this effect
in his Śloka-vārttika. (An object which does not come into
existence or which endures for ever cannot be created like the
sky-flower or the sky.)
Heaven and such other objects which are objects of our desire
are other than the sky and the sky-flower. For this reason such
objects may be created. A bhāvanā is an activity of the agent
towards a course of action which terminates in a result. It sig-
nifies that it causes one to come into being. This idea is exp-
ressed by a causal suffix attached to the verb, 'to be'. The he-
aven is the nominative case of the non-causal verb 'is'. The
nominative case of the original verb becomes the objective case
of the same verb with the causal suffix attached to it. The bhà-
vană denotes the activity of an agent who causes something to
come into being. A person brings into being heaven which is to
come into being, by means of his own activity. The very ac-
tivity which produces it (a result) is called 'bhāvanā'.
Now, the propounders of the hypothesis that a sentence sig-
nifies an action put a question to the framers of the new thesis.
They suggest that the so-called activity of a person is nothing
but an action. This activity is not distinct from an action. It is705
Nature of an activity
not a class by itself. Hence, the hypothesis that a sentence
points to an action has not been refuted. This suggestion
creates a new problem. An answer to this problem is as follows:
Any and every action is not a bhāvană, i.e., the activity of an
agent. Bhāvanā is the activity of an agent. But it is distinct
from all visible sacrificial acts which are done in an order of
time, viz., prior and posterior. Some of these acts are previously
performed and the others are subsequently performed. All these
acts are arranged in due order of time. A bhavana is distinct
from the aggregate of the sacrificial acts thus arranged. The
activity of an agent is experienced by us as distinct from such
sacrificial acts taken both singly and collectively.
A bhāvanā (the activity of an agent) is not to be produced
by any one of those acts. It does not produce only one of those
acts. But it produces all acts which are produced and which,
at the same time, produce other acts. This activity is distinct
from all acts and cases and is communicated to us by a word.
(This is the sense of the above verse). Let us critically examine
an example. A verb in the subjunctive mood, viz., 'yajeta' has
been illustrated. If we analyse the word 'yajeta'. we find
that it consists of two parts, viz., a verb (the root yaj) and a
suffix, indicative of subjunctive mood. The root 'yaj' signifies
the act of sacrifice etc. The suffix, attached to the root, com-
municates an injunction which has an impelling force and
the number of agent etc. But the activity of an agent which is
distinct from processes, denoted by a root, and is called bhāvanā
is not conveyed to us by a suffix. Pāṇini recognises no such in-
flection like the suffix indicative of the subjunctive mood as
points to the activity of an agent. Hence, the activity of an
agent does not constitute the meaning of a sentence.
An answer to the above question is as follows. If one minutely
observes the import of verbal communication then he under-
stands that the activity of an agent is also conveyed by a verb.
Let us now leave aside the verbs in the subjunctive mood. If we
carefully examine the verbs in the present tense then we shall
see that from the verbs 'yajate' etc. we unmistakably guess the
activity of an agent. As we grasp the act of cooking etc. from
the verbs, 'cooks', 'goes' etc. so we make out the activity of an
agent which is invariably connected with all these acts. Though706
Nyayamanjari
the act of cooking and such other acts come into being and cease
to exist yet the knowledge of the activity of an agent remains
unaffected. When nominal suffixes are attached towards 'Upagu'
etc. the resultant words are 'Aupagavaḥ', 'Kapatavaḥ',
'Aupamanyavaḥ' etc. These words convey as well the meanings
of suffixes attached to the basic word. The lifting up of a weight
and the taking down of a weight are implied by such suffixes.
Similarly, an additional meaning viz. the activity of an agent is
observed to permeate through the original meaning of a verb.
Moreover, when one intends to explain the meaning of a verb
viz. 'cooks' he explains it thus :-One does the act of cooking.
The act of cooking becomes the object of the transitive verb
'does'. In Sanskrit language the meaning of pacati is expressed
in the form 'pākam-karoti'. The word 'paka'—the meaning of
the root 'pac' gets the second case-ending. This case-ending
points to the fact that pãka is the object of 'karoti.' The word
'karoti' (does) represents the activity of an agent. The terminal
inflexion, attached to the root, points to the activity of an
agent. We have already stated that the word 'karoti' stands
for such an activity.
When the question 'what does Devadatta do?' is put, two
sorts of answer are given by the two speakers. One says that he
does cooking. Another person holds that he cooks. These two
answers purport to convey the same thing. Otherwise the in-
quirer would not have grasped the answer. Thus the two words
"pakaṁ karoti" (does cooking) convey the same meaning as is
conveyed by the single word "pacati" (cooks). The meaning
of the root 'to do' is grasped by us as distinct from that of the
root 'to cook'. The distinct meaning which is conveyed by the
root 'to do' is called 'Bhavana' (i.e. the activity of an agent).
Some critics join issue with the above thinkers and hold that
a terminal inflexion, attached to a root, does not convey an acti-
vity which is distinct from the number of an agent etc. and is
other than the meaning of a root. If a distinct activity had been
grasped then the verb 'karoti' (does) would have conveyed it.
The verb 'karoti' consists of two elements viz. (1) the basic root
(kr) and (2) the terminal inflexion attached to it. These two
elements cannot present to our consciousness two distinct mean-
ings.Nature of an activity
707
A reply to the above criticism is as follows: The thesis has
not been properly grasped. If one uses two words viz. 'päkam
karoti' then the sense which is conveyed by the inflexion attached
to the first 'kr' is different from that conveyed by the inflexion
attached to the second (kr). But if we use the word 'pacati'
then the inflexion attached to the root 'pac' conveys the same
sense as is denoted by the inflexion attached to the first (kṛ).
Nobody disputes that the number of an agent and such other
things are expressed by these inflexions. Thereby we should
not deny the presentation of an activity as noted above.
The activity which is conveyed by 'karoti' cannot be somehow
communicated by any other word. Words which denote distinct
verbs only convey also such an activity. All words do not com-
municate it. Which are the distinct words pointing to such an
activity? Oh yes, there are such words as we shall now mention.
All transitive verbs, having terminal inflexions, point to the
activity of an agent. The verbs like yajeta etc., having proper
inflexions attached to them, indicate the said activity. There are
a few verbs which are intransitive. When suffixes are attached
to them they assume forms like the words 'bhāva', 'bhāvanā.'
and 'bhūti'. The suffixes 'ghañ', 'lyuț' and 'kti' have been atta-
ched to the root 'bhū' (to be). The resulting words denote
existence or being but not an activity. There are some words
which denote rites but not verbs. Let us illustrate them. The
words like Śyena Yaga etc. exemplify them. The words like
Śyena etc. are proper names of some Vedic rites. This point
has been proved before. But there are roots of transitive verbs
viz., yaj, dā, 'hu' etc. When we use them in sentences we
attach proper terminal inflexions to them. These terminal in-
flexions having synthetic character, indicate the actual mood
of a verb viz., the subjunctive mood etc. Verbs, having been
employed in proper forms, express the activity of an agent. Let
us illustrate few verbs employed to convey the activity of an
agent. They are ‘yajeta', 'dadyāt, “juhuyāt' etc. As the above
meaning, viz., the activity of an agent is expressed by a verb in
the causal form (bhävayet) so it is also distinctly expressed by
the verb 'karoti'. One cannot say that the said activity is not
conveyed by the verb 'karoti', (The printed text-book seems
to us to be incorrect. We suggest two corrections here, viz.708
Nyāyamañjari
bhävayet itivat and nănuraktena. We are following the
Banaras edition of Nyāya-mañjarī p. 308 lines 25 and 26).
But when the verb 'karoti' is not associated with other acts such
as the act of sacrificing etc. it cannot be employed to signify
the said activity. Therefore the distinct words such as yajati
etc. communicate the activity of a person known as bhāvanā
which is to be brought into being. Thus the existence of
bhāvanā is proved.
Some thinkers hold that bhāvanā is a distinct type of activity
and is an internal activity of the soul. It is distinct from the
outer motion known as spanda (vibration).
Some other thinkers hold that bhāvanā is conation which be-
longs to the soul. When it appears the soul gives up its inactivity.
This conation effectuates sacrifice, libation etc. Everybody
admits that it is distinct from the acts such as sacrifice, libation
etc.
Though conation is an attribute of the soul yet it is not similar
to the attribute of ubiquity etc. The soul is directly aware of its
existence because it bears upon acts such as sacrifice, libation
etc.
Another sect of thinkers holds that as a universal belongs to
all individuals of a particular class but does not belong exclu-
sively to a particular individual so the universal verb which is
shared by all distinct acts such as sacrifice, libation etc. is called
bhāvanā.
As cowness belongs to all individual cows viz., Śābaleya etc.
as their common property and each individual cow e.g.
Sábaleya etc. has its specific property so an activity in general
belongs to all acts, viz. the act of sacrifice etc. as their common
feature and each act has its specific feature e.g., the act of
sacrifice has its peculiar form. The common activity is called
bhavaná. As the universal of cowness, isolated from all particu-
lars, c.g., Sabaleya etc. cannot be presented to our conscious-
ness a pure common activity dissociated from all particular
activities, cannot be presented to our consciousness. This
common activity is always presented to our consciousness as
associated with other particular activities. The absence of pure
common activity is not proved because of its such association.
The pure soul is never experienced. It is always experienced asBhāvanā with three Factors
709
associated with pleasure, pain etc, the specific attributes of the
soul. But such an association with attributes does not disprove
the existence of the pure soul. This being the case, when a
question 'what is he doing?' is put with regard to an unknown
specific act an answer is given viz., 'he cooks', he reads book etc.
As it reveals the specific nature of an act so it is appropriate.
Though 'bhāvana' is an act in general yet it is not a universal
like the universal of cowness or the universal belonging to an act.
If it were an acomplished fact that it would not be enjoined.
Moreover, in cases like the following 'One should sacrifice'.
'One should make gifts', 'One should pour libation' etc. a
consecutive series of non-specified activities is presented to our
consciousness. Such a series of activities is enjoined. Such non-
specified activities as are denoted by roots and are capable
of being performed constitute bhāvanā. From this stand-point
one may hold that a bhāvanā is denoted by a root. One may
argue that a bhāvanā does not constitute the meaning of a root
since the verbal nouns such as pāka (cooking), dāna (giving)
etc. do not communicate a bhavana. The defender of the views
may also counterargue that a bhāvanā should not also be
denoted by a suffix because verbs like 'bhavati' etc. do not
convey it. (We get the verb 'bhavati' by attaching a terminal
inflexion to the root bhū.). In fine, we say that we need not
make much of accurately settling the point in question. It is
our confirmed opinion that a bhāvanā is conveyed either by a
root or by a suffix.
A Bhāvanā Consists of three Factors:
A bhavana is communicated to us either by a root or by a
suffix. But it relates to three subjects of urgency (1) viz. what
is to be achieved (2) by which means it is to be achieved, and
(3) how is it to be realised. The first subject of inquiry is what
is to be achived. This inquiry is answered by word 'svarga-
kāmaḥ' (one desirous of heaven). What is to be achieved ?
'Heaven' is our answer.
Now, a doubt arises in our mind. The word 'svarga-kamah'
points to an agent but not to an end. Therefore, the above
solution does not satisfy us. The above doubt may be solved
thus. It is a truism that the said word points to an agent. But710
Nyayamanjari
here the statement purports to convey heaven. Heaven denotes
bliss par excellence. It is an end in itself but not a means to an
end. Heaven is desired as an object to be achieved. Hence it
falls on the side of a desirable object. We mean to say that
heaven is to be achieved. If the word 'svarga-kāmaḥ' literally
signifies one who desires heaven then it is clear that heaven is
to be achieved. If one admits that the compound word 'Svarga-
kāmaḥ' is an example of the Bahuvrihi compound then it points
to the fact that heaven is to be achieved. If we carefully examine
the force of an injunction then we see that an injunction points
to the above conclusion.
When one is aware of the end that he should achieve heaven
he enquires. "By which means is heaven to be achieved ?"
This inquiry is satisfied if it is held that heaven is achieved by
a sacrifice. Thus a sacrifice is related to heaven. Now, a ques-
tion arises in our mind viz. no word such as yägena is given in
the injunctive sentence. He means to say that there is no such
explicit statement as shows that one should attain heaven by
means of a sacrifice. But it is given that one should sacrifice.
('Given' is equivalent to 'heard'.) The complete verb consists of
two parts viz. (1) the root and (2) a terminal inflexion. It is
said that the terminal inflexion in the subjunctive mood denotes
a bhavana (the mental activity of an agent). Now, the
remaining element is the bare root. Now if a kṛt-suffix is
attached to this root then the word 'yaga' is framed. If the
third-case-ending is joined to this word then we get the word
'yagena'. Now, the question is "How can the bare root 'yaj'
convey the sense of inflexional word 'yàgena' ?" The problem
is solved thus:- Oh longlived one: You do not take an
exception to the hypothesis that a bhavana is denoted by a
suffix or an inflexion. Thus you should also agree to accept that
a bhāvanā also relates itself to a sacrifice. A bhāvanā refers to a
sacrifice (yâga) in such a manner as fulfills its requirements. If
its requirements were not fulfilled then it would not have
referred to a yaga. If the root 'yaj' fulfills the requirement of
an instrument then it becomes capable of being related to a
bhāvană. In this manner the root ‘yaj' is related to a bhāvanā.
The meaning of the root 'yaj' does not convey the sense of the
third-case ending. Hence, let the third case-ending be notBhāvanā with three Factors
attached to the root 'yaj'. But owing to the force of expression
belonging to a word the root 'yaj' conveys a yaga as an instru-
mental case. If you ask, "Owing to the power of denotation of
which word does the root 'yaj' convey the above meaning, i.e.,
the meaning of yagena?" then we answer that owing to such
power belonging to an inflexion in the subjunctive mood an
inflexion which conveys a bhavanã the above meaning is
conveyed. There is no royal mandate to the effect that the
instrumentality of an object is conveyed only by the direct
mention of the third case-ending. A subjective inflexion denot-
ing a bhãvană suggests the sense of the third case-ending. We
along with the critics accept the above view. Therefore, why
do not the critics accept the view that in the sentence "one
who is desirous of heaven should sacrifice" heaven is the object
to be achieved.
711
Or, when from a verb the meaning of a root is known as
an object to be achieved, the second case-ending signifies that
the associated object is to be achieved.
Now, a doubt arises in the mind of the objectors. If the
above solution is final then the meaning of the root is identical
with the object which is to be accomplished. In that case, the
root 'yaj' will answer the question what is to be achieved? It
should fall on the side of what. If you ask what is to be per-
formed then the answer is a sacrifice. Again, a sacrifice requires
an instrumental cause for its completion. What is its instru-
mental cause? A sacrifice should be causally connected with
Brihis (a kind of paddy) determined in another Vedic sentence
The meaning of the root 'yaj' should not be taken as an instru-
mental cause. The inflexion which is attached to the root
denotes an activity to be brought about. This activity is dire-
ctly directed towards an object which is close at hand. It is
its natural course of direction. If it does not concern itself with
an object and if it is taken to relate itself with an instrumental
cause which is remote then the activity does follow the proper
channel of direction. Therefore the said activity should not be
connected with an instrumental cause.
An answer to the above objection is as follows. The synta-
ctical relation as suggested by the objector would have been
accepted if the word 'svarga-kamah' had not been given in712
Nyāyamañjari
the injunctive sentence. As it has been given in the sentence
so the meaning of the root 'yaj' should be taken as an instru-
mental cause but not as an object. If you ask 'why' then our
reply is this. The object which is to be achieved is heaven.
Therefore, the root 'yaj' does not signify an object to be achi-
eved. But it signifies an instrumental cause which helps the
coming into being of an object. The reason behind our state-
ment is this. Heaven is an object of desire. It is pleasure itself.
As the world 'heaven' conveys no other sense so it, being noth-
ing but pleasure in itself, is worthy of being achieved. When
we long for an object to be achieved heaven alone attracts
attention as an object longed for. So a sacrifice, conveyed by
the root 'yaj', does not represent itself as such an object.
Heaven requires an instrumental cause for its coming into being.
The instrumental cause in question is a sacrifice. Thus, a sacri-
fice has been determined as an instrumental cause. A particular
sacrifice, Jyotiştoma by name has been again mentioned as an
instrumental cause. Therefore, it is reasonable to hold that
the sacrifice, conveyed by the root ‘yaj', is identical with Jyoti-
stoma. Thus, Jyotiṣṭoma and such other proper names become
designations of sacrifices.
There are a few designations of rites which give evidence in
favour of the hypothesis that a sacrifice itself is an object to
be achieved. Let us cite an example viz. "Agnihotram juhoti
(one should perform the Agnihotra homa)." The example,
cited by the objector, does not affect our hypothesis. Though
the meaning of the root superficially appears to be the object to
be accomplished yet a deep insight into the construction of the
sentence reveals that the said homa, called Agnihotra, is really
an instrumental case; otherwise the compound word 'Savarga-
Kāmaḥ' will have no syntactical relation in the sentence. We
have already cleared our position. In some Vedic sentences the
names of sacrifices are used as an objective case c.g. 'Agni-
hotrain juhoti'. In some other Vedic sentences the names of sacr-
ifices are used as an instrumental case e.g. 'Jyotiştomena yajati'
cic. Therefore ‘yaji' should be syntactically related as an ins-
trumental case. Thus we establish the point that a sacrifice is a
means to an end but not an end-in-itself. This is what is meant byDefinition of Motif
713
the statement that a sacrifice is the instrumental cause of a
sacrifice.
It has been stated that the proximity of the root 'yaj' to its
inflexion indicates that the meaning of the root is the object to
be accomplished. Such a statement is contrary to reasons. Two
words are mutually related in a sentence by a partícular rela-
tion if they are determined as fit to be related in such a manner.
When such fitness for being mutually related is logically ascer-
tained, ground for mutual relation to be held between the two
terms is prepared. In the absence of such fitness, mutual
relation between two terms cannot take place. Heaven is a
fit object to be achieved and a sacrifice which is denoted by the
root 'yaj' is fit to be its instrumental cause. We have already
stated our view.
When one learns that a person should achieve his object
longed for by means of a sacrifice a desire springs up in his
mind how to perform a sacrifice. Now, he connects the system
of means mentioned in the injunctive sentence and in other
sentences with the sacrifice in question. The means mentioned
in the sentence enjoining a sacrifice is that one who performs a
sacrifice with a view to acquire animals should sing a song
consisting of the Revati Rks set to the tune Väravantiya-a
song sung in the Agnişțoma sacrifice. The means mentioned
in other sentences are as follows:- One should unhusk paddy
with pestle and mortar', One should grind rice'. One should
offer twigs to fire and 'One should worship fire'. Our
conclusive view is that these means possess visible and invisible
efficacy. They almost in every case give an answer to the question
'how'. When a visible benefit is made one is to think such acts
as the act of pounding etc. This act has a direct influence upon
the meaning of the root i.e. the rite to be performed. A sub-
sidiary action which contributes towards a sacrifice in an invisi-
ble way renders indirect benefit to it e.g. the twigs of a sacred
tree. (If one makes an offering of twigs to fire then he gets
benefit in the next world. Hence, it renders an indirect service
to the sacrificer. But if we do not pound rice then we cannot
prepare cakes from rice. So its service is tangible. The two terms
*sannipatyopakáriņi' and 'ârâdupakāriņi' have been used by714
Nyayamanjari
Jayanta in senses contrary to those of these two terms used
by the modern authors of philosophy.
When an end, means to it and an act-the triparte ele-
ments of a sacrifice are mutually related a sacrifice becomes
fit to be performed. The fitness which it acquires is called
bhavana. If a bhāvanā takes place then an injunction and a
prohibition become fruitful.
There are two injunctions, viz. (1) ‘One who desires
heaven should perform Darśa and Paurņamāsa sacrifices' and
(2) 'One who longs for heaven should perform Jyotistoma
sacrifice. These two injunctive sentences are to be interpreted
in the light of the principle laid down before. The meaning of
the first entence is this that one is to achieve heavenly bliss
by means of Darśa and Paurņamāsa sacrifices and he shall have
recourse to the subsidiary actions such as the establishing of
sacred fire, etc.
An objector may find fault with this hypothesis and argue
against it thus. If this is your hypothesis why do you think that
an injunction is inevitably necessary? You have said that when
verbs are used in the present tense they signify the activity of
an agent. Then why do you assume a verb in the subjunctive
mood ? Now you may contend that 'We assume an injunction
i.e. a verb in the subjunctive mood either in order to demons-
trate the causal relation holding between a sacrifice and heaven
or in order to persuade one to undertake an action or to dissuade
him from doing it. But due consideration being given to
requirement, fitness and proximity though a verb is used in the
present tense yet it pointing to the activity of an agent throws
light on the causal relation subsisting between the act ofsacri-
fice and heaven even without the aid of an injunction. Now
the upholder of the above hypothesis may contend that assum-
ption of an injunction is necessary because it supplies us with
the impelling force i.e. an injunction goads us to undertake a
rite. Such a contention does not hold good since the movement
of a person depends upon his will. If a person knows that a
sacrifice is a means to heaven then he who desires to attain
heaven moves for it i.c., adopts the adequate means but he who
has no such desire does not move to do anything. How does
an injunction help him in any way? An injunction can neitherCharacter of an Injunction
fetter the legs of an unwilling person with an iron chain nor
tie down the hands of such a person with a piece of rope. A
person desires to avoid the sphere of prohibition which includes
the drinking of wine, the killing of a Brahman etc. because he
knows these acts to be evil ones and desists from committing
them. Hence neither an injunction impels one to undertake
an action nor prohibition prompts him to retard from an
action. Therefore, it is illogical to assume the hypothesis of an
injunction or that of a prohibition for the purpose of movement
or otherwise.
715
The determination of the character of an injunction (vidhi)
We do not know what is the definition of an injunction
(vidhi). Some thinkers say, 'An injunction causes a person to
move-a person who has not moved but does not reveal what
remains unknown since the second definition is too wide."
Yes, we have heard the verse which contains the definition
of an injunction but fails to ascertain what is exactly the mover
of the unmoved. Even the great savants of learning entertain
a grave doubt as to the exact characterization of a mover. Does
the suffix which is symbol of the subjunctive mood cause one to
move? Or, is the sense of the suffix, presented to our conscious-
ness, a mover? Or, does the operation of the awareness of the
sense of the suffix give us an impetus? Or, is the result of an
action a mover? Or, is the ascertainment of an exact means
to the desired goal an impeller? Or, is an attachment for the
desired goal a motiff? As there are so many rival hypotheses
on the point at issue so the true character of a mover is not
determined. Hence, we fail to grasp an injunction. You have
said 'What is the need of having recourse to an injunction?'
We have got something to say in this matter.
This is the super excellent power of an injunction which
unites a sacrifice, the meaning of the root 'yaj', with heaven
with such a tie as holds between a means and an end.
If one holds that the sentence "svargakámo yajeta" (One
who desires heaven should sacrifice) has no injunctive force and
the word 'svargakamah" points only to the agent then this
statement is inconsistent like the statement "The white colour
is the Hotr priest". If the sentence is not used in the subjunctive716
Nyayamanjari
mood then the verb 'yajeta' cannot syntactically relate itself
with heaven as its object since heaven occupies a subordinate
place in the sentence, being the first member of the compound
word 'svarga-kamah' and is very remote from the suffix which
stands for the actual verb. According to the natural order of
words given in the sentence a sacrifice should have been the
objective case since a sacrifice is practicable and is constituted
by consecutive parts. It is only through the favour of an injunc-
tion that the relation of a means to an end between a sacrifice
and heaven is revealed to us; otherwise, we could not have
known it. Therefore, we must assume a sentence in the subjunc-
tive mood.
How does an injunction indicate the relation of a means to
an end? It reveals the relation in this way. A suffix represen-
ting the subjunctive mood, normally induces a man who has
implicit confidence in the result of a rite to undertake it. When
a person listens to an injunction which commands him to
pursue non-human end, his interest flags since he has no regard
for the ideal. When a person moves for performing a rite, being
prompted by an injunction the injunction, apprehending some
limitation in its persuasive force settles the question that
heaven-the human end, is an object to be accomplished and a
sacrifice is its means. The persuasive force of an injunction is
demonstrated as it throws light on the end and its means.
An exception has been taken to the above hypothesis with the
remark, 'If a person does not move to undertake a Vedic rite
though an injunction points to heaven as the end of human
life then how can an injunction exercise its persuasive force?
Such an objection is baseless. An injunction does not set a
person to motion like the air. The air sets conscious or uncons-
cious objects in motion. But an injunction only induces one who
is endowed with consciousness. The inducement of a conscious
person by an injunction makes him feel that he has been led to
an action by the injunction. Such an awareness cannot be
produced in the mind of a person if an injunction does not
reveal the goal of an action. When the goal is brought to light
the complete knowledge of a Vedic rite is produced. When the
true knowledge of a Vedic rite dawns on a person he is persu-
aded by an injunction conforming to the path of proof to under-Definition of Motif
take a Vedic rite. If a person does not undertake an action
owing to his idleness etc, or owing to the absence of need then
let him not undertake it. But an injunction has done its duty
because it has stimulated the listener to the effect that he has
been inspired by it. The awareness of inspiration is onething
and the volitional reaction in the external world is another
thing.
717
An injunction is at the root of the knowledge of the causal
relations holding between a sacrifice and the goal of a person.
This knowledge owes its origin to the awareness of the first
inspiration set up by an injunction.
If one listening to an injunctive sentence 'One should sacrifice',
feels the inspiration but does not comprehend the causal relation
indicated above then the injunction does not become complete
in itself. For this reason, it is said that the said causal relation
is hinted at by the awareness of inspiration. In case of prohibí-
tion on listening to a prohibition that none should kill a person
he is not prevented from perpetrating an evil deed, however
prohibited it may be, unless and until he realises that the said
act is intrinsically evil. Therefore, an injunction is significant
even if an act is prohibited like an enjoined one. Hence, an
injunction must be resorted to.
The question 'Why has an injunction been resorted to ?'
appears to us to be similar to that raised by Simple Simon. We
do neither follow injunctions nor avoid prohibitions of the
modern age. We are not the authors of the Vedas. But we
simply learn them. We learn from the Vedas the sentence in
the subjunctive mood that one who is desirous of heaven should
sacrifice etc. The well-defined meaning of such an injunction is
that heaven is an end to be achieved and a sacrifice is a means
to that end. Such a meaning is not supplied to us by an act of
imagination. It is conveyed to us by the suggestive power of an
injunction. Therefore we should have recourse to an injunction.
The definition of motif
It has been objected that an injunction is hard to grasp
because springs of action have not been determined. An answer
to this objection is as follows. The result of an action cannot
be a motive since the result of an action is open to a puzzlingNyayamanjari
dilemma, viz. it is either a pre-existent object or a non-existent
one. If a result already exists then nobody tries to bring it
about. Again, if a result is non-existent then it is unreal like the
horns of a hare. As such it cannot logically act as a motive since
a motive of this type has never been experienced.
If you say that a result which is desired is a motive then it
may be as well said that the very desire constitutes the motive
of an action but not the result. Our desire for obtaining a result
may be excessive. But if the means to an end is not determined
then nobody can reasonably undertake an action. A man who
desires heaven does not simply make a show of an action in
order to attract a large number of audience. The exact means
to the real good should be his spring of action. The people also
behave in this fashion when they transact worldly matters. They
learn from the medical treatises written by the great physicians
that the myrobalan fruit remedies a few diseases. When they
fall a victim to these diseases they use it. Considering that food
appeases hunger hungry person sets to take food. Therefore
what is conducive to the well-being of a person is his motif.
The above hypothesis is not sound. Does a means to the well-
being stimulate one's activity, being itself known or unknown?
A means which is not known as such does not stir our activity.
If a person does not learn the medicinal properties of a my-
robalan fruit from any source whatsoever, then he, being ill,
cannot use it as a remedy. Therefore source of the knowledge
of a means is really a mover. How do we know that the means
in question leads to the end in question? When the means and
the end are tangible we know them in their true colour by the
joint method of agreement and difference. When the end is
invisible the means to this end is learnt only from the verbal
authority. Therefore, an authoritative word excites our inclina-
tion for a work. Such a word by itself (i. c. if its sense is not
properly understood) does not set up our activity. If it had
done so then it would have behaved like the wind etc. If a word,
being itself not properly grasped, makes us move as the wind,
or a demon or a bad king docs, then a man should undertake
a work whenever he hears a word but does not understand its
sense. Such a conjecture is absurd. For this reason, a word
impels to action when its sense is thoroughly grasped. Inflexions
718Types of Bhavanā
indicative of subjunctive mood, cannot impel a person to under-
take a work simply revealing the motif of an action. A word is
distinct from other sense-organs the eyes etc. since it com-
municates its meaning. In spite of this distinction it is the in-
strumental cause of the knowledge of its meaning which it
conveys. An instrumental cause is such as does something. A
cause cannot produce its effect if it does not operate. It must
be operative. The inflexion, indicative of the subjunctive mood,
does not merely effectuate consciousness but also gives an impu-
Ise to work. We know it from our experience. When one makes
out the sense of lin (an inflexion, indicative of the subjunctive
mood) he is seen to undertake a work. The operation of lin
is responsible for this movement. The operation of lin is called
Sābda-bhāvanā. It denotes an injunction i. e. a command, It
gives an impulse to wotk.
719
The Two Types of Bhavana
Sentences, used in the subjunctive mood, communicate two
kinds of bhāvanās viz. Šābda-bhāvanā and Ārthabhāvanā.
Of these two Ärthabhāvanā is the activity of the agent which
causes something to come into being but not denoted by the un-
inflected verb i. e. by the basic root. Something comes into
being. The activity of an agent is directed towards it. It belongs
to an agent. When heaven, the nominative case of the verb 'to
come into being', becomes the objective case of the verb,
belonging to the sacrificer, the process, denoted by the second
verb, is called "Arthabhāvanā". It has been already explained.
The process or operation which belongs to a word or to its consti-
tuent element and induces a person to undertake a sacrifice is call-
ed 'Sabda-bhāvanā'. The suffix or inflexion, indicative of the
subjunctive mood, denotes another type of Bhavana (an energy
which propels one to bring something into being). It is known as
'Sābda-bhāvanā'. This view has been expressed in the Tantra-
vårttika by Kumārila.
When one listens to a sentence containing the verb 'sacrifice'
in the subjunctive mood (i.e. one should sacrifice) he makes
out its two meanings (1) that it is his duty to perform the sacri-
fice and (2) that he has been induced to do it. Hence as the
suffix or the inflexion, indicative of the subjunctive mood, com-Nyayamanjari
municates one's own obligatory duty to be discharged so it
expresses an inducement to discharge it. Therefore, Kumärila,
the author of Tantra-Värttika holds that a sentence in the sub-
junctive mood points to the above two types of bhāvanās i.e.
Arthabhāvana and Sabda-bhāvanā.
720
Therefore, the activity of an agent towards a course of action
is called Arthabhāvanā. The operation of a word is also known
as Sabdabhāvana. These two bhavanās are presented to our
consciousness. As the operation belongs to a word so it is called
Šābda-bhāvanā. If the operation which belongs to a word
remains unapprehended then it does not assist the communi-
cation of sense. Hence, this bhāvanā is denoted by a word.
Kumărila has said to this effect that the Vedic lin denotes Śābda-
bhavana by its primary denotative force and assists to communi-
cate the meaning of a Vedic sentence in the subjunctive mood.
A Šābda-Bhāvanā Requires three Constituent Elements
A Śäbda-bhāvanā, being, itself a bhāvanā, requires three
elements like an Arthabhāvanā. The three elements are as
follows:-(1) What is to be accomplished i.e. the end is to be
realised; (2) the instrument by which the end is accomplished;
and (3) the manner or process in which the action is performed.
These three constituent elements should be shown. The three
elements of Sabda-bhâvanā are as follows: (1) The inclination
of a listener for an obligatory duty falls under the end of Sabda
bhāvanā. This point has been explained before. The function
of an injunction is to impel a person to an action. The primary
meaning of an injunction is Śäbda-bhāvanā. The inclination of a
person is roused by an injunction. Therefore, an injunction
aims at the rousing of the inclination of a person. Säbda-bhávanā
discharges the function of an instrumental cause or a means
which operates to bring an enjoined person into relation
with an action. In other words, owing to the instrumentality
of Šābda-bhavanà an inclination for undertaking an action is
evoked. Likewise in case of Arthabhāvanā, the attainment of
heaven is due to the instrumentality of a sacrifice. With regard
to the working of Śäbda-bhāvanā it may be said that an incli-
nation for performing an action is called up in the heart of a
person when an obligatory duty is thoroughly determined.Relation between Injunction and Bhāvanā
721
Sabda-bhāvanã which is denoted by an injunctive word is the
instrumental cause of the inclination of a person for a certain
action. The manner of performance is fulfilled by the operation
of recommendatory passages bearing upon an injunction. The
listeners are not inspired to undertake actions when they listen
to bare injunctions. But when they listen to various praises of
such actions contained in the recommendatory passages, they
become very much pleased at heart and are inspired to under-
take actions enjoined by injunctions. Thus these recommenda-
tory passages increase the intensity of inclination. Hence the
operation of recommendatory passages fulfills the procedure of
Šābda-bhāvanā. The aim of Sabda-bhāvanā is to rouse the
inclination of an agent for an action. Words which communi-
cate an obligatory duty are the instrumental cause. Mandatory
passages supply one with the procedure of performance. Thus,
Sabda-bhāvanāã which consists of three essential elements is
verily an injunction.
The Determination of Relation Holding Between an Injunction and
Bhāvanā :
If it is held that Sabda-bhāvanå itself is an injunction then
an objection may be raised against the view that it is a logical
impossibility to establish unity in the different meanings of
words constituting a sentence. (The sense of this objection is as
follows. If an injunction implies Sabda-bhavana and a verb
denotes the inclination of an agent then the meaning of a sen-
tence cannot be communicated. How does a sentence communi-
cate its meaning? If the meaning of a word is presented to us
as syntactically related to that of another word in a sentence
then the presentation of mutually related meanings is called
verbal communication. An inflexion, indicative of the Vedic
subjunctive mood, denotes Śābda-bhavana in the capacity of an
injunction. The same inflexion denotes the inclination of an
agent in the capacity of a verb. These meanings, being denoted
by the same word, are presented to us. Hence, the mutual
relation of these two meanings, presented to our consciousness,
cannot be called the verbal communication of the meaning of
a sentence.) The above objection does not hold good since both
the meanings are presented to our consciousness as mutually722
Nyayamanjari
related as the presentation, of the two meanings by the same
suffix, indicative of the subjunctive mood, constitutes the con-
necting link. Kumärila in the chapter on sentences of his
Ślokavårttika has said to this effect. As an injunction and a
bhāvaná are communicated to us by the same suffix so their
mutual relation is at first determined and then they are related
to the meaning of the basic root.
An injunction excites the activity of an agent towards a
course of action. Kumārila has rightly said that an injunction
enjoins an agent to direct his own activity towards a course of
action. Now, an objector raises an objection 'How does an in-
junction relate itself with a bhāvanā?'
Now the Värttikakāra himself has admitted that the mutual
relation between an injunction and a bhāvanā is presented to
our consciousness before their relation with the meaning of the
root of a verb. Though an inflected word denotes the senses of
both the root of a verb and the suffix attached to it yet it is to
be admitted that the meaning of the root of a verb constitutes
the primary material and along with it the two meanings of the
lin suffix, viz., an injunction and a bhāvanā are presented to
our consciousness as an appendage. Therefore, the activity of
an agent is related, to an injunction without being directed to-
wards a course of action. It, being directed a course of action,
is not related to an injunction. But an agent, having his activity
not directed towards a course of action, cannot perform a duty.
The activity of an agent is complete when it involves three
essential elements, viz., (1) it is in pursuit of an end; (2) it
requires the aid of an instrumental cause; and (3) the manner
of procedure is also given. When an agent is possessed of such an
activitiy he is capable of performing an obligatory duty; other-
wise, he is not. But an injunction does not relate itself with a
complete activity. If it remains unrelated to a complete activity
then how does an agent direct his activity towards a sacrifice
and adopt the proper means to realise his end?
An answer to the above objection is as follows. It is a truism
that an injunction does not know how to relate itself with the
activity of an agent directed towards an end, viz., sacrifice etc.
But as an injunction and the activity of an agent are denoted by
one and the same suffix so the injunction in question communi-Relation between Injunction and Bhāvanā
723
cates its relation with the bare activity of an agent. When a´
bare activity is excited in an agent an injunction cannot fulfil
its mission. It does not relax its efforts. But it waits for the
fulfilment of its mission. It behaves like a bridegroom who has
been wedded to a girl who is below her teens. As he patiently
looks forward to her adolescence and for the buddihg of her
beauty in each limb with his hands stretched, so the injunction
tarries unless and until the activity in question takes a concrete
shape, having enriched itself with all details, i.e., an agent
engages himself in the actual performance of an obligatory
duty. Kumârila has said in his Śloka-vārttika to this effect.
Though an injunction(Śäbda-bhāvanā) relates itself with such
an activity of an agent as has not been connected with other
factors yet it does not remain in situ, being thus related since
it lacks the moving force.
An injunction prompts an agent to an obligatory duty.
But the activity of an agent does not become effective unless
and until it is in close touch with its three elements.
An injunction comes into being but does not exercise power
unless and until a bhāvanā (the activity of an agent) without
depending upon others excepting an injunction becomes
efficient.
The activity in question requires an end and such other
requisite objects for its fruition even if the required objects
are supplied by another injunctive sentence. It intends to
establish its relation with such a subject-matter as has been
referred to by another context. It is also desirous of establish-
ing relation with the meaning of the root of the verb in ques
tion like the archetype. It also intends to establish a relation
with a subject-matter implied by another such subject-matter.
Such is the uniformly profound power of the verbal authority.
The method of interpreting an injunction in due order has
been instructed by the great interpreters of the Mimāṁsā. If
we are to understand the meaning of a sentence referring to
the activity of an agent then we are to pursue the method of
interpretation and to unfold its meaning by degrees. A bhă-
vanā constitutes the meaning of a sentence. If it remains
understood in a sentence then the blank place of the bhāvanā
should be filled up and the import of the bhāvanā should be724
Nyayamanjari
made out. A bhāvanā, being associated with many subsidia-
ries such as many species, attributes, substances, act. etc,
assumes diverse forms. But we understand the meaning of a
sentence from a sentence by one and the same method.
In every case the operative ending is attached to the root
of a verb and hence the activity of an agent (ārthibhāvanā)
constitutes the meaning of a sentence. The said bhāvanā is
qualified by many subsidiaries, viz. various attributes, species
etc. It is referred to by a judgment. Though a judgment
refers to various objects yet it points to a unified whole. Just
as a picture contains diverse lines of various colours but they
represent a single form.
(As the listener of an injunction has had direct experience of
the principal acts of a sacrifice and their subsidiary ones so
when he listens to the injunction 'One should sacrifice' a
picture of main acts and subsidiary ones is painted in his heart
since he posesses impressions arising from the said experience.
When the contents of a sacrifice are thus arranged he becomes
inclined to perform a sacrifice. When an agent moves to
perform a sacrifice the above described judgment arises in his
mind.
The concept of a bhāvanâ is the result of a long drawn
process of thought. It gradually unfolds itself. The bhāvanā
itself is a complicated process rendered complete by its access-
ories. Let us take an example of a long-drawn process viz.
the act of cooking. This act continues for sometime and
consists of many acts. We commence from pouring water
into a cooking pot and putting rice into it and end in the
boiling of rice which is independent of other acts. The whole
series of acts is known as the single act of cooking. The main
act of cooking consists of several minor acts such as pouring
water, placing rice inside the pot, stirring the content by
waiving ladle, the extraction of gruel etc. These acts extend
over a long period of time. Similarly, verbal knowledge is one
which commences from the knowledge of the meaning of a
word and ends in the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence.
Some say "The knowledge of a knower dawns with the
knowledge of the meaning of a word. It blooms like a flower
having the knowledge of the meaning of each constituent wordMeaning of a Sentence constituted by fäbda-bhāvanā
725
as its petal. Then it develops into the form of a fruit in the
shape of the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence. We
need not hammer on this point any more.
Thus the meaning of a sentence goes under the name of
Bhāvanā. It is the activity of an agent. It is directed towards
heaven, sacrifice etc. But the activity which prompts one to
do something is called Preşanã. It constitutes the primary
meaning of the optative ending attached to the root of a verb.
Or, it is the function of an injunction. Everybody denominates
is as an injunction.
An examinatio of the hypothesis that śābda-bhavana constitutes the
meaning of a sentence:
Some other thinkers do not subscribe to the above hypo-
thesis. They point out that śābda-bhāvanā is the activity
which belongs to a word, is produced and denoted by it.
When a word denotes and produces śābda-bhāvanā does it do,
being itself inactive? Or, does it produce a process, having
recourse to a distinct activity? If the propounders of the
hypothesis answer in the negative then they will be compelled
to admit that a word should directly communicate its meaning
without the aid of an intervening process and the assumption
of an intermediate process is redundant since it produces a
process, unaided by another process. If they say in the affir.
mative, then the hypothesis is open to the fallacy of regressus
ad infinitum. They should also devise ways and means of
solving the problem. But it is a hard nut to crack. We have
already elaborately discussed in the chapter on the definition
of proofs in general that there is no distinct process excepting
the vibration of elements. The reiteration of the same topic is
superfluous. The same line of thinking should be followed in
this case.
With regard to the process of a word which is said to be
created and denoted by it a few questions arise in our mind.
Does a word firstly denote a process and then produce it? Or,
does it at first bring about a process and then denote it? Or,
does it simultaneously produce and denote a process? It is
illogical to hold that a process is denoted when it has not
come into being. Nobody christens his son when he is not726
Nyayamanjari
born. Moreover, in that case, a word is not related to its
meaning. Again, a word does not simultaneously produce and
denote a process since the non-production of a process precedes
its denotation and the hypothesis requires toil and trouble on
the part of its propounders to be demonstrated. The alter-
native suggestion that a word creates and then denotes a
process is not also tenable since as it does not endure long so
it finds no opportunity of communicating the process after
having created it.
How will the weak optative suffix in the presence of strong
bulls carry a very heavy load? How will it express an
agent, and the number and the activity of the agent? How
will it produce an efficient force belonging to a word and
communicate it? It can hardly bear the burden.
Another point deserves our special attention. How does an
injunction which goes under the name of Sabda-bhāvanā
relate itself with the activity of an agent-the import of a
sentence?
An answer to this question has been already given. It has
been replied that as an optative suffix denotes both word-
efficient force and the activity of an agent so they enter into
the relation of being denoted by one and the same suffix. Now,
the objector points out that though the relation of being
denoted has been stated yet the crux of the problem has not
been touched. The activity of an agent towards a rite is known
as Ārthi bhāvană. It is the principal meaning of a sentence.
An end, an instrumental cause and the manner of performance
are invariably required by the activity of an agent. The
words such as 'svarga-kāma' etc. fill in with all the requisite
elements. The meanings of these words render assistance to
the activity of an agent as subsidiary elements. But word-
efficient force fills up none of the requisite elements of the
activity of an agent. Hence, it is not subservient to this
activity. Two principal objects such as a jar and piece of
cloth or two principal acts such as the act of cooking and that
of reading are never noticed to be mutually related as princi-
pal and accessory matters.
Now, the upholder of the hypothesis may contend that
an arthi bhavana is subordinate to a ŝabda-bhāvanā since theMandate denoted by a sentence
activity of an agent is conducive to the subject-matter of an
injunction bearing the title of śäbda-bhavana. If this is the
contention then the objector points out that an injunction
should be the import of a sentence but not the activity of an
agent since the letter is subsidiary. Therefore, the assumption
that an optative suffix denotes two principal meanings is not
appreciated.
727
The hypothesis that Śābda-bhāvanā and Arthibhāvanà are
mutually related because they are denoted by one and the same
suffix is not sound. The words 'Akşa', 'Pada', 'Māsa' etc.
admit of various meanings but the different meanings of each
word are not known to be related to one another on the above
ground. Moreover, in order to serve which purpose do you
hold that the same suffix denotes the above two bhāvanās?
An answer is given to this effect. When we hear the optative
suffix the ideas of the object to be accomplished and prompting
simultaneously flash in our mind. Two distinct acts of knowing
do not take place in our mind. These two contents are not
apprehended by the single act of knowing. If this is the case
then let only one meaning be denoted by the optative suffix.
If it has only one meaning then the question of the mutual
relation holding between the two meanings needs no discussion.
And the optative suffix is not saddled with a heavy load.
A mandate is denoted by a sentence
Now, we take for granted that the meaning of an optative
suffix is one and the same. But if the said suffix communicates
both duty and inspiration then it carries the same heavy load
as before. What may be the meaning of the optative suffix which
is both duty and inspiration ?
An answer to the above question as given by Kumärila is as
follows. It is not a heavy task for an optative suffix to convey
the same meaning as follows from it. The meaning of a sentence
which no proof other than the optative suffix comes forward
to convey is known as a mandate. (This mandate is nothing but
an inspiration). Kumárila explains his point of view. Every
body agrees to the point that the meaning of a word is learnt
from its usage. A general rule is noticed that in order to com-
municate, the sense of a sentence is used since the above rule728
Nyayamanjari
gets the sanction of usage. Among these sentences let us take
into consideration such sentences as involve the verb 'yajeta'.
In these sentences we shall take no notice of the meanings of
words other than the said verb since if the meaning of a verb is
known then the meanings of other words will gather strength
in order to render assistance to the meaning of the verb. Let us
now discuss the meaning of the verb 'yajeta'. From the above
discussion it follows that the verb 'yajeta' denotes inspiration.
The meaning is detected by the application of the joint method
of agreement and difference. When we hear other words we
have no knowledge of inspiration. But when we have the word
'yajeta' we have knowledge of inspiration. Thus we conclude
that we cannot take an exception to the above meaning of the
verb 'yajeta'. In other words, it is proved that the verb 'yajeta'
denotes inspiration.
If we discuss the meaning of the verb 'juhoti' etc. then we
see that the verbal terminations, indicative of the present
tense, the present perfect tense etc, denote the continuity of an
act, the cessation of an act etc. but not inspiration. A root in
general does not denote inspiration since such a meaning is not
invariably denoted by it. Hence, it is logically sound to hold
that an optative suffix denotes inspiration. What is the exact
nature of the said inspiration? When this inspiration takes
place and works within the heart of a listener he feels that he
has been enjoined to discharge particular duty. Such an inspi-
ration goes under the title of injunction. Pânini, the great
grammarian, recollecting the old tradition of grammar, pres-
cribes that an optative suffix denotes injunction. When a sacri-
fice, the meaning of the root 'yaj' or the activity of an agent
is mentioned no inspiration is communicated to us. In a nut-
shell an injunction itself is nothing but an inspiration. When
a verb viz., ‘yajate' (one sacrifices) is used in the present tense
it conveys a sense to us. But when the same verb is used in the
optative tense viz., yajeta (one should sacrifice) it conveys a
distinct sense since in this case the relation between an inspi-
ration and the person who is inspired to do something is
communicated. Now, a question arises in our mind. Does not
the above illustration convey the relation between a sacrifice
and its agent? An answer to the above question is this: It isMandate denoted by a sentence
729
not a truism that the said relation is not conveyed. But it is
also a fact that the relation between an inspiration and the
inspired is at first conveyed. We hold that when a person is
inspired he prepares himself to do an act.
When a person is prompted to do an act how is he prompt-
ed? Does he feel an abstract inspiration ? No, he is prompted
to do a concrete act, viz., he is inspired by the sentence that
he should perform a sacrifice. The said inspiration has direct
bearing upon a concrete act. In other words, the abstract
relation between an inspiration and the inspired is not distinctly
conveyed. There is much truth in your statement that the
performer of a sacrifice is prompted to do it as an agent of the
act. But when the performer of a sacrifice is prompted to do
the relation between an inspiration and the inspired is held
to be distinct from that which holds between the agent of the
act of sacrifice and the act itself. Thus, the person who insti-
tutes a sacrifice has double relations. On the one hand, he is
related to the act of sacrifice and on the other hand he is
related to inspiration. He looks like the King's cow having
double relations. She is related to the King. She is also related
to her milk. She who is related to the King is related to milk.
She who is related to milk is related to the King. Similarly, a
person will be related to prompting and to the act of sacrifice.
A person who is prompted does an act and the person who
does an act is prompted. This is the sum and substance of
our hypothesis.
Now, an objection to the above hypothesis arises in our mind.
Inspiration has no double characters since prompting itself is
an act. When a person is induced to do something that which
induces is called a prompter. Hence prompting itself is nothing
but an act. Thus the relation holding between prompting and
the person who is induced is nothing but the relation of a
person with an act. This objection would have been true if the
meaning of the optative suffix had been the actual mover like
the air etc. An injunction is said to be the mover in the sense
that it produces the awareness "I have been inspired to do it".
It simply communicates an inspiration but does not actually
inspire a person to do an act. Thus, the relation holding
between inspiration and the inspired is distinct from the parti-730
Nyayamanjari
cular case relation, i.e., the relation subsisting between a nomi-
native case and a verb.
An awareness is nothing but an act. That which produces an
awareness is the nominative case. Thus, the relation in question
is that between a nominative case and a verb. In other words,
the relation holding between inspiration and the inspired is
not a distinct one. This objection does not hold good, since,
the distinction between a cause and a mark is well-known. In
this case, we, the Mimāṁsakas, have tried to prove that the
relation subsisting between the institutor of a sacrifice and the
act of sacrifice is an instance of that which holds between a
nominative case and a verb and that the said relation is distinct
from that existing between inspiration and the inspired. We
have also established that they are distinct from each other.
The Naiyāyikas say that they do not preclude the Mimāṁsakas
from assigning any name to the distinct relation in order to
mark its distinction. Let the relation between inspiration and
the inspired be a distinct one. How do you know that it is at
first apprehended? A person undertakes an obligatory duty
when he knows that he has been ordered to do it. It is seen
that he performs a sacrfice when he is induced by his teacher.
When one listens to the Vedic injunction 'One should perform
a sacrifice (yajeta)' he realises at first that he has been
ordered to perform it. And afterwards he performs a sacrifice.
Hence, the relation between inspiration and the inspired
flashes at first in our mind but that between a nominative case
and a verb is presented next to our consciousness. For this
reason the meaning of the optative suffix is known at the out-
set. It is known as an inspiration. It is a mandate. It is denoted
by a sentence in the optative mood.
Now, an objector raises an objection that as sentences in the
imperative mood and in the optative one are used to convey
invitation etc. as well so how does an injunction convey merely
a mandate? The Mimamsakas give a reply to this objection
that all the distinct senses conveyed by them are not essentially
distinct from a mandate and that their minor differences are
due to their association with adventitious elements. According
to the varying degrees of importance of the performance of
rites a verb in the imperative mood or in the subjunctive oneCausative and Optative suffixes
conveys different shades of meaning, viz., inspiration, solicita-
tion etc.
731
But every shade of meaning gives us an incentive to work.
It has been stated by the grammarians that the optative and
the imperative suffixes denote an incentive since none of their
senses is dissociated from the above sense.
The meaning of the causative suffix is different from that of the optative
suffix:
The incentive which is conveyed by the imperative suffix etc.
is presented to our consciousness as distinct from that conveyed
by the causative suffix. The causative suffix is prescribed when
the activity of a causer is to be conveyed. The said activity
moves the agent to do something. When an incentive is to be
conveyed the imperative suffix is prescribed. Hence, the mean-
ing of the imperative suffix is identical with that of the causative
one. Thus, he who says 'Do this, do this' causes another to
do this. This is the sum and substance of the objection raised
by an objector. The above objections are not tenable since they
produce different forms of awareness in our mind. The senten-
ces 'Let him do. He should do' communicate a particular
meaning to our mind. But the sentence 'He causes him to do'
conveys a distinct meaning. The activity of a causer is denoted
by the causative suffix. But the activity of a mark is denoted
by the imperative suffix. The activity of a causative agent is in
concern with an activity which has commenced. This is the
exact meaning of the causative suffix. But in case of the impe-
rative suffix the sense is contrary to that of the above one. In
case of the causative suffix a person commences an act and
another person causes him to do it. But in case of the optative
suffix a man is prompted to do an act by means of an incentive
and when he has moved to do it he experiences the performance
of an act. Thus there is a great gulf of difference fixed between
them. When we use a verb in the causative form a person
causes one who is doing something to do it. But when we use
a verb in the optative mood an incentive is given to a man who
has capacity for discharging a duty. An immobile object which
has no capacity for discharging a duty is not stirred. With
regard to the lord of trees it is not enjoined 'You should per-732
Nyayamanjari
form a sacrifice.' Since an immobile object has no such capa-
city. A Brahmin who is inspired by an injunction to perform
a sacrifice has not yet commenced to perform a sacrifice. With
regard to the institutor of a sacrifice an injunction 'One should
perform a sacrifice' is not enjoined. But it is only enjoined with
regard to one who has not as yet commenced to perform a
sacrifice. Thus, the meaning of the causative suffix is in all res-
pects different from that of the optative suffix.
If verbal proof is the only source of a command how is a command com-
municated to us as the meaning of such and such word ?
Some thinkers raise an objection to the above hypotheses.
They point out that according to the hypothesis the optative
suffix may have a distinct meaning but no proof other than the
suffix itself reveals it. Now the trouble is 'How can one know
that the optative suffix conveys the said meaning? Our reply
to this question is as follows. Though the verbal command or
incentive is known to us only by the source of verbal know-
ledge yet it is easily proved that the knowledge of the relation
of denotation which holds between the optative suffix and the
command is acquired. When we listen to the sentence in the
optative mood viz. 'One should sacrifice' 'One should give',
'One should pour libation' etc. an injunction is presented to
our consciousness. How do we admit that this injunction is com-
municated to us by the optative suffix ? An answer to this
question is that from the usage we determine that the optative
suffix denotes the above sense. When an experienced person
listens to the sentence 'Go and read' it is noticed that he
makes haste to act accordingly. We have also learnt from ex-
perience that the responsive activity of the listener is due to
the grasp of the sense conveyed by a word. Suppose, a per-
son perceives a delicious fruit such as a mango etc. and has
definitely known by the joint method of agreement and diff-
erence that it is conducive to pleasure. Now if he longs for
it, recollecting its conduciveness to pleasure then he gets
by it and relishes. Such a desire is an attribute of the soul. It
is introspected like the soul. The soul is an object of self-con-
sciousness. We cannot exhibit it to another person. On that
ground it cannot be held that no discussion about the soulOptative suffixes
733
is possible. The hypothesis that the soul is intuited by no-
body is not tenable. A third person can introspect his soul
by means of self-consciousness. The desire which leads to the
enjoyment of a fruit is an attribute of the soul. It can only
be introspected. It is not a truism that the said desire trans-
cends our knowledge. When the said desire is introspectd by a
person he moves for its enjoyment. When we see that another
person moves for doing something we infer that the listener
of the injunctive sentence has the knowledge of the incen-
tive or the command conveyed by the injunctive sentence.
It is our experience that when we hear the optative suffix
etc. we feel an inspiration but when we do not hear such a
word we do not feel such inspiration. Thus we determine the
meaning of the said suffix by the joint method of agreement
and difference. This is our solution to the above problem.
Everybody may know it from his own experience that when-
ever a listener hears the optative suffix he is aware of an in-
centive to work. But when a person hears the optative suffix
for the first time he does not become aware of the incentive
to work. The said inspiration can be made known to us by no
other proof. The meaning of the verb 'kurvat can only be
communicated by the verb 'kuryat'. But no other proof can
reveal the meaning of the said suffix. In the face of such a
conclusion those who hold that the optative suffix without any
reference to the knowledge of the relation of denotation com-
municates an incentive to duty by its own intrinsic force lack
the courage of conviction. Hence, we should disregard them
and take no interest in their views.
If you hold that no word excepting the optative suffix con-
veys a command then how is it that word 'niyoga' conveys
a command and the meaning of the word should fall outside
the scope of all proofs other than the verbal one? Oh Sir! a
command cannot be communicated to us by the derivation of
the word 'niyoga'. Its etymological derivation is this:-The
root, Yuj' has the indeclinable 'ni' as its prefix and 'ghan' as its
suffix. The above derivation is resorted to only to explain the
form of the said word. As the command is conveyed by the
verbs 'yajeta' etc. so it is communicated to us by no other
words. Hence the Mīmāṁsakas hold that 'Dharma' is revealed734
Nyayamanjari
by no proof other than the verbal testimony. The function of
the optative suffix is command (niyoga). It is nothing but the
obligatory duty itself. It is revealed only by the verbal testi-
mony but by no other proofs. It is not reasonable to hold that
the optative suffix conveys an operation which prompts one to
perform an obligatory duty. It communicates an obligatory
duty which is the meaning of a sentence. Some Mīmāṁsakas
hold that the Vedas purport to convey only objects to be accom-
plished but not existent realities.
A niyoga prompts one to perform an obligatory duty by its verbal force.
The hypothesis in question like that of the Bhaṭṭas sug-
gests that an injunction has got two parts to play. It plays the
role of a mover and that of a rite to be performed. Oh long
lived one! you behave like a person who has become incohe-
rent owing to the influence of sleep since you have held that
a mover is not different from a rite to be performed. You boldly
assert that a niyoga is a mover and is also a rite to be performed.
How do other thinkers suggest double characters of a niyoga?
They cannot entertain this suggestion. When a niyoga expresses
its verbal import it is a mover. When it is comprehended from
the side of its meaning it is a rite to be performed since an in-
junction points to an act to be performed. When a person says 'I
carry out the order of my preceptor I execute the royal man-
date' why does he perform an act-the content of an injunc-
tion? If this is the question then we give the following ans-
wer. An order has no concrete shape like a jar and hence it
cannot be worked out. We are to work out the content of an
order, i. e. the object to which the said order points. When a
preceptor orders his
pupil "You should carry a kind of
wooden water-pot' he thinks that he has obeyed the order of
his preceptor by carrying a water-pot. When a king orders
his officer 'Go to the fort' he thinks that he has executed the
order of the king by going to the fort. Therefore, a niyoga (an
order) is nothing but an act to be performed.
A fresh question arises in our mind. There is a verbal usage
to this effect 'I do this by royal order'. This shows that
the said order points to the act to be performed. The above
objection does not hold good since some thinkers point outInjunction as an Inducer
that in the above example the said order is to be carried out
and the third case ending in 'rājājñayâ' signifies that he has been
directed by the king to do it.
735
A Niyoga Stirs Our Activity When Its Sense Is Grasped.
But other thinkers of the Prabhakara school hold that the
verbal aspect of an injunctive sentence implies the obligatory
duty to be discharged and that the sense of an injunctive sen-
tence points to it (the said sentence) as a mover. The intrinsic
nature of niyoga (an embodiment of command=an injunctive
sentence) is the state of an act to be performed. But as they
very niyoga induces the man ordered to discharge his duty so
it is called a mover. A niyoga reveals itself as an obligatory
duty in such a manner that it has not also abandoned its nature
as a mover. It also acts as an inducer without forsaking the
character of being an obligatory duty. The import of the verbal
aspect of the suffix does not overburden the optative suffix as
Kumārila does.
An Injunction Having no Reference to an end acts an Inducer:
The very niyoga which is conveyed to us by the very words
constituting an injunction is "yajeta svarga-kāmaḥ”. It is
presented to our consciousness as characterized by two concomi-
tants. The root 'yaji' expresses one of these two concomitants
viz., the act to be performed. Another compound word 'svarga-
kamah' suggests the second concomitant viz., the person who
has right to perform a sacrifice and enjoys its fruit. If it is made
out that a sacrifice is a means to heaven then it is established
that a person who is desirous of heaven has right to perform a
sacrifice. Thus, it amounts to this that only a person, desirous
of heaven, performs a sacrifice and the path, already chalked
out, is to be followed to establish syntactical relation between
a sacrifice and one desirous of heaven. But we do not think that
an injunctive sentence induces a person to perform a sacrifice
because it exhibits the fruit of the enjoined sacrifice. Ifsuch a
view is held then the independence of an injunction is at stake.
An injunction is not so weak that it cannot induce a person to
perform a sacrifice till it does not exhibit the fruit of the action
enjoined. If we do not admit the truth of the hypothesis that736
Nyayamanjari
an injunction independently induces a person to perform a
rite then injunctions such as 'One should perform a sacrifice
as long as one should live etc.' should not induce a person to
activity. Very well, a question is now put to you viz., 'Are
these injunctions 'One should sacrifice as long as he lives' etc.
absolutely fruitless?' The Mimāṁsakas say 'We answer in
the affirmative'. They admit that these are fruitless. The
reason behind this admission is this. An injunctive sentence
does not require a fruit for its completion. But an injunction
'One should perform a sacrifice' requires two essential ele-
ments for its completion. The two factors are at follows. 'What
it to be performed' and 'Who will perform it' are required by
an injunction. These two elements are related to sacrifice as an
injunction requires them. If this is the case then the above in-
junction 'One should sacrifice so long as he lives' its import
is that a living person is enjoined and the obligatory duty is to
perform a sacrifice. Then the fruit of this injunction will be
assumed after mature consideration. It is not mentioned in the
scriptures. What is the function of an injunction in case of the
injunction 'One who desires heaven should perform a sacri-
fice? Does it hint at the right to perform a sacrifice of a
person who desires heaven? No, in this case an injunction ex-
presses only a command. If we do not subscribe to this view
then the mention of the word 'svarga-kāma' loses all its signi-
ficance. The injunction in question purports to convey that
heaven is the goal and a sacrifice is a means to its attainment.
The word 'svarga-kámaḥ' has not been inserted in the injunc-
tion to serve the useful purpose of exhibiting the result of this
sacrifice. Therefore an injunction does not function to stir
movement for the attainment of goal. But the desire for the
attainment of goal is the cause of movement. Some authori-
tative persons hold that a desire for the attainment of goal is
the real motive which drives a person to action and an injunc-
tion lacks the driving force since an injunction completes its
mission, vindicating the relation of means to its end. But it
does not concern itself with the actual performance of a Vedic
rite.
Hence, as the Syena sacrifice is a sinful act so in that case it
has been shown that a person who desires to kill his enemy by737
Injunctions and their scope
is
means of the Vedic mystic-rite has right to perform the Syena
sacrifice. The use of participle (Satṛ suffix) in abhicaraṇa jus-
tifies the above interpretations of the Vedic passage "Syenena
abhicaran yajeta." In this case, the Vedic passage does not
induce him to undertake the Śyena sacrifice. The person does
not make out from the passage that the killing of an enemy
his duty. But he does not simply know the means to the killing
of his enemy. The scripture simply gives him instruction with
regard to the more means of slaughter. The said injunction
does not influence him to perform the Syena sacrifice since the
strong desire to kill his enemy drives him to perform the said
sacrifice. Therefore, the word 'beneficial matter' has been put
in the definition of Dharma (Duty) in order to exclude sinful
deeds such as the Syena sacrifice etc. from duty. The definition
a useful purpose
of Dharma is this: Any matter which serves
and is laid down by Vedic injunction is Duty.
When the qualification of a person is determined by his
desire of some fruit the scriptural passages induce him to
adapt such procedure of performance as is a necessary means
to a rite. The author of the Mimāṁsā Sūtra has said to this
effect that the scriptures enlighten merely a sacrifice. In case
of the verb 'yajeta' a sacrifice, the meaning of the said verb is
known to be a means to heaven. But when a sacrifice is known
to be a means to heaven the manner of procedure is not known.
Hence, at that time scriptural passages alone induce a person
to adopt procedure of performance since there is no desire of
some fruit which may act as a motive. Therefore, the killing of
an animal which takes place in connection with the performa-
nce of a rite dedicated to Agni and Soma is not a sinful act.
In that case the killing of an animal is one of manners of per-
formance. The prohibition that one should not Lill animals is a
general rule. The general rule extends its jurisdiction over all
matters without encroaching upon the sphere of a particular
rule. As the killing of an animal is one of the subsidiary actions
of the rite dedicated to Agni and Soma and is laid down by
the Scripture so the general rule which prohibits animal-slaugh-
ter cannot declare it to be a sinful act.738
Nyāyamanjari
An Injunction Induces a Person to an Action Without Referring to its
Fruit
Now, a fresh problem arises in our mind. It is this that when
a person betakes himself to perform the Syena sacrifice he is
induced by scriptural passages since instigation which is the
function of an injunction constitutes its differentia from other
proofs. It is not a truism that an injunction throws light only
on the relation between a means and an end like the joint method
of agreement and difference since an injunction is nowhere
obstructed in its normal function of instigating person to ac-
tions expressly stated by the Vedas. Similarly, in case of the
injunction "One should perform Syena sacrifice" the move-
ment of a person for the action is likewise instigated. (The
main purport of this objection is to controvert the Mimāṁsā
thesis that Śyena sacrifice is a sinful act). The above problem
is thus solved. The instigation of an injunction consists in pro-
ducing the judgment "I (the listener) have engaged myself in
such and such action." It is a true reflection on the charac-
teristic feature of an injunction since an injunction uniformly
behaves in all cases viz. in case of Syena sacrifice, the means
par excellence of killing an enemy or in case of the manner of
performance or in case of a sacrifice dedicated to Agni and
Soma. Though in the matter of external worldly activities the
compelling force of an injunction remains intact yet if desire
of some gain and similar other motives over and above anin-
junction induce a person to an action then the power of in-
stigation belonging to an injunction stands neutralized as it
remains neutral in fore-sacrifices which are required as a means
to the animal cake-offering.
Let us clarify the above Vedic example. The preparation
of an animal cake is a subsidiary rite of the Agnisoma sacrifice.
When a cake is prepared in connection with the main sacrifice
fore-sacrifices are performed. When its subsidiary rite is to be
observed i.e. an animal-cake is to be prepared or indepen-
dent fore-sacrifices to be observed? The conclusive answer on
this point is that no fore-sacrifices are to be observed when
an animal cake is prepared. Hence, it has been said that the
injunctive function i.e. the power of instigation remains inactiveInjunctions and their scope
739
In the case of the neutrality of the power of instigation the
prohibitive law "None should kill an animal" exerts its influ-
ence. But if, inevery case, the power of instigation, belong-
ing to an injunction, remains unimpaired then Śyena sacrifice
is in no way distinct from Jyotiştoma sacrifice since as a pro-
hibitive passage exerts no influence upon the undertaking of
Agnișoma sacrifice so it does not stand in the way of one's
first move for Syena sacrifice. It may be objected that in the
case of Jyotiştoma sacrifice the enjoyer of the fruit of the said
sacrifice does not transgress the prohibitive passage by his
enjoyment since heaven is not a forbidden fruit. But in the
case of Syena sacrifice 'as the killing of animals is prohibited
so he who enjoys the fruit of Syena sacrifice transgresses the
prohibitive passage. Such an objection does not hold good
since when a person acquires the right to perform Syena sacri-
fice the enjoyer of its fruit does not transgress the prohibitive
passage. In other words, the force of the injunction which
governs Syena sacrifice remains equally strong. So, the said
prohibitive passage becomes powerless with regard to the said
injunction. Therefore, the fruit of Syena sacrifice is not affected
by the prohibitive passage. The enjoyer of the fruit of Śyena
sacrifice commits no sin.
Now, the old Mīmāṁsakas solve the above problem thus. They
hold that an injunction does not instigate a faithful listener to
produce a result with the mandate "Bring about this result"
they say that an injunction induces such a person to undertake a
rite with the advice "perform this". They also state that when
the person has right to perform an action the prohibitive
passage "None should kill an animal" exerts its unimpaired
influence upon him. In other words, Syena sacrifice is a sinful
act. The critics subject this view to a serious criticism. They
say "Oh long-lived one you have entered into our views.
If an injunction does not induce a person to bring about the
result of an action as he desires it then it should not also insti-
gate him to adopt its means. An injunction reveals only a
means to an ignorant person since an injunction establishes
only what has not been previously established. It has been
stated that the person knows that he should do an act but does
not know the exact means. In the case of Syena sacrifice one740
Nyāyamanjari
knows that he should perform Syena sacrifice in order to kill
his enemy.
But if the means of killing his enemy is not prohi-
bited by the scriptural passage then it is to be admitted that.
the person who performs Syena sacrifice does not transgress
scriptural prohibition. Kill your enemy with the magical prac-
tice of Śyena sacrifice. Thus we arrive at the conclusion that
Syena sacrifice is the means of killing an enemy. In other
words, if one performs Syena sacrifice he does not transgress
scriptural prohibition. We need not unnecessarily prolong this
discussion. In the case of a qualification based upon desire of
some fruit an injunction does not require a result. But the
rule is that a result is the means of acquiring the proper
qualification to perform a rite.
A prohibitory injunction expresses turning off, having no reference
to sin
Though the prohibition of animal-slaughter has been settled
by the scriptures yet the person who is qualified to kill his
enemy has been laid down by the same scriptures. Hence, we
cannot assume that a prohibited act, viz., the killing of an
enemy, gives rise to some sort of sin.
Even if we assume that the said act, viz., Śyena sacrifice
produces evil consequences such as hell, etc., then the said
Śyena sacrifice does not get the sanction of an injunction. But
the injunction which prescribes Śyena sacrifice should not be so
dishonoured.
An injunctive sentence always requires these two necessary
factors, viz., (1) a rite and (2) a person qualified to perform
the rite. When these two factors are supplied an injunction
becomes complete in itself but requires no other additional
factors for its completion.
In the case of Syena sacrifice a person who is in a fit of
rage and ready to kill his enemy is qualified to perform it.
The result of this act is the killing of an enemy towards which
the qualified person is directed.
The determination of the subject-matter of prohibition
We cannot till now make out
what is the import of a prolii-
bitive injunction. The verbal terminations denote activitics741
Injunctions and their scope
directed towards an end. The basic roots to which they are
attached denote acts to be accomplished. According to the
Mimānisā doctrine roots reveal something to be accomplished
in a consecutive series. A negative particle denotes negation
which is not accomplished in a consecutive series. Hence, it
does not constitute the subject-matter of an injunction. The
negative particle is not construed with verbal termination
called lin. So, negation is never implied by an injunction since
the said verbal termination is not attached to the negative
particle. But it (the verbal termination) is attached to the root
'han'. The act of killing cannot be enjoined by an injunction
since if it had been implied by an injunction then it would
have been dharma (duty). Moreover, such an injunction will
be meaningless. There is no necessity of an injunction which
prescribes killing since men have natural propensity for doing
it. The meaning of the root 'han' (to kill) as qualified by the
meaning of the negative particle is not enjoined by an injunc-
tion since the meaning of the negative particle does not qualify
the meaning of the root 'han' (to kill) in the manner in which
an adjective qualifies its corresponding noun.
In the case of the injunctive sentence "He offers an oblation
with sour milk" sour milk has logical ground to qualify the
offering of an oblation since it is the instrumental case of such
offering. But it is not reasonable to hold that the meaning of
the negative particle modifies the act of killing because the
very act of killing itself is negated, i.e. the very act ceases to
exist.
A mere human effort does not constitute the subject-matter
of an injunction since such an effort does not owe its origin to
an injunction, i.e., it comes into existence independently of an
injunction. An effort which is qualified by the meaning of the
negative particle does not form the subject-matter of an
injunction since the negative particle does not logically qualify
it as it does not modify the act of killing.
As words 'non-Brahmin', etc., purport to convey emphatic
denial, i.e., they convey the sense of some positive objects deter-
mined by negation so 'non-killing' implies emphatic denial but
not bare denial. If this is so then it will be employed to denote
a positive act other than the act of killing. Now, what will be742
Nyayamanjarī
the meaning of the sentence "He shall not kill"? It will
certainly imply that he shall do something else. If this meaning
is admitted then what is the specific nature of the act? We
cannot make out any sense of 'shall not kill' if its meaning is
carefully examined. If it is said that non-killing implies any
act whatsoever other than the act of killing then such a view is
not tenable. Any and every act is not incited by an injunction.
Such acts owe their origin to natural propensities not inspired
by injunctions. Hence, an injunction becomes unnecessary. If
a man lives then he surely does something, viz., either he reads
or walks or eats something.
Now, a new hypothesis may be put forward for our conside-
ration. The negative particle has no connection with the
subject-matter of an injunction. But it is connected with the
authoritative voice of an injunction. It sets at naught the
authoritative voice of an injunction. So, it is called as non-
proof (Pramāṇābhāva). A person who is bent upon killing is
dissuaded from it. It is implied by the negative particle that
it is not one's duty to kill.
The above view is not tenable. According to the settled rule
of syntax a verbal termination indicative of optative tense
(lin) is construed with the root 'han'. It is the character of an
injunction that it instigates a person to an act. The negative
particle which denotes denial stands by it.
An injunction bends towards it. Though it bends towards it
yet if the former is construed with the latter then the characte-
ristic feature of the former, viz., the property of instigation
will be destroyed. It is the invariable nature of the negative
particle that it implies the negation of an object with which it
is construed. If one intends to construe the negative particle
with an injunction then the sentence implies that there is no
such injunction as enjoins killing. If the upholder of this thesis
contends that it is a desirable contingency then the inevitable
result which follows in its wake is that killing is not conveyed
by an injunction.
The upholders of the above hypothesis argue in the following
manner. In the case of the injunction "He offers an oblation
with sour milk" the offering of an oblation is established by
some other passages. In other words, it is not an originative743
Injunctions and their scope
sour
injunction. The Mimamsakas of the Bhatta school hold that
milk since
the injunction lays its emphasis upon
sour milk, being the instrumental case of the said offering
of an oblation, qualifies it. So, following the line of the
above argument, the Prabhakaras may take this stand that
an injunction with regard to killing is meaningless since natural
propensities prompt men to kill. The prohibitive injunction
contains the negative particle in it. If the negative particle finds
a place in a sentence but has no part to play then it should
be meaningless. In order to solve this riddle why do not you
admit that the injunction points at negation?
Now, the objectors raise an objection. They hold that the word
'Karma' denotes an action. In the above case the offering of an
oblation of which sour milk is an instrumental case has been
enjoined. Therefore, considering it from the side of its result
the offering of an oblation is enjoined by an injunction. But it
is not proved by any proof. But in the case of the prohibive in-
junction that he shall not kill, the negative particle cannot be
logically construed with any word as the word "sour milk” is
construed with the offering of an oblation since the nature
of the negative particle is to negate. Such a criticism does not
hold good. The negative particle assumes the dignity of an ad-
jective (a qualifier) because it dissuades one from the act of
killing. When we hear the root 'han' as modified by the nega-
tive particle the discussion from the act of killing is conveyed
to us.
Sour milk is the instrumental case of the offering of an obla-
tion in the above case. It is an accomplised thing. Though it
qualifies the offering of an oblation and becomes thus related
to it yet the offering of an oblation does not give up its cha-
racter of being an action. Similarly, though the meaning of
the root 'han' is known as related to negation, the meaning of
the negative particle yet the qualified meaning is presented to
our consciousness as arranged in the relation of being prior
and posterior. When we hear the word 'a-Brāhmaṇa' an acc-
omplished thing other than a Brāhmaṇa is conveyed to us. But
when we hear the sentence "He shall not kill" it does not imply
an accomplished thing. Therefore the injunctive sentence "He
shall not kill” enjoins an action, viz., dissuasion from killing.Nyayamanjari
Or, negation will be related to the verbal termination indica-
tive of lin (optative mood). Pure optative verbal termination
denotes an instigator. But if the negative particle is attached to
it then it, being thus qualified, denotes dissuading something.
This is the primary meaning of a word. Who is to be brought to
book for this finding?
744
Optative verbal termination is not attached to the negative
particle because the negative particle is not a root. Verbal ter-
minations in all tenses and moods are attached only to roots but
not to other words. In the fitness of things the meaning of the
verbal termination is construed with negation, the meaning of
the negative particle. As they are related so the boiled down
meaning does not imply that there is no such injunction as en-
joins killing. In the case of prohibitive injunction “He shall
not kill" it does not induce a listener to an action. But it does
not mean that he is dissuaded from all action. He is only not
induced to the act of killing. If one does not subscribe to this
view then the listener will be indifferent to all sorts of actions.
We shall no more criticise our rival hypothesis. Thus in the
case of prohibitive injunction such an injunction has to essential
factor, viz. (1) the action which is enjoined is arranged in re-
lation of being prior and posterior and (2) negation is related
to an injunction. Thus its connection with the two anubandhas
is established.
Thus when the implication of an injunction is fully discussed
a person shall assume the result of a rite prescribed by the
Vedas according to his imaginative power. Therefore, a rite
enjoined by the Vedas should depend upon its result.
Why shall a person dissuade from an evil deed without the
threat of sin? He may not of his own accord dissuade from it.
So, prohibitive injunction lays down his dissuasion.
If a person is excessively fond of killing animals then he
does not turn away from it though he knows that animal slaugh-
ter is productive of great evil. If this be the case then why will
a prohibitive injunction prescribing dissuation be invalid ?
An injunction may yield a result or not. A person may be
inclined for killing or not. An injunction shall remainsteady in
its own function. Its function cannot be interfered with.Injunctions and their scope
It has been repeatedly said that an injunction operates to pro-
duce the knowledge of instigation. That is when one listens to
an injunction he feels that he should do the act prescribed by
the injunction. Therefore, an injuncton is never unsuccessful
in its mission.
745
If an injunction does not depend upon the result of an ac-
tion then why does a person assume the result of actions such
as Visvajit sacrifice etc. of which no result has been directly ex-
pressed by the Vedas ? Moreover, if there is no mention of a
fact or which is essentially required for a sacrifice, viz., a per-
son who is qualified to perform a sacrifice then a person, quali-
fied to perform a sacrifice, is assumed, otherwise an injunction
ceases to be an injunction. As the same rule uniformly applies to
all sacrifices so it is assumed that a person who desires heaven
is qualified to perform a sacrifice. This assumption is part and
parcel of an injunction. Do not think that the said assumption
is of human origin. The Vedic scholars hold that it is a por-
tion of the Vedic sentence. In fine, they say that the assump-
tion of qualification is that of a relevant matter which is use-
ful to a sacrifice. It is not the assumption of a result. The as-
sumption of a qualification is not identical with that of a result.
An injunctive sentence conveys the mandate of a sacrifice to-
gether with the assumption of two useful matters bound up with
a sacrifice, viz. the qualification of a sacrificer and the result of
a sacrifice.
A mandate is called the meaning of a sentence owing to its
importance. Though other matters, such as a sacrifice etc., are
revealed by it yet they occupy a subordinate position since they
become an object of our experience as the sphere of the work-
ing of a mandate. But the mandate itself occupies the main
position in a sentence since it is presented to our consciousness
as strengthened by various rites and their causal factors having
tangible result and being implied by its intrinsic power. If it is
held that the main thing is that which is accomplished then we
shall say that a mandate is that which is accomplished. If one
holds that an end occupies the most important place then this
hypothesis is not disproved. But it is also to be noted that an
end is to be realised and its realisation depends upon a man-
date. Hence, a mandate occupies the principal position. But a746
Nyayamanjari
sacrificer who is enjoined to perfom a rite occupies a subordinate
place. (As a mandate presupposes a person who is ordered so
such a person finds a place in the sentence.) A mandate consti-
tutes the meaning of injunctive sentence since it occupies the
principal position in a sentence.
The fourfold division of a mandate
Injunctions admit of four kinds since this division is based
upon the analysis of our corresponding experience into the four
different types. Of these four kinds let us cite example of the
originative injunction. The illustration is that he shall perform
Agnihotra sacrifice. It conveys nothing but the origination of
Agnihotra sacrifice itself.
The illustration of the injunction of connection of the main
rite with its accessory ones runs thus. The injunction:-"He
shall sacrifice with sour milk" implies the connexion of the ac-
cessories such as sour milk etc., with the main rite which has
been conveyed by the originative injunction "He shall sacri-
fice with milk".
The example of the injunction of qualification is that he who
desires heaven shall perform Agnihotra sacrifice. When the rite
is revealed by it the person who is qualified to do the rite is
known in and through the said rite.
This is only to be stated about the injunction of the due
order of performance that all things useful in a sacrifice are
known only when a rite is performed in due order up to its end.
It is an offshoot of the injunction of qualification. The exam-
ple of the injunction of qualification is its illustration. The
above-mentioned injunction "He who desires heaven shall
perform Agnihotra sacrifice" illustrates it also.
In some cases single injunctive sentence illustrates four
different kinds of injunction. In those cases each kind of injunc-
tion does not require a distinct sentence for its illustration. The
illustration is as follows :-In Agnistut sacrifice a
group of
hymns, known as Väravantiya and sung in honour of Agni, is
to be inserted into the Rk verses called Revati. The said
sacrifice is to be completed by the subsidiary rite, being
commenced with the recitation of the above verses. A person
who desires animals shall perform this sacrifice. [A person whoInjunctions and their different forms
desires animals is qualified to perform the above sacrifice.] In
the above instance, the injunction of origination, that of
connexion of the subsidiary rite with the main one, that of
qualification, and that of performance in due order have been
illustrated. The different kinds of injunctions are guessed by
us from the diversity in the nature of actions themselves. The
very injunction leads one to infer the adequate means for the
completion of the sacrifice denoted by the basic root. For this
reason the injunction in question is called the determinant of
the second injunction. Let us illustrate it. The injunction of
appointing a preceptor is implied by that of the study of
Gayatri mantra by a Brahmin lad to be invested with sacred
thread.
747
The different forms of injunction
In some cases, if a thing is got in order to realise another
object then an injunction does not imply another similar thing
which is a helpful means to an action, laid down by the Vedas.
Let us illustrate our point. A young she-calf one year old is
taken to a sacrificial place for sale and is purchased and got.
The dust clinging to the hoof of such a calf is required in a
certain sacrificial rite. Though the above calf has come there
for some other
purpose but not for the said purpose yet
another calf should not be brought there for taking dust. The
injunction gives such a decision in this matter. In a context an
injunction which brings together all matters to be collected is
called Gråhaka vidhi.
In a particular context though an injunction refers to many
matters yet it does not include a particular rite viz., twelve
upasads (12 libations in an ektype sacrifice of the Archetype
Jyoti toma). Noticing their excellence they are included in
this context from another context. The injunction of connec-
tion of the accessory rites with the main one includes within
itself an injunction. It is called an injunction within a viniyoga.
The Different Forms of Injunction
In some cases even in spite of the absence of the evidence
of an applicatory injunction settling connection between a sub-
sidiary act and its principal injunction which indicates theNyayamanjari
connection of the single number of an animal as subsidiary
with the seizing of an animal as its principal one is called
upadāyaka. Let us take an illustration: One should sacrifice
with an animal (paśunâ yajeta). The singular number of the
third case-ending attached to pašu does not enjoin that the
number of the said animal should be one. It simply enjoins
that an animal, the meaning of the basic stem (pašu), should
only be taken into consideration since the number one of the
animal has been already enjoined. The number one has not been
enjoined here because the said number has not been men-
tioned in the injunctive sentence. An animal should be seized
but numberless animals should not be seized. There is no
reason to discard a number which has been mentioned before.
In other words, the number one of the animal should not be
given up. Therefore, the import of the entire argument is that
the number one belonging to the animal is to be taken
as subsidiary to the principal act, viz., the seizing of an animal.
An injunction which prescribes an offering to Surya is ecty-
pal. As it draws all manners of performance belonging to
archetypal rite towards its own rite so it is called 'codaka,' i.e.,
the rule of transfer.
748
The conclusion that an injunction is the meaning of a sentence
In fine, manifold efficacies of the only Lord Injunction, the
meaning of the optative mood, have been shown since his body
is endowed with the power of instigation. We shall no more
discuss the subject-matter of the Mimāṁsā literature, the
theatre of intellectual feats of the great leaders of thought. An
injunction of the above description constitutes the meaning of
a sentence.
All the characteristic features of an injunction have been
discussed in the work of Jaimini - a work consisting of twelve
chapters. All the details about an injunction have not been
discussed by us, apprehending the danger of making this
treatise cumbrous.
Only the panoramic view of the problem of injunction has
been presented in its due order. The great thinkers differ from
one another in the above-mentioned meaning of a sentence.749
Knowledge of an end as the motive of action
The establishment of the hypothesis that the knowledge of an end is the
motive of one's action
It has been stated that a sentence conveys an injunction
which is presented to our consciousness by him, etc, and the in-
junction itself is an act to be accomplished and an embodi-
ment of instigation. Though it may be so yet we do not grasp
it to be distinct from human activities which are being experi-
enced by us.
An act is apprehended by us to be such as leads us on to an
end because it is that which is to be accomplished and which
stirs our movement. But if an injunction is other than an act
then it cannot partake of the above two characters of an act.
The Mimâmsakas have already shown that the relation
which subsists between an act and an agent is distinct from that
holding between the director and the directed. An injunction
constitutes the second relation. The said contention of the
Mimāṁsakas does not stand to reasons.
The verbs 'should do' etc. purport to convey no instigation
which is other than an act itself.
The Mīmāṁsakas raise an objection to this effect. Do the
verbs, 'does' and 'should do' etc., convey the same sense ? Oh
long-lived one ! your knowledge of etymology is novel. I sec.
We do not hold that the senses, conveyed by these two verbs,
are not different from each other. The verb 'does' communicates
to us an act which has commenced and persists in the present
time. But though it conveys an instigation yet it does neither
cause one to move for it nor indicate that one should do it.
If it is communicated to us as a director then why does not
it cause us to do it? It should have caused us to do it. As it
contains an element of instigation in it so it acts as an instigator.
It is a truism that the said act is presented to our consciousness
as an instigator. But in reality it does not act as an instigator.
It is only a verbal practice to say "I obey the order of the king".
The sentence does not convey the instigation "I should obey
the order of a king" (i.e., I am under the obligation of ob-
eying the order of a king). The sentence "I obey the order of
a king" implies that to obey the order of a king is an act which
is accomplished by me.750
Nyayamanjari
An order is that which is known to be carried out by others.
He who obeys an order does not think that it should be carried
out. But a ruler who makes an order thinks that it should be
carried out. If it is not admitted then one is to follow the order
of any and every person. Though a sentence conveys instiga-
tion yet intelligent persons do not undertake an action, hearing
sentences, uttered by young boys, or insane persons etc.
No body cares to obey the order of a king from whom no-
body apprehends danger if it is disobeyed and from whom no
body expects the fulfilment of their desire if it is obeyed. If
one listens to a sentence containing a verb in the present tense
and expects some result form it then he acts in accordance with
it though the verb has no verbal termination indicative of the
optative mood. The sentence "One recovers from taking my-
robalan" proves the thesis.
There is no distinction between the sentences "One who
desires recovery should take myrobalan" and "One recovers
from taking myrobalan" as to their prompting force.
In fine, the people arrive at the logical conclusion by the
joint method of agreement and difference that an end induces a
person to an action but not an injunction.
In the above matter such a conclusion may be entertained. In
ordinary worldly transactions a person may undertake an
action out of desire for fruit or in accordance with the intention
of a director. In these cases an end is the remote or indirect
cause of movement. The origin of the Vedas cannot be traced
to a human being-a speaker. So, when a person listens to the
sentences of the Vedas he undertakes an action, being inspired
by the knowledge of instigation. But if a person listens to the
sentences of a mad man containing verbs in the optative tense,
he does not feel that he is inspired by them to do something.
Even if he feels inspiration and undertakes an action, his action
does not yield the promised result. So, the above sentences
are disregarded as incoherent talks. But in the case of the
Vedas as a person hears the injunctive sentence "One should
sacrifice" so he feels inspired to undertake the enjoined act.
There is no reason to set his inspiration at naught. Hence, he
engages himself in undertaking the enjoined act. The Vedas
are not the source of invalid knowledge because the author of751
Knowledge of an end as the motive of action
the Vedas is not a director. It has been stated before that as the
truth of the Vedas is self-evident, so they discharge all the
functions of true knowledge. Some thinkers hold that the Vedas
owe their origin to an author. A person who has desire for
fruit undertakes an act in accordance with the intention of
the said author. Though this hypothesis suggests a possible
answer to that of the Mimamsakas yet we do not insist upon it
since if we entertain the said hypothesis then we alter our
course of discussion. But we express the following point of view
as our own. As the feeling of inspiration establishes one's
movement for an action so the compound word 'Svargakāmaḥ'
should be interpreted in a different sense, following the foot-
steps of Badari. (It has been suggested that desire for fruit
does not stir one's movement). Let the compound word simply.
qualify a person when a person as qualified for a particular
rite is selected.
If the above view is accepted, we take no exception to it. But
we object to the supposition that supreme bliss is an end since
it is gratuitous. Now, one may argue that if supreme bliss is
not an end then the compound word 'Svargakāmaḥ' cannot be
an adjective of a sacrificer. The import of this argument is this
that the result of an action is the end to be realised. If we arrive
at the conclusion that the result of an action is our goal then
we cannot but hold that an end prompts us to action owing to
its intrinsic power. This hypothesis gets the support of the
popular opinion. Moreover, it knows no exception. So there
is no
reason why we should discard it and subscribe to the
conjecture that the feeling of inspiration prompts us to an action.
If you admit that an order points to a result then the result
itself occupies the principal position in a sentence. As the order
itself becomes subordinate to it (a result) so the conclusion
that an order is the primary import of an injunctive sentence is
contradicted.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas contend thus:- The meaning of an in-
junction like the meaning of a root, is not a means to the result.
If it had been a means then it would have been a subsidiary.
But as a result is implied by the meaning of an injunction so it
is held that an injunction is meant for a result. The intrinsic
character of an injunction is to be a prompter. If you subscribe752
Nyayamanjari
to this hypothesis then let the meaning of the root 'yaj' be the
object to be accomplished. In that case why do you say that an
order, the meaning of an injunctive sentence, is an object to be
accomplished? Now, the Mimamsakas may contend on the
basis of the current verbal practice that an order is completed
when a sacrifice, the meaning of the root 'yaj' is performed.
There runs a verbal usage "I am completing the order of my
master."
If this is their contention then our counter-argument runs
thus 1f the meaning of a root completes both an order, the
meaning of an injunctive sentence, and a result then the sente-
nce in question is open to the charge of syntactic disunity. (If
a sentence refers to two independent substantives then the split-
ting up of a sentence into two is inevitable).
Moreover, owing to the acceptance of the hypothesis that
the meanings of all constituent words of a sentence are inter-
related an order is known as connected with its subject-
matter. In the present context an order of a sacrifice is made.
So a sacrifice is apprehended as the raison d'etre of an order.
Now, if we assume that an order is carried out by a sacrifice,
the meaning of the basic root then we admit that an order be-
comes a means to an end, viz. the result. Thus, as it is an accessory
matter serving the purpose of another so it is not the principal
import of a sentence. This point has been discussed before.
Now, it may be suggested that a sacrifice completes two things
viz., an order and a result. An objection arises in our mind viz.
"Does it simultaneously or successively complete them ?" It is
not capable of completing them simultaneously. If it had such
capacity then they would have been identical.
One may not see an order since it is conveyed only by a ver-
bal statement. But why will not one see that it is completed
along with the ultimate result viz., heaven, animal etc ? Let
the second alternative suggestion of successiveness be admitted.
Is an order at first completed and does the completion of the
said result follow it? Or, does the completion of the result
precede and is a result completed afterwards? If it is held that
an order is completed at the out-set then why should a man
move for accessory matters which are means to a sacrifice?753
Knowledge of an end as the motive of action
Just as by performing fire-sacrifices a mandate concerning
Darsa and Paurṇamāsa sacrifices is completed but the enjoined
matter which remains unfinished is completed in accordance
with the direction of the Sastras as a sacrificer may also move for
the completion of the accessory matters of a sacrifice in con-
formity with the direction of the Sastras even after the execution
of an order.
The Mimamsakas may contend that it is a desirable continge-
ncy. If this is their contention then we say in reply "O
Mīmāṁsakas! as the activities of a human being are directed
towards the attainment of the highly desired end owing to his
natural appetites so they do not come within the province of
injunction. Hence, you contradict your own statement when
you hold that sacrifices like Śyena sacrifice etc are sinful acts.
If the Mimāṁsakas contend that the result is at first establish-
ed and the order which concerns it is completed then the in-
admissible logical consequence that the result, being established
before the completion of the said order, should be visible be-
comes inevitable When a sacrifice has been duly performed the
promised fruit viz., a son, animals etc., is not tangibly obtained.
If it is held that though the result remains inevitable yet it is
established then such a conclusion is absolutely mysterious.
Some Mimāṁsakas contend that a sacrifice, the meaning of
the root, completes an order through the operation of the
unimportant intermediate process viz., the establishment of
heaven etc. This contention also stands refuted. The reason is
as follows.
As the minor operation of fire, viz., the act of blazing, at first,
takes place before its main operation in the shape of the act of
cooking so the minor operation, viz., the establishment of
heaven, should be at first experienced. But this logical conseque-
nce is inadmissible. Now the Mimāṁsakas contend thus He
who desires heaven intends to enjoy celestial bliss by means of
a sacrifice. So it is learnt from the texts that an order, the
meaning of verbal termination indicating optativę mood should
be at first executed. Now, if the said order is completely carried
out then we are given to understand by verbal authority that
the result, viz., heaven, has also been produced. The establish-
ment of heavenly bliss will be certified by experience in the754
Nyayamanjari
future: Such a contention does not stand to reasons. We do not
experience, heaven is twice established by means of the two
distinct sources of knowledge. The first proof of heaven is fur-
nished by verbal knowledge and the second one is offered by
our experience. We fail to make out what is the genesis of
the hypothesis that heaven will be established in the future by
means of experience.
The act of sacrifice is short-lived. It does not endure in the
future. You (the particular sect of Mimãmsakas) do not admit
the existence of transcendental result in the shape of some power
etc. arising from a sacrifice.
You hold that the words ‘apūrva' and 'dharma' denote an
order by means of their secondary meaning. But an order does
not endure long like power or like an impression belonging to
the soul. Is an order an embodiment of instigation ? Or, is it a
result itself? What do you say? Let an order be either of
them. But none of them lasts long. The above hypothesis leads
to an inadmissible logical conclusion. If an impression that ob-
edience to such an order brings up the result takes hold of the
mind then an order implies a result. But an order is never
empty. It is directed towards an object which is to be
accomplished. It is characterised by the object. It is obeyed
because it has a concrete shape. An act is not accomplished if
the necessary conditions do not assemble and the requisite in-
termediary processes do not make their contribution. Hence,
an act implies them all. Similarly, an order cannot be executed
if the person who is duly qualified to perform the act is not men-
tioned. Hence, an order implies such a person. When an order
is qualified by the implied person it points to the result of an
act. Hence, the result of an act is assumed. But an injunction
does not require a result. But the above statement does not
stand to reasons.
If a thing does not come into being without being condition-
ed by another thing then the latter should be implied by the
former. But though an injunction implies a person duly quali-
fied to perform an act yet it cannot be held to imply the result
of an act.
As soon as a person touches an impure candâla he becomes
instantaneously impure. Similarly, a person, desirous of heavenKnowledge of an end as the motive of action
755
qualifies himself to perform an act by his mere desire for
heaven. Therefore, the assumption of such a person is not arriv-
ed at by implication. Hence, how can the implication of such
a person be that of a result ?
Now, the Mimāṁsakas may contend that a person who is
desirous of heaven is known only by an inference to be duly
qualified to perform a sacrifice. He is not a qualified person if
he cannot inanage to attain heavenly bliss by dint of his own
act. The solution of the problem as offered by the Mīmāṁsakas
is not satisfactory. .
It depends upon the will of a person to do an act. Scriptural
passages themselves cannot do an act. A person who desires
heaven is only directed to perform a sacrifice just as a living
person is only directed but not a dead one. The drift of this
argument is this that the assumption of a duly qualified person
is mechanical but not inferential.
Our experience says that an object, longed for, is our goal.
Let us take an example to illustrate our point. A person who
desires cure shall take myrobalan. In this case the taking of
myrobalan is our end. Similarly, in the ease of a Vedic rite
enjoined by the passage "A person who desires, heaven shall
sacrifice" heaven is our goal, O gentle one; how have you found
out that the same law applies to secular matters to determine
the goal? The goal is discovered when we either reflect on the
primary meaning of a word denoting the qualified person or
discuss the intrinsic character of an injunction.
The meaning of a word is such. Or this person desires it to
be so. Why do you think in this way? It does not come within
the province of an injunction. O long-lived one! If you think
that it follows from the intrinsic nature of an injunction then
why do you heap censure on Kumārila Bhaṭṭa, because he holds
that a permanent obligatory rite yields a result? No adjective
has been given to the agent of an optional rite or to that of an
unconditionally obligatory rite in order to distinguish him.
All persons who may be living or desirous of heaven are equally
qualified to perform optional or such obligatory rites. The drift
of his argument is this that as it goes without saying that the
agent of an optional rite is living, so it goes without saying that756
Nyayamanjari
one who desires heaven is the agent. The same rule applies to a
categorically obligatory rite.
The influence of an injunction upon an insect is the same.
An injunction does not instigate an intelligent person to perform
an act, being threatened with the fear of being fruitless.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas raise an objection to the above
suggestion that a standing obligatory rite bears a fruit. In the
case of an optional rite it has been directly stated that the goal
of this act is heaven but in the case of a standing obligatory
rite no such goal has been directly mentioned. On the strength
of which authority has an end of such an obligatory rite been
assumed? The Naiyāyikas give a reply to this objection. They
hold that it is the very injunction which leads us to such an
assumption. The mention of heaven'is of no use to us if an in-
junction does not require it. An injunction attracts an unheard.
fruit in the shape of heaven and requires it as its essential ele-
ment just as it appropriates the fruit mentioned in the passage.
"He has become possessed of streams of clarified butter". Hence
aninjunction is the sole authority in the matter whether an action
bears a fruit or not. We shall disregard the suggested authority
whether the fruit is heard or not. If a standing obligatory rite
bears no fruit then we shall hold that both optional and per-
manent rites alike shall bear no fruit.
In the light of discussions concerning an injunction it will not
be inconsistent to hold that if a person performs any prohibited
action then he gets punishment in the shape of sufferings.
in hell.
A person with his conscience clouded by unbearably oppressing
hatred considers the slaying of a Brahmin to be his duty since
he thinks that the said act is conducive to pleasure. A person
has also believed that alcoholic drinks are also conducive to.
pleasure since he is a confirmed votary of Epicurus. If an
injunction does not inform that the above acts are conducive to
suffering but not to pleasure then how can it turn a person away
from the sinful acts? Hence, he should admit that a permanent
obligatory rite yields a result viz., the destruction of accumulated
sins like the removal of sin of omission and that a prohibited
action leads to sufferings in hell. If we do not admit it then we
fail to establish what is duty and what is contrary to duty.Knowledge of an end as the motive of action
757
Moreover, if the performance of prohibited acts does not
generate sin then the slaying of a Brahmin is not a sinful act-
not to speak of Syena sacrifice. Thus the term 'artha' in the
definition of dharma becomes meaningless,
If the Mimāṁsakas hold that a person moves for the means
owing to his natural propensities but observes the procedure of
performance, being inspired by the scriptural passages then their
view is not sound.
Because means, unaided by the manners of procedure, cannot
produce the intended result viz., heaven. The learned scholars
are of an opinion that a means, aided by the procedure of per-
excellence.
formance, is really a means par
The division of the conditions of a sacrifice into two different
heads viz., (1) Karaṇa (means) and (2) Itikartavyatā (manners
of performance) is a very minor one. But if a sacrifice is per-
formed with the completion of all its subsidiary actions then and
then only it leads to the desired goal. But if a single subsidiary
action is omitted then the sacrifice does not produce its result.
Therefore, if we are to perform an optional rite then we must be
particularly mindful of the performance of all subsidiary rites
without an exception. This is the teaching of the Vedas. Hence,
one should move for the manners of performance out of mere
desire for the attainment of goal as he does for the means.
If in both cases pure desire of result is the sine qua-non of his
movement then the killing of an animal in connection with the
sacrifice dedicated to Agni and Soma should be considered as a
sinful act just like the Syena sacrifice.
Moreover, it has been stated by the Mimāṁsakas that in the
case of an optional rite the operation of an injunction amounts
to the relation of a means to an end holding between a sacrifice
and its result. The above statement is not correct. The reason
is as follows. The relation subsisting between an injunction and a
sacrifice is that of the inducer and the induced. A sacrifice is
presented to our consciousness as a subject matter of an injunc-
tion. But the desired result is not known to us as a means to
heaven. Again, if it is held that the only operation of an injunc-
tion is to reveal causal relation then the view virtually leads to
the conclusion that an injunction enjoins that this is the means
and that this is the end. In that case an injunction should giveNyayamanjari
758
up its own intrinsic character of inducing one to movement one
who has not as yet moved for an action.
There is a well-known saying that an injunction has four
different modes. But its basic character of being an instigator
underlies all of them.
An injunction at first communicates its incentive to an
enjoined rite and then informs that the above act is an obliga-
tory duty. A person who is induced to perform this rite scruti-
nizes his duty minutely.
On listening to the verbal termination indicative of the optative
mood the listener feels inspiration and then apprehends that a
sacrifice is a means and heaven is an end and the relation hold-
ing between them is that of a means to an end. Now, the
Mimāṁsakas take an exception to the above suggestion and
point out some defects in it. In the case of an optional rite a
person, instigated by an injunction, proceeds to perform a rite.
This is the sum and substance of the said suggestion. But if
some body does not undertake an action then he shall commit
the sin of omission since he has transgressed an injunction.
Such an objection does not hold good. A person who desires
heaven is qualified to perform a rite. But one who has no such
desire has not requisite qualification to do it. Let us take an
example to illustrate our point in question. A Vaiśya should
recite a group of verses. But if a Kşatriya does not recite those
verses, he does not commit the sin of omission. But the
person
who desires heaven undertakes to perform a rite, being induced
by an injunction. If one admits that movement for a means
owes its origin to desire then his activities for manners of pro-
cedure of performance will be held to be due to desire also
since he has moved for it, being inclined to render assistance to
the said sacrifice. Thus, an injunction should be defunct in all
matters. It is needless to discuss this question any further.
Moreover, how do you hold that an injunction is the import
of a sentence since a meaning is ascertained from usage ?
The Mimāṁsakas have said the following: One has direct
experience that his voluntary activities spring from his desires.
So it is natural for him to infer that such activities of another
person also spring from his desires. Such an inference is not
justifiable. One cannot be conscious of his own inspirationKnowledge of an end as the motive of action
759
since there is nothing to reveal it. An instigation is not self-
luminous like its own consciousness. If the Mimāṁsakas contend
that the awareness of instigation is self-luminous then we ask
them 'what is its cause?' Its cause is to be found out by scrutiny.
If the Mimāṁsakas hold that the optative mood communicates
it then we point out that this view is not tenable. When a liste-
ner hears an injunctive sentence how has he learnt that the
optative mood denotes instigation? As one is aware of the fact
that his own activities are preceded by the awareness of instiga-
tion so it is an inference that the activities of another person
are preceded by the awareness of instigation. Thus we shall
understand that verbal terminations, indicative of optative
mood, communicate instigation. But one should very carefully
think over the question 'How is he aware of instigation when
he learns the meaning of a word or of a sentence ?' If the
Mimâmsakas hold that he knows it from another source of valid
knowledge then we say 'O Mīmāṁsakas! get up and discuss
no more since your pet hypothesis that instigation is
communicated only by the verbal source has been disproved.'
We have previous experience that a wood-apple and such
other fruits are conducive to pleasure. Hence, whenever we see
them we move for eating them. It has also been settled that
desire of pleasure is the motive of our activity. There is no
other motive which prompts us to activity. Some thinkers have
said to this effect that worldly transactions are due to desire
which is based upon recollection since everybody is aware of
his own desire for fruits.
Some thinkers other than the Naiyāyikas assume that a
sentence communicates instigations. We, the Naiyāyikas, take
no exception to it. But it is also true beyond the shadow of a
doubt that desire for a fruit is the real motive in such cases.
If the fruit of an action induces a person to take upon himself
an undertaking then the objections, raised before, will be met.
If the earlier statement is true then how can one say "I am
pouring libation at the instance of my preceptor ?" Let us set
aside such a popular remark. In the above case the preceptor
does not induce him to action. But the desire of gaining good
or that of avoiding an evil is the prime condition of his move-
ment. Hence, it is reasonable to hold that the fruit of an action760
Nyayamanjari
is the real motive. Our experience bears witness to the truth of
this hypothesis.
Moreover, some other thinkers have suggested that the
intention of a director is the prompter since nobody undertakes
an action at the instance of a person who has not won the
former's heart by his personal charms. But if the fellow is
captivated by his personal charms then he reads the intention
of his idol from the latter's browbeat, etc., but not from his
words and takes up an action.
The hypothesis is not sound. The said person undertakes an
action, inferring the intention of his director since he believes
that if he acts up to his director's intention then he will be
able to look after his own interest. He does not undertake an
action with the consideration. "Let my director be pleased".
But if the pleasure of his director is the source of his own
pleasure then he may desire the pleasure of his director as the
source of his own pleasure. He does never undertake an action
only with a view to bringing about the pleasure of his director.
Lord Buddha himself who was bent upon doing good to all
embraced altruism as his own interest since to render service
to others was his self-interest. Hence one's own pleaure is the
motive. If the Mimâmsakas hold that the intention of the
director induces one to an action. then they should admit that
there is no director in the Vedas since they say that the Vedas
have not been composed by an author. Therefore, there is no
chance of knowing the intention of a director. As there is no
possibility of guessing the intention of a director so nobody
should move for the Vedic rites. Hence, the fruit of an action is
the only motive.
The Mimāṁsakas have raised a few objections against the
said hypothesis. They have put forward a dilemma to invalidate
it. Is the fruit an accomplished fact or not? They believe that
this riddle cannot be solved. So, the hypothesis is not logically
tenable. The above argument is not fair since the fruit of an
action prompts us to action since it is an object of our desire.
If the unaccomplished fruit of an action is our motive then why
is not an unreal object our motive? The Naiyãyikas say by way
of reply that an object which is absolutely unreal like the sky-
flower cannot be our motive.Knowledge of an end as the motive of action
A man desires pleasure or cessation from pain but nobody
longs for a purely imaginary object like the sky-flower.
Those who hold that love is the motive have in their mind
the view that the object, longed for, has the prompting force
since love is a form of desire.
761
Some thinkers hold that an object which is conducive to our
welfare instigates us to action. This hypothesis is not fair. The
reason behind our criticism is this that we do not move for an
object which we do not long for though it is conducive to our
welfare.
Now, the Mimāṁsakas contend that a person who is in need of
something does not move for an indefinite object. But he moves
for an object which he definitely knows to be conducive to
welfare. Hence, the determination that this means will surely lead
to goal is the real motive. This is true. But if the knowledge
of the sure means and the desire of fruit assemble then the
latter should be called motif. Because movement for an object
springs from desire. Conation is another name for inner activity
resulting in bodily movement. The followers of Kaņāda hold that
conation is the effect of desire. Conduciveness to welfare de-
termines the acceptability or the otherwiseness of an object but
does not stir movement. It has been also suggested that conduc-
iveness to welfare which is intimated by efficient force is the
motive. The distinct mention of this motive is not logically ten-
able. Efficient force consists of three elements. When we appre-
hend its distinct feature we determine that the relation of means
to its end holds between a sacrifice and heaven, the two ele-
ments of bhāvanā (efficient force). It should not be held that
the activity as characterized by these two elements is conducive
to welfare. As bhāvanā has not as yet come into being so its
property, viz., conduciveness to welfare, cannot come into ex-
istence. If a cow is not born then the universal of cowness
does not belong to its limbs, viz., dewlap, etc. If the three ele-
ments are not fulfilled then the activity of a person, called
bhāvanā, does not come into being.
Some hold that a word, indicative of optative mood the sense
conveyed by it, constitutes the motive. This hypothesis has been
already refuted.Nyayamanjari
An injunction by its intrinsic character does not stir our move-
ment. If one admits that an injunction prompts us to activity
when the causal relation between a sacrifice and heaven has
been established then the end turns out to be an instigator in
" spite of the absence of his verbal admission.
Some hold that an injunction is the real instigator since it
reveals the end. The view is not tenable. If this is the view
then an injunction is no better than perception, etc.. and the
unique character of an injunction is done away with.
He should be informed that if an injunction conveys a fruit-
less act then it loses all prestige. Even an ignorant person does.
not undertake a fruitless act.
762
Does any intelligent man set to a fruitless work? Now, the
Mimāṁsakas contend that there are some persons who do not
undertake an act even though they are informed of its result.
The Naiyāyikas say in reply (to this contention) that it matters
little if they do not undertake such a work. The reason is this
that an injunction does not cause one to do an act. But we
have stated before that an injunction does not inform. The
Mimamsakas further contend that it may inform of an act
though it does not reveal its result. Is there any obstacle to
such information? The Naiyãyikas review this contention and
point out that such an injunction does not serve the purpose
of an indicator to all. If it goes to inform an intelligent person
then he is not well-informed in the absence of the declaration
of a result. There is no need of talking much about it.
So, the result of an action-the object of desire, is the real
motive, the author of Nyaya-sutra has thus composed his sutra.
'yamartham adhikṛtya', etc.
The concluding portion of this topic
Hence, neither an injunction nor lin-the verbal termination
indicative of the optative mood, is the cause of the volition of
a person. Even bhāvanā, the denotation of lin-the verbal
termination indicative of the optative mood is not cap-
able of producing volition. Conduciveness to welfare which be-
longs to a rite prescribed by the Vedic injunction cannot bring
about such volition. It is not also logical to hold that fondness
is the cause of volition. So, the author of Nyâyasūtra, who has763
Meaning of a sentence Determined
clear thinking, has stated that an end which is the object of
desire is the cause of volition.
The determination of the meaning of a sentence.
The opponents of the Nyaya school say, "Refuting the rival
hypothesis you have established that an end is the final cause of
volition. Now, as you are intolerant of other's views so you
yourself say what is the meaning of a sentence. Gautama holds
that a motive is that for which a person moves. Thus he has
shown that an end has prompting force. An intelligent person
knows an object by the source of valid knowledge. He takes hold
of it if it is worthy of taking and rejects it if it is rejectable.
When a person is inclined either to take it or to reject it he
makes an effort in that direction. This effort is called pravṛtti,
When this effort reaches its goal, i.e., the actual taking of an
acceptable object or the discarding of a rejectable object taking
place the effort becomes fruitful, i.e., it is crowned with suc-
cess. As Vātsyāyana makes the above remark so he has hinted
at the hypothesis that the desire for fruit stirs our movement.
So, following his foot-steps we have also subscribed to the
above hypothe.is.
But neither the author of Nyaya-sūtra nor his commentator
has hinted at the meaning of a sentence in any place. The pur-
port of this statement is 'Why do the Naiyāyikas seriously
discuss the problem at all? An answer to the question is this
that this branch of study has a distinct subject-matter of its own.
The Nyaya branch of study is the science of logic but not the
science of grammar.
If this is the case then why has the Sūtrakāra discussed the
meanings of words, viz., a particular, a universal and the form
of a particular? This question is highly reasonable. The author of
the Nyāya sūtra has taken steps to vindicate the validity of ver-
bal knowledge. In order to do so he has had to silence his op-
ponent who has loudly declared that words have only imaginary
meanings.
If this is so then the truth of verbal knowledge will not be
established unless and until it is held that a sentence denotes
external reals. Therefore, an effort should be made in this dir-764
Nyayamanjari
ection. You have said the right thing. The author of the Nyaya-
sūtra thinks that steps which he has taken to establish the real
meanings of a word have been in the right direction to pro-
pound the meaning of a sentence. For this reason he has not
given us instruction that the meaning of a sentence is distinct
from that of a word. Hence, it is his intention that the mean-
ings of words constitute the meaning of a sentence. For, will
the Mimāṁsakas accept the hypothesis that the meanings of
words constitute the meaning of a sentence? The Naiyāyikas
say in reply 'Oh yes, by all means'. They also mention in this
connection that many meanings of words constitute the meaning
of a sentence but not a single one does it.
Now, some remarks may be made by way of criticism. It has
been suggested that many meanings of words constitute the
meaning of a sentence. But they are nothing but meanings of
words. The meaning of a word can never constitute that of a
sentence since a word communicates its meaning in its universal
aspect but never does it in the particularized aspect. But a sen-
tence always communicates a particular meaning. A particular
is one thing and a universal is another thing. It has also been
stated in another place that a sentence conveys an additional
meaning. Therefore, the meaning of a sentence is distinct from
that of a word and the meaning of a word is another than that
of a sentence.
A solution to the above criticism is as follows. O long-lived
one: You have not followed the real purport of our statement
that many meanings of words constitute the meaning of a sen-
tence but not the single meaning of a word constitutes it. What
we have meant to say is this that the mutual relation of
word-meaning constitutes the additional meaning of a sentence.
As this relation takes place so an extra meaning has been as-
serted.
If a word does not denote a particular object then the mutual
relation of word-meanings is not explained, it is stated that a
sentence points to particular objects. But the relation in itself
(i.c., isolated from the relata) does not constitute the meaning
of a sentence since it has not been communicated by a word.
Let us take an example, 'Let a white cow be brought'. Among
the constituent words of a sentence no word which denotes aMeaning of a sentence Determined
765
relation is heard. Even if we admit that a word denotative of
relation is heard then it has syntactical connection with no word
of the sentence. Does the sentence 'Gauḥ śuklā ānīyatām
samsargaḥ' (Let a white cow be brought-relation) convey a
meaning? Hence, the mutually related meanings of words con-
stitute the meaning of a sentence but not their relation in its
isolated form. This idea has been expressed in the sentence
'Vyatisaktato avagater vyatisaṁgasya' (The meaning of a sen-
tence is communicated by the mutually related meanings of its
constituent words). As threads produce a distinct whole, viz., a
cloth or as sticks produce mattress, a distinct whole, so a distinct
whole in the shape of the meaning of a sentence is not produced
by the meanings of its constituent words. No such distinct whole
is apprehended by us. A universal, an attribute, and an action
are presented to our consciousness but a whole is never presented
to our consciousness. Hence, a distinct whole, constituted by the
meanings of words, is not the meaning of a sentence. So, the
author of Nyaya-sūtra has not given the idea of the meaning of
a sentence as something distinct.
Now, another point deserves clarification. A relation among
meanings is not possible if they are not arranged as principal
and secondary ones. If many meanings occupy principal posi-
tions in a sentence then none actually enjoys the principal posi-
tion. In a sentence many meanings may occupy a secondary
position. For this reason many secondary meanings should qua-
lify a principal meaning which thus becomes qualified. The
qualified meaning which occupies the principal position should
be the meaning of a sentence. A judgment which is produced
by a sentence refers to the qualified object. The drift of the
above statement is that a sentence has a distinct meaning of
its own. The Naiyāyikas point out that the above statement is
true but still mutually related meanings are only presented to
our consciousness. They also hold that no distinct object is
constituted by these mutually related meanings. When these
meanings are mutually related to one another we admit that
the primary or secondary position is distributed among them.
But the same position is not uniformly occupied by the certain
type of meanings in all cases. If the uniformity of position had
been always maintained by a particular type of meanings then766
Nyayamanjari
it would have been always declared as the occupant of the pri
ncipal position. In some cases an action occupies the principal
position and the case form of a noun becomes subordinate to
it. Let us take an example 'One should sacrifice with Brihis'.
In some cases, the case form of a noun occupies the principal
position and an action becomes subordinate to it. Materials
denoted by a noun, are known to be the object of desired
action. Let us take an example 'He sprinkles Brīhis'.
ļ
In some cases, an action occupies a secondary position but a
material occupies the principal position. But in some cases, a
material occupies a secondary position but an action occupies a
principal position. Reflecting on the purport of a word the
position of the meaning of a word is determined.
"
In fine, as the position of the meaning of a word in a sentence
cannot be settled in a definite manner so it is better to hold that
meanings of words which are mutually related constitute the
meaning of a sentence. There is no divergence of opinion
about the hypothesis that some relation is communicated by a
sentence.
Those who hold that a mandate or a bhāvanā or an action
constitutes the meaning of a sentence admit that the mutually
related meanings of words constitute the meaning of a sentence.
Now, another point invites our attention. As relation is convey-
ed by a sentence so mutual exclusion is also communicated
by it. When the sentence 'Let a white cow be brought' is
heard, black, cows etc., are excluded from the meaning of a
white cow'. It has been said that mutual exclusion is not the
meaning of a word. Hence, mutual exclusion is not conveyed
by a sentence as its meaning.
Now, if the Naiyâyikas argue in this way then relation is also
denoted by no word in a sentence. There is much truth in this
criticism. Though the said relation is not denoted by any word
yet it is not true that it is not implied by it. How is it that
what is not meant by a word is implied by it? This point
will be clarified in the subsequent chapter. But mutual exclu-
sion cannot be thus implied. Thus a difinite conclusion is arriv-
ed at that the mutually related meanings of words constitute
the meaning of a sentence.An End as the meaning of a sentence
767
Or, the meaning of a single word, which occupies the princi-
pal position and which is qualified by the meanings of the
other words of a sentence, occupying the secondary position,
constitutes the meaning of a sentence. One should admit the
truth of this hypothesis on the strength of the experience that a
sentence produces a single judgment.
The establishment of the hypothesis that an end is the meaning of a sentence
It is not very easy to determine what is the single meaning of
a sentence. If the pitcher containing coronation water is to be
given to any one of these meanings then it may be given to an
end since no word is uttered without any purpose.
In some cases an end is directly stated by a word. In some
other cases an end is indicated by the context. In some other
cases an end is suggested by discussion. The net result is that an
end is the ultimate goal which is pointed to in every case.
All case forms of nouns produce an action. An action pro-
duces a result, i. e., an end. But a result produces no other
result. Hence, a result is only conveyed by a sentence since it
occupies the principal position.
A question still arises in our mind. An end is for the benefit
of a person. But an end is not an end in itself. Hence, a
person should occupy the principal position, Such a hypothesis
should not be entertained. An end itself is happiness, so it
cannot rest unsupported. It finds its support in a person since
happiness is an attribute of the soul. Though the soul is said to
be the substratum of happiness yet it does not mean that a
person enjoys the principal position since the very person in
whom happiness inheres makes an effort to obtain happiness.
A bhāvanā is an activity which is directed towards an end.
A mandate cannot induce a person to undertake an action
if there is no end to realise. These points have been discussed
before.
The hypothesis that an action in itself which involves no
reference to an end is the meaning of a sentence has been
refuted.
Hence, as an end is an object to be realised without an
exception and as all actions, etc., are directed towards it, so it
is desirable that an end is the meaning of a sentence.Nyayamanjari
The Mimāṁsakas raise an objection to the above conclusion.
The goal of an action is heaven, etc. The objects like heaven,
etc., are by their intrinsic nature pre-existing things. Hence,
they cannot end into relation with case forms of nouns. Case
forms of nouns cannot be related to pre-existing things by such
relation as holds between any cause and an effect. Now, the
Naiyāyikas may contend that they may be related through the
intervening action. The Mimāṁsakas raise another question.
The end is related to an action. The case forms of nouns are
also related to an action. What is the difference between case
forms of noun and an end? The case forms of nouns are relat-
ed to an action which is a means. But an end is related to
an action as an object to be realised. An object is accomplish-
ed by an action. An action is not produced by an end, i.e.,
an object. Hence, it is established that an end occupies the
prominent place.
As the meanings of words, being mutually related, constitute
the meaning of a sentence so the author of Nyâya-sütra, taking
note of it, has not said that a sentence conveys a distinct
meaning, i.e., a meaning which is other than those of words.
768
Or, owing to the prominence of its position an end is assert-
ed to be the meaning of a sentence. Sound thinkers make an
attempt at establishing the hypothesis. It is well known to all
that an end has been taught by the author of Nyāya-sūtra as
the motive.
The refutation of the hypothesis that the vibration of the soul
(udyoga) is the meaning of a senteuce:
Some thinkers hold that when one listens to the verbal
termination in the optative mood a distinct type of activity
(udyoga) arises in the soul. This udyoga constitutes the mean-
ing of a sentence. But we are absolutely in the dark about its
characteristic feature. What is this activity of the soul? There
are nine attributes of the soul viz., consciousness, pleasure,
pain, desire, hatred, volition, merit demerit and impression.
They only constitute its specific attributes but none else. Either
consciousness or volition or any one of desire and hatred is
the so-called activity of the soul since other attributes cannot
be thought of to be so. If consciousness is held to be the activityA
Vibration of the soul as the meaning of a sentence Refuted
769
of the soul then the hypothesis is the same as that an idea is the
meaning of a sentence. Thus no new hypothesis has been
suggested. Again, if volition is the action of the soul then
udyoga is another name for bhavanā. Now, if it is either of the
two, desire and hatred, then the meaning of a sentence is either
desire for pleasure or desire for the avoidance of pain. This is
the hypothesis of the Naiyãyikas. There is nothing new in it.
Or, if the activity of the soul as suggested by the Bhättas is the
vibration of the soul then it is bhāvanã only and nothing else.
If it is held that mandate which is to be carried out by a listener
is udyoga and it instigates him to an action then it is nothing
but an injunction (niyoga). Udyoga and niyoga convey the
same sense since they have been derived from the same root.
Their difference in form lies in this that the different preposi-
tions have been prefixed to the same root. They do not mean
different objects.
There is no need of this unheard chapter on udyoga. It is only
known to the persons mentioned in the Mahābhārata.
It is not known to persons like us.
The refutation of the hypothesis that a sentence conveys knowledge
Some thinkers hold that a sentence conveys knowledge. This
hypothesis has been already refuted since its parallel hypothesis
that a sentence conveys the knowledge of relation has been
refuted.
Pratibhā is surely a form of knowledge. It is produced by a
sentence. But it is not denoted by a sentence. Just as the
awareness of colour is produced by eyes: But colour is not an
object of them (Hence Pratibhā is not the meaning of a sen-
tence).
The upholders of the above hypothesis argue thus :-As an
external object does not exist so a sentence denotes only the
knowledge of an object. The argument does not hold good
since the existence of an external object has been proved. When
the sentence that a tiger has come is uttered different emotions
arise in the minds of courageous and timid persons. If they
know for certain that a real tiger has come then these mental
changes take place owing to their innate tendencies. But if they
have the mere idea of a tiger then such actual emotions do770
Nyāyamañjari
I
not occur. It is a fact that when a person learns from a. sen-
tence that a real tiger has come emotional change takes place
in his mind. But the mere knowledge of a tiger does not bring
about such a change. If the upholder of the above hypothesis
contends that the external object does not exist at that time
then our reply to the contention is that it is a deceptive one
and that it will not accord to the object denoted by it. But it
is also to be noted that it points to something which has no
external reality. When a real external object, say a female,
appears before us different mental reactions occur in our
mind in accordance with our innate tendencies. Some (as-
cetics) consider her to be untouchable dead body. Some (sensu-
ous persons) take her as an enjoyable object. Some beings (tigers
etc) think of her as an edible object. The different subjects
have different forms of knowledge. Similarly, when different
persons have grasped the meaning of the sentence that a tiger
has come, different mental reactions take place. The brave per-
sons are encouraged to hunt it. The timid ones are cowed down
with fear. Such mental phenomena occur. But their appearance
does not imply that a sentence denotes knowledge. Or, you may
say that a sentence implies knowledge from the pragmatic
point of view. If you like, you may subscribe to this view. But
on no account the hypothesis that a sentence denotes knowledge
or a word denotes an idea is true. Now, the upholders may
contend that though knowledge is not denoted by a sentence
yet it will constitute the meaning of a sentence like the rela-
tion of objects. An answer to this contention has been given.
The mutually related objects constitute the meaning of a sen-
tence but not the mere relation of objects. In this case too, the
objects which are presented to our consciousness constitute the
meaning of a sentence but not the knowledge of objects. More-
over, there is no hard and fast rule that the objects, denoted
by sentences, must belong to the present time like the objects
of perception. It has been argued that as sentences point to
past or future objects so they denote knowledge since objects.
are not present. The argument is not tenable since though sen-
tences indicate past or future objects yet they point to such
objects as have been proved to be real. It is superfluous to
hammer this point into their head.771
Real Nature of a Word
In fine, the meaning of a sentence is objectively real. It is
not a creation of our imagination. Even if it is held that a few
words have imaginary meanings then it is to be admitted that
these words are related to objects. The charge of falsehood
levelled against verbal knowledge on the ground that external
objects do not exist has been refuted. Thus we arrive at the
sound conclusion that verbal knowledge is true.
ÄHNIKA VI
An introductory discussion to ascertain the real nature of a word
The objector raises a question that the problem of the vali-
dity of verbal knowledge has not been as yet solved since the
source of the knowledge of the meaning of a word and that of a
sentence has not been determined.
The Naiyāyikas say in reply that they solve it thus:- Is there
any difficulty to solve the problem ? If an event follows in quick
succession an antecedent one then the latter is the cause of the
former. When one listens to a word or a sentence he is aware of
the meaning of a word or of that of a sentence. Hence a word
and a sentence condition the knowledge of the meaning of a
word and that a sentence respectively.
What is a word? And what is a sentence? As assemblage
of letters is called a word. A collocation of words is called a
sentence.
The above definitions are not satisfactory since the real
-assemblage of letters is a fiction. If it is so then how will letters
assemble to constitute a word? If the formation of a word is
impossible then a sentence which is said to be the collocation
of words is far more impossible. Again, letters cannot denote
a meaning since the problem, Do letters singly or collectively
convey a meaning ?' has not been squarely solved. Hence the
objectors hold that there is another word which is distinct from
letters. It is called sphota. This name is significant because it
communicates its meaning.
Now, the Naiyayikas may say 'Let it be so, and let a sphota
which is other than letters convey a meaning. What is the
harm to us ?' The objectors point out "Why is it not a source
of trouble to them ? The Naiyāyikas hold that a word or a
sentence is a source of true knowledge because its author is a772
Nyayamañjari
trust-worthy person. But a sphota, being eternal, does not owe
its existence to a trust-worthy person. They have proved that
a word which is a collocation of letters is non-eternal. But such
a collocation of letters is not a source of valid knowledge since
it fails to convey a meaning. But the word viz. sphoța which
communicates a meaning is not non-eternal. Hence, it has not
been effectuated by a trustworthy person. Hence the Naiyãyikas
have troubled themselves in vain, adopting a wrong track. For
this very reason the Naiyāyikas have got to prove by all means
that non-eternal letters convey a meaning and that hypothesis
of a sphota is to be refuted.
Now, the argument of the Naiyāyikas is as follows: Let us
take an example viz. the word 'gauḥ'. When the letters 'g'
etc. are presented to our consciousness we are aware of a mean-
ing. But if they are not presented to our consciousness, we
have no knowledge of its meaning. Hence the letters 'g' etc.
are competent to communicate a meaning. Again, they are
called sound since they are grasped by our auditory sense-
organ. Hence, we should not assume a word designated as
sphota since it is neither perceived nor inferred nor presented
to our consciousness.
The Refutation of the Hypothesis that Letters Convey a sense
The objector, i. e., the upholder of the hypothesis of sphoța
reviews the above criticism and says "How will your hypothesis
stand? All your hopes are shattered. How do the letters con-
vey a sense? If the letters viz.'g' etc are to communicate a
meaning then do they convey it singly or collectively? A letter
cannot singly convey a sense since when a letter is singly heard
no sense is made out. The collocation of letters is an impossi-
bility. Even if it is assumed that a collocation of letters takes
place then does it convey a sense, itself remaining unknown or
being known" ? According to the Naiyāyikas letters do not
coexist when they are not cognised since it has been proved
that sounds pass away like a dream.
Though the Mimāṁsakas hold that a sound is eternal yet all
letters from 'a' to 'z' coexist. Hence it is very difficult to deter-
mine that a definite collocation of letters expresses a precise
meaning.·
Hypothesis that letters convey a sense Refuted
773
Now, the Naiyãyikas may contend that letters do not effe-
ctuate consciousness like the eyes etc. If they had done so then
their unknown coexistence would have been enough to produce
consciousness. But as letters serve as a mark so they indicate
another object when they themselves are present and known
like smoke etc. Hence when they are presented to our conscious-
ness their assemblage is a necessary condition. But such a
collection of letters is an impossible feat. Are the letters which
constitute an assemblage uttered by a single speaker or by
many speakers ? Now, if it is held that the said assemblage is
of such letters as are uttered by many speakers then a great
uproar takes place. Letters being drowned in that uproar,
their individual distinction is hard to discern. Under these
circumstances you will think of assemblage or non-assemblage
of such letters. Even though we admit that letters anyhow assem-
ble yet such an assemblage does not convey a sense. Now, if
letters are pronounced by a single speaker then it is noted that
they are uttered with the help of different organs of speech.
They are pronounced successively but not simultaneously. Hence,
the order of succession of the appearance of letters invariably
takes place since the succession of letters has not been given up.
If such succession is admitted then a single letter should convey
a sense. But our experience contradicts the above conclusion.
Therefore, as the assumption of the assemblage or the non-assem-
blage of letters has no logical significance, letters do not convey a
sense. The same criticism holds good with regard to the pheno-
mena of consciousness, produced by letters. The events of cons-
ciousness, produced by consecutive letters cannot simultaneously
take place. If each letter successively produces an event of
consciousness the awareness of each letter should convey a sense.
Again, the upholders of this view may further contend that the
last letter of a word with the aid of impressions due to the
awareness of its antecedent letters conveys a sense. Such a con-
tention is not logically sound. The reason behind this criticism
is as follows. An impression revives the recollection only of that
object the consciousness of which has produced it (the im-
pression). But it cannot produce the consciousness of another
object. If they hold that the said impression will recall
the memory of all antecedent letters in due order andNyayamanjari
communicate its meaning then such a defence does not
hold good. If one admits it then he should also admit that
different forms of consciousness simultaneously take place
since like the memory of all letters antecedent to the last one
the knowledge of denotation should also be assembled at this
time, following the experience of the last letter. Otherwise, there
is no room for the knowledge of denotation. And for this rea-
son the simultaneity of consciousness happens to take place.
There is no sufficient reason to hold that the recollection of all
antecedent letters and the knowledge of denotation successively
come into being. If the contenders insist on the point that these
events of consciousness successively occur then at the time of
the appearance of the knowledge of denotation the memory of
antecedent letters passes away. In that case will the memory
of antecedent letter render its assistance to any body? Now
they ask 'why? We point out that different impressions recall
distinct memories but do not revive such recollection assimult-
aneously refer to many letters.
Now, the defenders may contend that there will arise a recog-
nitive judgment having a reference to past and present letters and
the letters referred to by it, will communicate a meaning. They
simply hope against hope since there is no such condition as
favours the appearance of the above judgment. The sense-organ
is not capable of grasping past letters, an impression does not
reveal a present letter and a sense-organ and an impression do
not co-operate to produce a judgment which refers to both past
and present letters. Because when an impression is revived by
the perception of a concomitant object and such other objects
it produces only memory but nothing else. Its capacity for pro-
ducing memory is only known to us. It does not render its as-
sistance to sense-organs by its operation to produce a judgment
which refers to letters.
774
Again, if letters had been held to communicate a meaning
then they would have conveyed the same sense though their
order had been inverse. Now if they hold that letters require a
definite order for the communication of meaning then they
should also think of the problem whether the order of letters is
distinct from letters or not. If the order of letters is not dis-
tinct from the letters themselves then the letters, in spite of theirHypothesis that letters convey a sense Refuted
775
interchange of place, remain the same. Then, why do not they
convey a sense, having a mutual change of place? If the order
of letters is distinct from letters themselves then something dis-
tinct is admitted to denote a meaning. In that case, the critics
express their wish to come over to this side (the side of de-
fenders).
Now, the defenders of the former hypothe is persist in arguing
to uphold their view thus :-A word is known to convey a par-
ticular meaning by means of verbal usage. A word is used by a
person and it communicates a meaning. Then the number and
the order of letters which constitute the word are observed. We
notice that a person uses a word and it conveys this meaning.
At that time we observe the definite number of letters which
constitute the word and the particular order in which the letters
are arranged. We also learn from the verbal usage that the
same member of letters arranged in the same definite order will
convey the same sense. This is our final conclusion on this point.
What is the good of chopping logic?
Kumärila has also said to this effect :-As many letters,
arranged in a definite order, are known to convey a particular
meaning so many letters, arranged in that very order, convey
the same sense.
The upholders of the hypothesis of sphota say in reply that
they should now discuss the point as to how one learns the
meaning of a word from the verbal usage of another person. If
one learns that another person understands the meaning of the
word in question then he understands that the word conveys the
same sense. When he reads the apprehension of meaning of an-
other person he observes which letters convey which sense in
which manner. As he has observed so the same number of letters
arranged in the same order will communicate the same scenes
to him. Hence, the path of the communication of meaning as
constructed by letters is very difficult to understand,
As long as questions, viz. How many letters communicate a
meaning? Which are they? In which manner do they convey
a sense? are not put to you, you go on saying that so many
letters point to a meaning, they are such and such and they con-
vey a sense in this way,776
Nyayamanjari
Sphota is an inference
From the trend of the above arguments we arrive at the con-
clusion that letters by no means convey a meaning. But it is also
a fact that when letters are uttered they communicate a mean-
ing. This knowledge of the meaning is an event in time. This
event cannot take place if there is no cause par excellence to
account for it. Hence, we hold that the cause par excellence is
sphota.
The knowledge of meaning is an effect. Let its cause be in-
ferred. Or, let it be an instance of negative inference. Or, let
it be a case of presumption. By all means one is to accept the
knowledge of meaning as an effect. On the strength of anyone
of the above arguments a cause par excellence of the said
effect is to be assumed. We suggest that the cause par excel-
lence in question is sphoța.
It is a partless whole. It is eternal. It consists of no consecu-
tive elements. Hence, defects which have been mentioned to
undermine the hypothesis that letters convey a meaning do not
affect the hypothesis that sphoța conveys a sense. Hence, sphoţa
denotes a meaning. It has been said that a meaning is communi-
cated by a word (śabda). The fifth case-ending has been attached
to the stem 'sabda' (a word). Such a usage is highly appropriate.
In other words, 'sabda' is the basic stem. It stands for sphoţa.
Now, the upholders of the above hypothesis may contend that
the word 'sabda' denotes letters and these letters convey a sense.
Even if their contention is admitted, they cannot reasonably
explain why the fifth case-ending in singular number has been
attached. If the above contention is true then the usage should
be that words communicate a meaning but not a word does it. If
a word is taken as synonymous with a sphota then it becomes
appropriate to hold that a word conveys a meaning. Thus the
case-ending in singular number and the basic stem are appro-
priately used.
Now, the upholders of the rival hypothesis take an exception to
the said conclusion and argue that the word 'fabda' does not
denote sphota. But it stands for letters since word 'sabda' denotes
audible sense-data. Letters are such sense-data. The import of
this argument is that sphota is not denoted by the word 'sabda'.
The argument does not hold good since the universal which be-Sphota as an Inference
longs to all sabdas is also audible but lacks the practical efficí-
ency of a sabda. Moreover, though the inarticulate murmur of
the spring is audible yet it cannot communicate a meaning
like a śabda. Hence, what communicates a meaning is a sabda.
A sphota-sabda communicates a meaning. But letters do not con-
vey a sense. For this reason, sphota alone deserves to be
denoted by the word śabda,
777
Now, the upholders of the rival hypothesis raise another objec-
tion that if what points to another object is śabda then smoke,
a substance, which indicates another object should be taken as
sabda. The defenders of the sphota hypothesis say in reply, "Do
not say this. When we hear at the commencement of a state-
ment 'Atra Gauh' many objects are presented to our auditory
sense-perception. Let us discern at the out-set what is a sabda
among them. We come to a decision that what communicates a
meaning is a sabda. If this conclusion is established then there
is no room for the doubt that smoke and such other substances
are ŝabdas.
Now, the upholders of the rival hypothesis advance a fresh
argument in favour of their hypothesis and point out that
if letters are present then a meaning is communicated and that
if letters are not present then a meaning is not communicated.
They make the critical remark 'How is the communication of
a meaning causally connected with a sphota ?" The defenders
of the sphota hyphothesis give a reply to the above cri-
ticism. What is not an invariable, unconditional and immediate
antecedent is not a cause. If an object invariably, unconditionally
and immediately precedes an event then the former is the cause
of the latter. Letters do not invariably, unconditionally and
immediately precede the communication of meaning. How is it
that they do not precede in such a manner? Letters manifest a
sphota at the out-set. Then a sphota communicates a meaning.
The communication of a meaning does not immediately follow
the hearing of letters. The manifestation of a sphoța takes place.
The immediate antecedence of letters is thus contradicted.
Therefore letters are not the cause of the communication of a
meaning. A sphota really communicates a meaning. But the
people mistake that letters have communicated a meaning,778
Nyayamanjari
The manifestation of a sphoța by letters
Now if it is held that a sphota is manifested by letters
then where are those riddles which beset the hypothesis that
letters communicate a meaning? The riddles are as follows. Do
letters singly manifest a sphoţa? Or, do letters collectively
manifest á sphoța? Kumärila Bhaṭṭa has raised a few problems.
as to the manifestation of a sphota by letters.
Those who hold that the apprehension of letters conditions
the manifestation of a partless sphoţa are not immune from the
above questions. Sabara, the great commentator has also raised
a question that if impressions due to the experience of letters are
assumed then an invisible agency is postulated. But he has
solved the question thus: In order to get rid of such an assump-
tion if a sphoța is postulated then two such assumptions are
made. We are to assume the very invisible impression and
over and above it a sphoța-a distinct thing, is to be assumed.
The defenders of the sphota hypothesis meet the above
objection thus: They hold that the above criticism does not
affect their hypothesis. The above riddles do not arise with
regard to the manifestation of a sphoța. If the critics ask
'why' then the reply is as follows. A band of thinkers defends
the hypothesis in this way. When the first letter is heard a
sphota is manifested. The second letter and the rest ones are
not to be taken as superfluous since they make an improvement
upon the manifestation of a sphoța. Let us cite a parallel case.
Those who test a gem do not clearly grasp its true character at
the first sight. Though the true character of the gem is not
clearly manifested at that time yet it clearly reveals itself to his
mind when it is repeatedly examined.
Similarly, in this case too when the first letter of a word is
heard a sphota is manifested. Though its manifestation takes
place yet the speaker will employ the other letters in order to
make the said manifestation much more vivid and distinct.
Inarticulate sounds manifest a phoja
Some other followers of the sphota school hold that inar-
ticulate sound (dhvani) is the only manifester of a sphota.
The essence of a dhvani consists in the air. These airs in thePerceptibility of a Sphota
779
shape of dhvanis manifest a sphoţa which is partless. When a
sphota is manifested it comes in contact with the organs of
speech viz. palate etc. which are the source of letters. After-
wards this very contact acts like a limiting adjunct. It eclipses
the real character of a sphoța and makes it appear as one
having many parts such as letters etc. As the air is constantly
flowing so dhvanis pass away after they have been pronounced.
They manifest the imaginary forms of a sphoţa. Our experience
teaches that a thing appears to be what it is not when it
becomes associated with a limiting adjunct. Let us take an
example to illustrate our point. When one looks at his face
through the different media such as a sword, a gem and a
mirror, his face appears to be dark, long etc. The same musical
note assumes various forms when it is manifested by the various
musical instruments such as a lute, a flute, a small drum, a big
drum etc. For the reason stated above letters are mere appeara-
nces but not real. Moreover, they do not manifest a sphota.
Therefore, how can the above riddles, viz., 'Does a letter singly
manifest a sphoța ? Do letters collectively manifest a sphoța*
etc. exert their influence upon the hypothesis in question.
The appearance of letters is due to association with limiting
adjuncts. These letters have only imaginary forms. The up-
holders of the rival hypothesis say, 'It is observed by the joint
method of agreement and difference that letters condition the
communication of meaning.' On the basis of this observation.
they also hold that the assumption of a sphota involves two
assumptions. They say in reply to the above objection, that if
they admit the existence of a sphota, they make no assumption
not to speak of double assumptions.
In fine, a sphota conveys a sense and letters are not the
invariable condition of communicating a sense. They are to be
taken as superfluous for this purpose. This conclusion which is
arrived at is incontestable.
The Perceptibility of a sphota
Moreover, the logicians of the Nyaya school of thought take
delight in argumentation. In order to please them we have
shown that a sphota is an inference. But we do not really780
Nyayamanjari
subscribe to this hypothesis. Our conclusive view is this that a
sphota, being perceived by our auditory organ, is a percept.
Some critics have made an adverse comment on this hypo-
thesis. They remark that the sphoţa-vädins persue a hide and
seek policy with regard to sphoțas and letters. Though letters
are perceived yet they are held as not perceived since they are
unlucky. But though a sphota is not perceived yet it is held as
perceived since it is lucky.
2
The sphoţa-vădins give the following rejoinder to the above
criticism. They point out that they do not say that letters are
not perceived. But they hold that though letters are non-
existent yet they are presented to consciousness through the
influence of a condition. They mean to say that a sphoța
appears as a letter when it is associated with a dhvani. Let us
take a parallel case. A face appears to be long etc. when it is
looked at through a reflecting glass. A single individual sound
in the shape of a sphota is presented to our consciousness. It is
absolutely partless. It is presented to our consciousness as a
single entity, e. g. a word and a sentence. But letters are not
presented to our consciousness when we are aware either
of a word or of a sentence. The consciousness of a universal
does not refer to individuals to which the universal belongs.
The awareness of a whole does not refer to parts in which the
whole inheres. The consciousness of a word or that of a
sentence is not illusory just as the presentation of an army
or of a forest as a single unity. Many individual soldiers are
presented to our consciousness and they are taken as a single
unit, viz. an army. Many trees are perceived and are taken
as a single unit, viz. a forest. But we do not perceive many
letters and take them as a single word. Similarly, we do not
perceive many words and take them as a single sentence. The
oneness of a word or of a sentence is not a construction of
our imagination since it is not contradicted by a sound
experience. Now, our critics may suggest that the awareness
of the oneness of a word or of a sentence is also an appear-
ance since it is conditional. A word appears as one since it
produces the knowledge of a single object. A sentence appears
as one since it produces a judgment which refers to a singleProof of a Väkyasphota
781
object in the shape of a relational whole. Thus, the awareness of
the oneness of a word or of a sentence is conditional.
The sphota-vadins say in reply to this criticism, 'How does
the communication of a single object take place?' The
awareness of the meaning of a word or of a sentence presup-
poses the consciousness of a word or of a sentence. If the unity
of the awareness of the meaning of a word or of a sentence
conditions the unity of the consciousness of a word or of a
sentence then this solution involves the irrefutable fallacy
of a vicious circle. Similarly, the unity of the consciousness
of a universal or of a whole may be as well held to be condi-
tional. But the Naiyāyikas meet this charge with the remark
that the consciousness in question is true since it is a piece of
uncontradicted experience and is beyond the shade of a doubt,
the sphoța-vādins may also point out that they may also put
forward the same argument in favour of their hypothesis.
Therefore, the consciousness of a word refers to a pada-
sphota and the consciousness of a sentence refers to a vakya-
sphota. The sphota is thus perceived. A pada-sphoța commu-
nicates the meaning of a word. And a vākya-sphota communi-
cates the meaning of a sentence.
The proof of a vākya-sphota
The critics open their criticism thus. If a sphoța-śabda is
partless then a sentence is also a sphota but nothing else. As
such it, should not consist of parts, viz. words. Again, if the
sphota-vādins hold that a sentence consists of words as its part
then words should also consist of parts in the shape of letters.
The sphota-vadins say in reply to the above criticism : Our
heart leaps with joy on hearing the above remark. We think
that the lamp of conscience of the long-lived one will be
kindled. You will take our point of view and think aright
when you will be initiated into it. You are under the sway of
illusion that different letters exist. But they do not really
exist. A sphota, being associated with various dhvanis, appears
as different letters. In order to enlighten you we have shown
before that a pada-sphota is partless. But really speaking, a
pada-sphota does not constitute the part of a sentence. A
sentence is partless. It conveys a meaning which consists of782
Nyāyamanjari
no parts. As a word is partless so a sentence is also partless
and a word does not constitute its part.
Some other thinkers also hold that as a word does not
belong to a sentence as its part so the meaning of a word does
not belong to the meaning of a sentence as its part. A sentence
and its meaning are partless. If one imagines that a sentence
consists of parts then an absurd conclusion will be inevitable.
Let us clearly state our argument. Suppose, a sentence
consists of parts. Words constitute its parts. Letters cons-
titute the parts of a word. A letter should also consist of
parts. These parts should also consist of parts. An unending
series of parts will go on. There will be no resting place of
our imagination. Owing to the regressus ad infinitum no
solution will be arrived at.
If y you stop the process of vivisection into parts on reaching
letters then why should you not stop it at a sentence? The
consciousness of the meaning of a sentence is like an integrate
whole which admits of no division. Such an awareness can
only owe its existence to such a sentence as is individual.
Those who commence verbal communication learn the usage
of language together with its import from the uses of the
experienced ones. The experienced ones do never employ
words unnecessarily since mere words do not play an impor-
tant part in a verbal transaction. A sentence renders a useful
service in such transaction, if one is initiated into the use of
a sentence. A sense is definitely grasped from it. What
appears to be part of a sentence is nothing but an appearance.
The meaning of a sentence is also an indivisible whole. It
admits of internal diversity like a man-lion. A man-lion is a
class by itself. It is neither a man nor a lion. Similarly,
the meaning of a sentence is distinct from that of words like
sweet drink etc. As sweet drink has its separate existence it is
distinct from sugar, fragrant Nagakeśara and peppercorn, as
a picture is distinct from vermilion, red Arsenic, lac etc. as a
mixed tune is distinct from gamut, so a sentence is distinct
from words and the meaning of sentence is distinct from
those (the meanings) of constituent words.Parts of a sentence not real
The Unreality of parts of a
Sentence
If the above account is true then how do we think that words
are parts of a sentence? In reply to the above question we say
that such a division of a sentence into parts is merely imagina-
ry but not real. Now, you may contend that parts of a sentence
are not merely imaginary since words being syntactically relat-
ed to a sentence their meanings are seen to be related to the
meaning of a sentence. The contention is not tenable since if
from the words kūpa, sūpa and yūpa a letter, from each word
is taken out and a word is framed then no sense is made out.
Again, if one merely follows another then the latter should not
be the cause of the former. A cloud of dust follows an elephant,
a horse etc, It is generally held that the elephant, the horse
etc. are the cause of the cloud of dust. Similarly, the cloud of
dust is seen to follow a row of ants. Hence, a row of ants sho-
uld be held as the cause of the cloud of dust (The sense of this
argument is that mere sequence does not help to determine the
relation of causality holding between the antecedent and the
consequent events. Similarly, the causal relation does not hold
between the meaning of words and the meaning of a sentence
though the latter is preceded by the former).
Hence words which consist of the two elements, viz., the
basic element and the suffix are not real. We also imagine that
they have meanings. The imaginary meaning of these words is
resorted to as the condition of the meaning of a sentence. But
such a meaning is never noticed as a real existent object like a
Sāla tree (a kind of teak tree). It is also seen that even an im-
aginary object is a means to the realisation of a real object
since false snake-bite and the like effectuate actual death. The
alphabets of our scripts are not real letters which we pronou-
nce. But they help us to make out the real sense of a sentence.
You cannot contend that these alphabets are real. They are
essentially lines but not letters. Being lines they cannot convey
a sense. If we take a line to be the letter 'g' then it conveys a
meaning. It enjoys a real existence as a line. In that capacity
it fails to convey a meaning. It is not real in that capacity in
which it conveys a meaning. In other words, the alphabets are
real in the sense of lines but lines they convey havenosense. They
enjoy imaginary existence as letters. But they convey sense as
783782
Nyayamanjari
no parts. As a word is partless so a sentence is also partless
and a word does not constitute its part.
Some other thinkers also hold that as a word does not
belong to a sentence as its part so the meaning of a word does
not belong to the meaning of a sentence as its part. A sentence
and its meaning are partless. If one imagines that a sentence
consists of parts then an absurd conclusion will be inevitable.
Let us clearly state our argument. Suppose, a sentence
consists of parts. Words constitute its parts. Letters cons-
titute the parts of a word. A letter should also consist of
parts. These parts should also consist of parts. An unending
series of parts will go on. There will be no resting place of
our imagination. Owing to the regressus ad infinitum no
solution will be arrived at.
If you stop the process of vivisection into parts on reaching
letters then why should you not stop it at a sentence? The
consciousness of the meaning of a sentence is like an integrate
whole which admits of no division. Such an awareness can
only owe its existence to such a sentence as is individual.
Those who commence verbal communication learn the usage
of language together with its import from the uses of the
experienced ones. The experienced ones do never employ
words unnecessarily since mere words do not play an impor-
tant part in a verbal transaction. A sentence renders a useful
service in such transaction, if one is initiated into the use of
a sentence. A sense is definitely grasped from it. What
appears to be part of a sentence is nothing but an appearance.
The meaning of a sentence is also an indivisible whole. It
admits of internal diversity like a man-lion. A man-lion is a
class by itself. It is neither a man nor a lion. Similarly,
the meaning of a sentence is distinct from that of words like
sweet drink etc. As sweet drink has its separate existence it is
distinct from sugar, fragrant Nagakeśara and peppercorn, as
a picture is distinct from vermilion, red Arsenic, lac etc. as a
mixed tune is distinct from gamut, so a sentence is distinct
from words and the meaning of sentence is distinct from
those (the meanings) of constituent words.783
Parts of a sentence not real
The Unreality of parts of a
Sentence
If the above account is true then how do we think that words
are parts of a sentence? In reply to the above question we say
that such a division of a sentence into parts is merely imagina-
ry but not real. Now, you may contend that parts of a sentence
are not merely imaginary since words being syntactically relat-
ed to a sentence their meanings are seen to be related to the
meaning of a sentence. The contention is not tenable since if
from the words kūpa, sūpa and yüpa a letter, from each word
is taken out and a word is framed then no sense is made out.
Again, if one merely follows another then the latter should not
be the cause of the former. A cloud of dust follows an elephant,
a horse etc, It is generally held that the elephant, the horse
etc. are the cause of the cloud of dust. Similarly, the cloud of
dust is seen to follow a row of ants. Hence, a row of ants sho-
uld be held as the cause of the cloud of dust (The sense of this
argument is that mere sequence does not help to determine the
relation of causality holding between the antecedent and the
consequent events. Similarly, the causal relation does not hold
between the meaning of words and the meaning of a sentence
though the latter is preceded by the former).
Hence words which consist of the two elements, viz., the
basic element and the suffix are not real. We also imagine that
they have meanings. The imaginary meaning of these words is
resorted to as the condition of the meaning of a sentence. But
such a meaning is never noticed as a real existent object like a
Šāla tree (a kind of teak tree). It is also seen that even an im-
aginary object is a means to the realisation of a real object
since false snake-bite and the like effectuate actual death. The
alphabets of our scripts are not real letters which we pronou-
nce. But they help us to make out the real sense of a sentence.
You cannot contend that these alphabets are real. They are
essentially lines but not letters. Being lines they cannot convey
a sense. If we take a line to be the letter 'g' then it conveys a
meaning. It enjoys a real existence as a line. In that capacity
it fails to convey a meaning. It is not real in that capacity in
which it conveys a meaning. In other words, the alphabets are
real in the sense of lines but lines they convey have no sense. They
enjoy imaginary existence as letters. But they convey sense asNyāyamanjari
letters. Thus, an imaginary object may be the condition of a
real event.
784
Those who subscribe to the view that words are constituted
by letters hold that parts of words, viz., the basic element, the
suffix etc., do really exist since they are presented to our con-
sciousness as such and are the source of the communication of
the meaning of a word. The sphoța-vādins join issue with them
and hold that the above contention is not sound. The etymologi-
cal derivation of a word admits of so many diverse ways that it
is difficult to find out all of them. Let us take an example, viz.,
the word 'bhavati'. Sometimes the derivation of the word has
been given thus - the root 'bhü' constitutes the basic element.
Sometimes the suffix 'kvip' is attached to the word 'bhava'.
Thus the noun 'bhava' is converted into the verb 'bhava'.
Verbal termination is attached to it. The complete word
'bhavati' is thus framed. Thus we see that in order to derive a
word we have recourse to various tactics, viz., pratyaya, ädeśa,
āgama, guņa, vṛddhi and the dropping of a letter, etc., Thus,
the process of derivation is very conflicting. There is no straight
way of derivation. Is the splitting up of a word into two
elements, viz., the basic element and the suffix real? This
is the basic element and this is the suffix. This division of a
word into two parts is purely imaginary.
In order to determine the meaning of a sentence the mean-
ings of words have been selected by imagination and held
apart. Bhartrhari in his Väkyapadiya has said to this effect.
Some specialists in Etvmology have drawn out words from
partless sentences by their pure imagination and divided
them into two. four or five classes. This division resembles
the splitting up of a word into two elements, viz., the basic
element and the suffix.
Moreover, if these words had been real then they would
have been presented to our consciousness in their unalterable
forms. But their forms are alterable. (They mislead listeners.)
Sphota Enjoys the Status of the Absolute
Now the critics of the doctrine of sphota raise a problem.
As the sphoţa-vädins hold that letters are not parts of a word
and words are not parts of a sentence so the clauses are not to beSphota as the Absolute
785
held as parts of a complex sentence. For this very reason com-
plete sentences included in the chapter of a book should not
enjoy real existence. And for the same reason the chapters of
a treatise should have no reality. Is it the very reason at the
root of the conclusion that the sästra aims at teaching one indivi-
sible truth without the second ?
A rejoinder to the above criticism is as follows. If you
seriously desire to know the essence of our doctrine then, O
good sir, you may follow it. Sabda is the Absolute. It is the
One without a second. Various tendencies of thought arise
from the beginningless Nescience. It eclipses the One and dis-
torts it. It makes the Sabda Brahman appear as different
meanings. A meaning has no separate existence apart from its
denotative word. Therefore, the distinction holding between a
word and its meaning is purely imaginary. Everybody takes
shelter in Nescience as a real means to true knowledge. The
real essence of everything in this universe is śabda since every
form of consciousness is interpenetrated by. There is no such
form of consciousness as is not associated with verbal expression.
It has been stated by Bhartṛhari in his Vākyapadiya (1.125).
The essence of consciousness is the state of being intermingled
with words. No piece of consciousness can be dissociated from
verbal expression. If any piece of consciousness ceases to
be associated with words then it cannot reveal its content, viz.,
the subject and the predicate. Because a judgment expresses
the distinction between the subject and the predicate only in
and through the medium of verbal expression. Hence consci-
ousness is indissolubly associated with the verbal expression.
The above verbal expression (vâk) has been duly divided
into three classes, víz., (1) Vaikhari, (2) Madhyamā and (3)
Pasyanti. Of these three the first form of Vâk is the totality of
all manifest letters. The manifestation of these letters such as
'g' etc. is due to a number of conditions such as the different
limbs, viz., the throat, the palate etc., the vocal organ, and the
different efforts of the inner air in successive orders. The con-
tact of our body with the vocal organ is called vaikhara. The
vāk which is manifested in the place of such contact is known
as vaikhari. Some other thinkers have also subscribed to this
hypothesis.786
Nyayamanjari
The vak which assumes the form of letters is called
vaikhari. The assumption of such a form is due to the opera-
tion of the vital breath of the speakers. But the manifestation
of letters takes place when the said air blows over some parti-
cular limbs in a distinct manner.
The second form of vak consists of a series of inarticulate
sounds only grasped by our internal organ. We come across a
group of common letters which may pass for a noun or for a verb.
There is no mark of distinction. In other words, there is a series
of letters. We may arrange these letters in different groups. The
first groups of letters may be presented to our consciousness as
nouns and verbs. The same letters which constitute (nouns may
constitute) verbs if they are included in the different groups of
letters. Thus, the same letters constitute both nouns and verbs.
Hence, words have no definite form and character. As their
forms vary so they have imaginary being. Hence they are not
real. As their character is ever changing so we cannot make
out the sense of a sentence spoken to us by a speaker. Let us
take an example "kālena dantināgāstvam", and analyse it into
words that are supposed to constitute it. The above sentence
gives out two senses. In order to suit the sense words are diffe-
rent. Though the above sentence is split up into different sets of
words in conformity to the different senses yet the letters remain
the same. The sentence may give the following meaning
"You have come on a dark elephant" (kālena kṛṣṇena dantinā
hastinā āgās tvam). Shall we accept the above meaning and
arrange words accordingly? The sentence may also give
the following sense that elephants roar or snakes hiss in
time. Words which constitute the sentence are as follows -
(Käle samaye nadanti śabdãyante nägāḥ kariņaḥ phaṇino vā).
Or, shall we accept the second meaning and arrange words
accordingly? Hence, as there is no rule for the division of a
sentence into words so this division of words and their meanings
is imaginary but not real.
The upholders of the hypothesis that a sentence is consti-
tuted by words may contend that the splitting up of a sentence
into words with their proper meanings will be settled in accor-
dance with the first meaning which a sentence conveys. In reply
to this contention it may be said that if this is admitted then whySphota as the Absolute
787
shall we make arrangements for splitting up a sentence into
words? When the sense of a sentence has been gathered what
is the good of splitting up a sentence into words? Moreover
let us take two examples, viz., dadhyatra and madhvatra. In
these two cases though the vowel 'i' in dadhi and vowel 'u' in
madhu are not visible yet they conveysense as we all know.
Hence the division of a sentence into words and the division of a
word into letters are not real. Therefore, we arrive at the true
conclusion that a sentence admits of no parts and that a part-
less sentence conveys a sense which admits of no parts. It does
not consist of manifest letters which are grasped by the auditory
sense-organ. Such a form of Vāk is called Madhyama. Some
other thinkers also hold a similar view. The form of Vâk which
entirely depends upon the function of our intellect and having
transgressed the operation of the vital breath flows on in a
successive series is known as Madhyama. The form of Vāk
which is self-luminous consciousness and whose flow in a series
of successive events is not noticed is called Paśyanti. Some
other thinkers have also contributed to a similar view.
The form of Vak which realises its identity with inner
consciousness and has given up its march in a series of flowing
events for good is eternal and very subtle. It is called
Paśyanti.
As the subject matter under discussion is very lengthy, we
shall not hold elaborate discussion on it since such a discussion
will surely interfere with the elaboration of the relevant topic.
In the present context the above account of the said thesis will
suffice. The people employ sentences in order to transact all
verbal intercourse with others since words and letters fail to
render the above service. A sentence is not a whole consisting of
parts. Hence the distinction which holds good between a whole
and its parts does not apply to a sentence. A sentence admits of
no parts. It conveys its sense as a partless non composite thing.
The meaning which it conveys is also partless. Clauses (i.c.
incomplete sentences) are also worthy of being employed since
our verbal transaction is accomplished by them. Hence, we do
not deny existence to them. But this procedure owes its origin
to the state of ignorance. Let this path of verbal transaction
continue to exist as it is seen. But when true knowledge will dawn788
Nyayamanjari
all these hypotheses will be falsified. But no verbal transaction
can be conducted by means of mere words and letters since mere
words and letters are never employed. Under these circumsta-
nces we do not consider it to be wise to hold that words and
letters enjoy real existence.
In fine, Vákya-sphoța is indivisible one. It admits of no
changes i.e. successive states. It conveys a meaning which is
similar to it in every respect. But all these letters are very
short-lived by their intrinsic nature. They absolutely depend
upon imagination for their existence. They do not constitute
one of the necessary conditions of communicating the meaning
of a sentence. Therefore, there is no need of discussing this
topic to a greater length.
An Introduction to the Refutation of Sphota
The refutation of the sphota-hypothesis is as follows. How
do you postulate the hypothesis of existence of a sphoța? What
is your basis? Do you admit the existence of sphoța on the
strength of an inference? Or, do you do it on the stronger
evidence of perception? You cannot establish the existence of
a sphoța by means of an inference since the letters which are
arranged in a definite visible order convey a meaning, being
thus arranged.
The Establishment of the Hypothesis that Letters Convey a Meaning
The Sphota-Vâdins raise an objection to the above
solution. They hold that dilemmas have been put forward.
These dilemmas clearly indicate that letters neither singly nor
collectively convey a meaning. Therefore, the thesis that
letters convey a meaning has been refuted. An answer to this
argument is as follows. The said criticism is not sound. The
dilemmas, advanced by the critics, are specimens of bad logic.
When letters stand apart, without being related to one another
they individually convey no meaning. But when they are
united with one another to form a collection they collectively
convey a meaning.
The possibility of the collection of letters has been gain-
said because they appear successively. Such a criticism is not
sound. Though letters come into being in succession yet theyRefutation of Sphota
789
conjointly produce an effect. There are several instances which
show that the succeeding phenomena form a collection and
conjointly produce an effect. As three slabs of stone which are
simultaneously placed on an even spot keep a vessel on them
so it is seen that all morsels of food taken one after another con-
jointly make one effect, viz., the feeling of satisfaction. If one
of these morsels is left out then such satisfaction does not arise.
Hence, this satisfaction is the conjoint effect of all morsels of
food. But none can swallow up all morsels of food at a time.
Though morsels of food are successively swallowed up yet their
collection takes place. In connection with the various forms of
Soma sacrifice the number of repetitions of the recitation of a
particular Anuvāka (a group of hymns) varies. If the recita-
tion of the said Anuvaka is not repeated as many times as
has been prescribed then the enjoined fruit is not obtained.
Even if the number is less by one, the fruit will not accrue to
the performer of sacrifice. Hence in the Vedic literature the
conjoint action of the successive acts has been acknowledged.
So in the secular matters we have also seen that the successive
phenomena mutually co-operate to bring about an effect. In
other words, the combination of successive phenomena takes
place to achieve a common end. Let us quote another example
from the Vedas to illustrate our point of view. Darša sacrifice
(a sacrifice to be performed on the day of new moon) and
Pūrņa-māsa sacrifice (a sacrifice to be performed on the full
moon day) are mutually connected as the Dvandva compound
conveying the sense of conjunction indicates. In other words,
the combination of these two sacrifices has been admitted.
These two are main sacrifices. Each of them has many subsi-
diary sacrifices known as Agneyas (dedicated to Agni) and
others. The subsidiary sacrifices of the one are to be performed
during (the dark fortnight). And the subsidiary of the other ones
are to be performed during (the bright fort-night) day. Hence,
the successiveness of these acts is unavoidable. In spite of their
successiveness they are observed to render assistance to the
main act. Similarly, the Vedic priest presses Soma creeper and
extracts juice out of it in order to offer it to Indra and Väyu
and separately does the same act for the twin gods Ašvins.
When he repeatedly presses Soma creeper to draw out juice790
Nyayamanjari
for Indra and Vayu he recites only a single mantra. The first
series of acts of pressing Soma creeper done for Indra and Väyu
is an instance of joint action. The second series of acts done
in honour of Aśvins follows the first one. Hence, these two
acts take place successively. But the first series of acts which
is a combined one and the successive second series of acts conjo-
intly render an assistance to the accomplishment of the main
act. Hence, the collection of successive phenomena is not
incompatible. Thus, though letters appear successively yet they
will combine themselves to convey a meaning.
The refutation of the hypothesis that a sphoța is an inference
The sphoța-vādins raise a few objections to the above solu-
tion offered by the rival party. They say 'We admit your
statement about several swallowings of morsels and repeated
recitations of hymns in connection with the various forms of
Soma sacrifice since they conjointly produce an effect and
successively come into being. It is also noticed by all that
they gradually produce their effect. Now, the Naiyãyikas put
a counter question to them. If your statement is correct then
do you observe that Agneya sacrifices and such other sacrifices
gradually produce an effect?' The Sphota-vadins say in reply
to this question, 'We hold that they bring about minor
Apūrvas. We also hold on the strength of the authority of the
Vedas that when all the minor sacrifices viz., Agneya etc.
will be completely performed the main Apūrva will be
accomplished.' Now, the Naiyāyikas take an exception to
this solution and raise a few questions. An Agneya sacrifice
is a process. It consists of several short-lived acts which are
successive. Does each constituent act of Agneya sacrifice
gradually contribute something towards the appearance of the
minor Apūrva, the ultimate result of Agneya sacrifice? Have
you got an experience of such contribution? Do minor
Apūrvas individually produce parts of heavenly bliss? They
cannot produce such parts since the main act remains unper-
formed as yet. Therefore the collection of minor Apūrvas has
got no important part to play. But they play some insignifi-
cant part to bring about the ultimate result. Their efficacy isSphota not an Inference
not denied since the main sacrifice will be defective without
their performance. Now, the Naiyãyikas turn their attention
to their main thesis and say, "It is not a fact that we cannot
show that letters contribute something towards the communi-
cation of meaning as the minor Apūrvas have a little contri-
bution towards the main sacrifice." If you ask "What is the
effect of these letters?" then we say in reply "Either the
perception of each letter will be the effect produced by each
letter or the impression of each letter due to such perception
will be its effect."
791
Now, the Sphoţa-vădins take an exception to the above
solution of the Naiyãyikas and point out that the relation
which obtains between parts and a whole does not subsist
between the two sets of minor sacrifices and the main sacri-
fice. The Naiyāyikas say in reply that though the said relation
does not hold yet the above two sacrifices contribute their
useful quota towards the completion of the main sacrifice.
They also point out in this connection that the part-and-
whole-relation is hard to establish between the minor Apūrva
and the main Apūrva. It is also to be noted that words, i. e.
parts of speech, clearly play an important role as parts of a
sentence. They communicate the meanings of words. These
meanings constitute parts of the meaning of a sentence. In
this respect, they stand above all criticism. Let us now com-
pare and contrast the mode of operation of the different letters
with that of the different acts cited as examples. The act of
going is not a long process. It comprises within itself a series
of transient acts. When we say that a man goes to a village
from a particular place he slowly moves towards it. Each
constituent act perceptibly contributes something towards the
realisation of the final goal. Similarly, each swallowing of
morsel brings about satisfaction to some degree. In this way,
the minor sacrifices gradually help towards the realisation
of the final end, the ultimate result of the main sacrifice. In
all these cases, the final result is gradually achieved. But
letters do not contribute towards the gradual communication
of the sense of a word. In spite of this contrast letters produce
their impressions and memories since they are vividly perceiv-
ed. As they produce these effects so the main object, viz., theNyayamanjari
communication of the meaning of a word, is actualised. Hence,
there is no exception to contribution on the part of letters to-
wards the slow but progressive realisation of the main object.
In other words, letters behave in the same way like the examp-
les quoted above. But there is a bit difference in the mode of
operation of these letters. A word consists of a few letters.
Among them all the antecedent letters excepting the last one are
past when they render service. But the last letter bodily exists at
the time of rendering an assistance to the communication
of the meaning of a word. In the manner just stated the collo-
cation of letters conveys the sense of a word just as the
imaginary momentary acts bring about the ultimate result.
The adjective imaginary requires an explanation. These
acts have real existence. But they are short-lived. When the
actual result is brought about they cease to exist. In that case,
the causal relation cannot hold between them and the ultimate
result. (So Jayanta holds that their presence is imagined).
Though these letters are successively perceived yet a recog-
nitive judgment of inner perception like an introspection will
arise. It will refer to all the letters. It will help to communi-
cate the meaning of a word. Suppose, a few objects have
perished and have been perceived one after another. Still, our
experience says that there arises a recognitive inner perception
which refers to all those past objects. Let us cite an example.
Devadatta ate a hundred mangoes. No body can deny exist-
ence to this judgment. It is not also an instance of doubtful
knowledge. It is not also an erroneous judgment which is
contradicted by a subsequent judgment. If a copulative judg-
ment of this sort is not assumed then many verbal usages based
upon the similar judgments should be discredited. The judg-
ment in question refers to past letters, the objects of recollection
and to the last letter which is an object of present perception.
Thus it refers to both types of letters existent and non-existent.
Hence one cannot but admit that it has a peculiar form. Or,
if the said judgment arises after the passing away of the last
letter then it refers only to non-existent letters. And as such it
has no peculiar form. This judgment alone conditions the
communication of the meaning of a word. Therefore, the
vicious dilemmas, viz., 'Do letters singly convey the sense of a
792793
Sphota not an Inference
word or not?', 'Do letters collectively convey the sense of a
word or not?" etc. are now pointless.
Now, the Sphota-vãdins raise another point by way of criti-
cism. They hold that if the said letters are serially presented
to the above copulative judgment then this judgment is no
better than the perception of each discrete letter. In that
case, though all letters are presented to this copulative judg-
ment yet the collocation of all letters cannot help the communi-
cation of the meaning of a word. But if all letters are synthe-
sised by the said judgment like a bunch of flowers then the
order of succession of all letters being not referred to by the
judgment, these letters should condition the conveying of the
sense of a word though they are arranged in a reverse order.
The Naiyâyikas meet this objection thus: A mere copulative
judgment does not condition the communication of the sense of
a word. The required judgment which immediately follows
the perception of letters arranged in a distinct order of succes-
sion causes the communication of the meaning of a word. This
judgment is not the presentation of letters merely arranged like
a bunch of flowers.
If this is the case then how do you entertain a doubt about
the arrangement of letters in a reverse order? Again, if the
said judgment were the presentation of letters like a bunch of
flowers then there would have not arisen the question of the
order of arrangement reverse or non-reverse i.e. actual since in a
bunch of flowers no order of the arrangement of followers is
followed. This copulative judgment which refers to a definite
number of letters follows in close succession to the antecedent
acts of perception caused by these letters. The acts of perce-
ption reveal the serial order of the said letters. Hence, how
can the reversal of the serial order of these letters take place ?
These letters which are grasped by the first experience follow a
definite serial order. They being arranged in that very order
are referred to by the successive copulative judgment. These
letters as presented by the copulative judgment make way
for the communication of the meaning of a word, constitu-
ed by them. Hence, our hypothesis suffers from no defect.
Another alternative suggestion may be possible. Sabara, the
authoritative commentator on the Mimārisă Sūtras, has describ-Nyāyamanjari
ed that the last letter of a word accompanied by the impre-
ssions of its previous letters, convey the sense of a word,
constituted by them. All letters communicate the meaning of
words, constituted by them in the same manner.
We have already said what we should say now with regard
to this subject-matter. We have stated that an impression does
not produce the knowledge of the meaning of a word. It simply
revives our memory. This is what our experience teaches.
Now a question arises in our mind, Viz., 'It is a royal
mandate that an impression shall produce memory only?' An
answer to this question is this that it is the mandate of
logic but not that of a king. An impression is not a distinct
substratum. When we carefully know an object and repeat its
knowledge with all seriousness the traces of knowledge are
called an impression which can revive memory only. It is only
inferred from its effect, viz., recollection. It is not perceived.
It is a kind of faculty. It is not possible for an impression
which itself is an after effect of knowledge to be able to generate
the new knowledge of an object. Can it produce an effect other
than that for which it has been postulated? An impression which
revives memory owes its origin to the apprehension of an object.
If one holds that an impression generates the apprehension
of an object, he speaks of a novel type of impression. It is very
difficult on our part to find out the cause of such an impression.
Really speaking, we find none. Therefore, an impression can-
not be the cause of the apprehension of an object.
The above argument is not sound. A person who possesses
the impression of a letter arising from apprehension is seen to
apprehend an object. Thus a saṁskāra (impression) is not
merely such a faculty as exclusively generates recollection. It
is an attribute of the soul. It is called vasanã : (It is the resi-
duum of an apprehension like the fragrance of a flower which
has been removed). It is capable of producing the apprehen-
sion of an object just as it generates memory. In every case,
we say whatever is in accordance with experience. Our experi-
ence is the source of true knowledge. On the strength of our
experience we admit that an impression is competent to pro-
duce memory. Our experience also teaches that the knowledge
of an object arises from impression. Letters and their appreh-
794Sphota not an Inference
795
ension have almost simultaneously taken place. No other sound
is presented to our consciousness. We shall ask our opponents to
consider this aspect of the above problem. The knowledge of an
object takes place in our mind.
We cannot say that such an
event occurs without any cause.
As it cannot happen without
any cause so it necessarily implies its cause. An impression is the
cause par excellence of such knowledge. Thus, the knowledge
of an object, depending on impression like memory, suggests that
the impression is the cause.
Now, a question arises, viz., "What is the cause of an
impression ? This is a foolish question since it is well-known
that an impression owes its origin to the apprehension of an
object. Some logicians say 'It is natural law that the vivid
apprehension of an object produces impression which is the
cause of memory.'
of
Now, a fresh question arises in our mind. How does an
impression which generates memory effectuate the apprehen-
sion of an object? The sense of the question is that the
apprehension of an object is presentative in its character.
Hence, how can an impression bring it about? If it is effectuat-
ed by an impression then it will be representative. There is no
hard and fast rule that an impression shall produce memory
only. The apprehension of an object produces a special kind
of impression. When the apprehension of an object of a par-
ticular type comes into being and no adequate cause is found
out to account for its existence it is said that such an apprehen-
sion owes its existence to this type of impression. Various types
of effects are explained only on the assumption of diverse types
causes. This hypothesis is based on the solid rock of experience.
We are not wedded to an opinion that an impression is the
direct cause of the knowledge of the meaning of a word. It is a
It will produce such knowledge through the
medium of memory. Let us explain the second hypothesis. A
word generally consists of a few letters. All its constituent letters
are not simultaneously pronounced. When the last letter is
pronounced almost all antecedent letters have passed away.
When the last letter is heard the memory of the past ones
is recalled by their impressions. Thus, we may have the
knowledge of the meaning of the said word through
remote cause.796
Nyayamanjari
the instrumentality of letters which areremembered and of
the letter which is apprehended. Thus we see that
hypothesis suffers from no defects.
Now, the Sphoţa-vādins raise a fresh problem. The letters
of a word which are now past have not been simultaneously
presented to our consciousness. They have been gradually heard
by us. Thus the impression of each letter has been generated by
the experience of each letter. As memory depends upon the
efficacy of an impression so each letter should be separately
remembered. Thus all letters shall be consecutively but not
simultaneously remembered. This being the possible course of
events, all letters are not simultaneously recollected. Thus as
the combination of letters is not possible so all defects, stated
before, vítiate the hypothesis in question.
The Naiyâyikas meet the above objection thus. They hold
that the above defects do not vitiate the said hypothesis. As
letters successively appear so they are consecutively experienced.
These successive experiences gain strength and produce such an
impression (i.e. work out such a qualitative change in the soul)
as simultaneously recalls all letters which have been previously
experienced in memory. Let a parallel case be cited to bring
home the point in question. Gold is kept in a closed vessel. It
is repeatedly heated. Repeated heatings bring about a qualita-
tive change in gold. Thus several acts which gradually take
place cumulatively produce an effect. Thus, an impression (a
new type comes into being). The logical conclusion of the
above hypothesis is that impression brings forth another well-
developed impression. If the Naiyāyikas subscribe to this
hypothesis then they assume something transcendental i.e.,
something which cannot be corroborated by visible facts. The
Naiyāyikas join issue with their critics and emphatically assert
that it is not transcendental. The very study of the Vedas
presupposes such an impression. The reading of the Vedas is
an act. As such it is short-lived. If the critics do not
subscribe to the result of the cumulative readings of
the Vedas that an impression begets another then the
first reading of the Vedas being not distinct from the
last one a student cannot be able to get an Anuvâka of the
Vedas by heart in spite of his life-long study.Sphota not an Inference
Now, the Sphoța-vådins sum up the arguments of the Naiya-
yikas and say, "There are two alternatives before us. We are to
accept any one of them. Either we are to admit that an
impression effectuates another impression or we are to admit
that an impression is responsible for the knowledge of the mean-
ing of a word. Any way we are to assume transcendental causality.
Now, may we ask why do you take an interest in the hypothe-
sis of impression and why do you take an aversion to the
hypothesis of sphota? Please state the reasons for your parti-
ality and aversion". The Naiyâyikas say in reply that the
proper answer has been given by the celebrated commentator
mentioned before (i.e., Sabara). He has pointed out that if
a sphota is assumed then one is to make two assumptions, viz.,
a sphota and an impression.
797
Now, the Sphota-vādins contend thus: 'We are not required
to make double assumptions. An impression of the ordinary
type is not a novel object. It is a well-known object which is
admitted by all. Therefore, we make no new assumption. We
have not allowed an impression to go beyond its normal acti-
vity. We firmly stick to the hypothesis that an impression
exclusively produces memory. But you, the Naiyāyikas, have
allowed an impression to transgress its normal law. We have
not followed your foot-steps.'
The Naiyāyikas give an answer to the above charge. They
say to the Sphota-vädins, "How is that you have not allowed
an impression to go beyond its normal activity? You also
admit that there is an impression that revives the memory of
all letters at a time. The very same path which is adopted by
letters to reveal the meaning of a word is also followed by them
for the manifestation of a sphoța. You assume the hypothesis
of an impression but over and above it you postulate the hypo-
thesis of a peculiar sound. Thus, both of us agree to accept the
hypothesis of impression. But we do not subscribe to the view
that the only function of an impression is to revive memory.
But we have only allowed an impression to transgress its limit
and to produce the knowledge of the meaning of a word. But
you have ab initio put forward the hypothesis of the world of a
new pattern. You have postulated sphota-a class of transcen-
dental sound. You also assume that the said sphota is distinct798
Nyayamanjari
from letters and it is partless. How is it that your assumption
does not suffer from cumbrousness?"
Kumārila has also subjected the said hypothesis to a severe
criticism. He says, "The Sphoța-vādins assume that a sphoţa
exists and distinguishes itself from letters. A word consists of
parts. Hence, they should also postulate that a sphoța is part-
less. Hence, the assumption of impression which plays a neces-
sary part in the production of the knowledge of the meaning of
a word has no part to play in the manifestation of a sphoța.”
(Sphoța-vāda, Sl. 94). Kumārila's criticism in a nut-shell is
this that the assumption of impression, on the part of the
Sphota-vādins. is superfluous.
The Naiyāyikas press the Sphoța-vādins hard. They review
the arguments of the Sphota-vådins. The Sphota-vādins have
held that when the initial letter is presented to our conscious-
ness sphoța has become manifest and when the subsequent
letters are known to us the awareness of the sphoța becomes
distinctly vivid. They also cite an example. They hold that the
manifestation of sphota is like that of gem. The said example
is not appropriate. Gem consists of parts. Hence all minute
parts are not discovered by its first perception. Subsequent acts
of perception reveal them. In this case subsequent acts of percep-
tion have some important part to play. But a sphota is partless
like a letter. Hence, the initial letter reveals it in its entirety.
What part will the subsequent letter play? A letter being
partless, the partial manifestation of a letter is not possible.
Similarly, a sphota is not partially manifested since it is
partless.
Kumārila has also said to this effect :
If a letter is pro-
nounced in a low voice, it is not heard at all. If it is loudly
pronounced, it is distinctly heard. The whole of a letter is heard
and nothing remains to be heard afterwards. The same rule
applies to a sphoţa. Either it is entirely known or it is not
known at all.' (Sphota-vāda Śl. 17).
The Sphota-vādins have cited a second example in order to
establish their hypothesis. They hold that though a group of
Vedic hymns or a verse is presented to consciousness on its be-
ing heard for the first time yet it is very clearly and vividly
known when it is repeatedly heard. Similarly, though a sphotaSphota not manifested by a dhvani
799
is manifested by the first letter of a word yet it will be more
vividly revealed by the other letters. The example, cited by them,
bears no resemblance to a sphoța since it is absurd to think
that a group of hymns or a verse consists of no parts. Some
parts are letters and some other parts are words. The first
awareness fails to grasp them all. When they are heard again
and again they are retained and are clearly and distinctly
known to us. Thus the distinct knowledge of a group of hymns
or a verse refers to its parts. But a sphoța is partless like an
individual letter. Hence the awareness of a sphota knows no
different degrees of vividness. It remains always the same.
Therefore, the example in question is not appropriate.
The refutation of the hypothesis that a sphota is manifested
by a dhvani.
Those who hold that dhvanis manifest sphoțas but not letters
are not sound judges. They prefer this view because they think
that they can avoid the very dilemma which besets the hypo-
thesis that letters manifest a sphoța. The dilemma in question
has been referred to in the last section. Though dhvanis which
are very slow give rise to audible letters yet they fail to mani-
fest sphotas. Again when we wish to pron unce words very
quickly words thus pronounced, convey no meaning since letters,
contained in each word, are not distinctly grasped. The drive
of this criticism is this that if dhvanis had manifested sphotas
then both slow and fast dhvanis would have alike manifested
sphotas.
Now, the upholders of this hypothesis may contend that
dhvanis, in order to manifest sphotas, hold up indistinctly pro-
nounced letters with the help of organs of speech and the air
just as we keep down a sword, a dirty mirror etc. which exhibit
a distorted image of a face such as the dark complexion,
the unusual length etc. The above contention is not tenable.
There is no justifiable cause for the appearance of such letters
since the letters good or bad are presented to our uncontradict-
ed experience. But a sphota which is distinct from letters is
never presented to our consciousness. If one holds that an ob-
ject which is not experienced exists and an object which is
experienced does not exist then he talks like one who says that
horns exist but a hare does not exist. The new path which has800
Nyayamanjari
been adopted by you is not less cumbersome. Sabara, the com-
mentator on the Mimāṁsā sūtras, has rightly remarked that if
sphoțas are assumed then two assumptions are to be made viz.
dhvanis and sphoțas are to be postulated. Moreover, the letters
are assumed to manifest a sphoța which will also follow them to
communicate the meaning of a word. In other words, the hypo-
thesis of a sphoța has in no way an advantage over the hypo-
thesis that words communicate meanings. Hence there is no
need of postulating the hypothesis of a sphota.
The other thinkers i.e., the Mīmāmsakas, hold that as letters
survive even after their presentation to consciousness so they
communicate meanings without requiring the help of impres-
sions. But we do not subscribe to this hypothesis since letters are
transient. It is illogical to think that letters persist to exíst even
after their presentation to consciousness. According to our
training we know that letters communicate meanings. They do
their function as they have been observed before to do it.
Kumarila has also said to this effect:
"As many letters, arranged in a particular order etc."
This hypothesis has been viewed with disfavour by the
Sphota-vădins. They ask "How many letters, being arranged in
which particular order, do convey meanings ?" We are poor
fellows. We shall not be able to give the right answer. Please
ask your own consciousness. It is a very trifling objection. We
should not think much of it. You have also said that either
letters may communicate meanings even if they violate the tem-
porary order of their arrangement or if the said order of letters
is necessarily required then a sphota should be the temporary
order of letters. Such a suggestion is not sound. A temporary
order is nothing but the different strokes of time. A sphoța
cannot be identical with the different strokes of time. The tem-
porary order of letters does not independently communicate a
meaning, Again, the temporary order of objects other than
that of letters does not also communicate a meaning. But such
an order, belonging only to letters, communicates a meaning.
Kumarila has also discussed the problem thus :-
There are two alternative suggestions viz. (1) Does the mere
order of letters (i.e. not the letters themselves) convey the said
sense? Or, (2) do the letters arranged in an order of succes-801
Sphota not a Perception
sion convey it? Though these two alternative suggestions are
possible yet the second one is the true hypothesis. In other
words, the letters arranged in an order of succession but not the
mere order of succession convey the sense of a word. The order
of succession which belongs to the letters thus arranged renders
its assistance to them to communicate a meaning. There is no
need of logical demonstration to establish it since the said order
of succession is nothing but the property of the said letters.
Hence, the very letters which have been noticed to convey a
particular meaning, being arranged in a particular order of
succession, will also convey the same meaning, being arranged
in the same order. Thus, a sphota is not an inference. We do
not infer it as we do a cause from an effect. It is not also a
presumption. We do not presume the hypothesis of a sphoța in
order to explain the knowledge of meaning. So we establish
our point.
The refutation of the hypothesis that a sphota is perceptible.
The sphota-vādins have also argued that as it is generally
admitted by usage that a meaning has been communicated by a
single sabda so the usage in question points to the hypothesis
of sphota. Such an argument is not sound. If letters communi-
cate a meaning in accordance with the law stated before then
the above usage holds good.
Now, the sphota-vādins take an exception to the above solu-
tion. The word 'sabda' does not denote an impression (samskära).
In this world it is not well-known that the word 'sabda' deno-
tes an impression. No body can prove by means of any method
that the said word denotes an impression. A person, ignorant
of the meaning of a word, learns the meaning of a word when
he is instructed by another person in its meaning. If the word
'Sabda' signifies an impression then it is never noticed that
the impression, belonging to a person, generates the knowledge
of another person. No body can detect such a causal relation
since an impression is a transcendental object. Now, the critics
of the Sphota-vadins may hold that the word 'sabda' stands
for letters. Now, a question arises in our mind. Does the word
'Sabda' mean each individual letter or an aggregate of letters?
If it signifies each individual letter then the word 'sabda',802.
Nyayamanjari
should communicate no meaning since an individual letter con-
veys no meaning. Moreover, it should not denote an aggregate
of letters since the word 'sabda' is a class name, i.e. a common
noun. If we use proper names in the dual or plural number then
a common noun in the singular number cannot be used as a case
in apposition with either of them. Verbal usage like the follow-'
ing is never seen. Verbal usage "Yajñadatta and Devadatta
are a man", "Dhava, Khadira and palaśa are a tree" etc. is
conspicuous by its absence in the literature. Similarly, the
verbal usage that 'g', 'au' and 's' are a Sabda is never
seen.
Now, the critics may contend that as the word 'forest' denot-
es a collection of trees so the word 'Śabda' signifies a collection
of letters. As the verbal usage that a forest is trees is seen so
the usage that a sabda is 'g', 'au' and 's' will be appropriate.
Such a contention is not tenable. The above example illustrat-
es the relation of identity in difference, holding between the
subject and the predicate. In certain cases, we notice identity.
But there are also cases which clearly indicate difference. A
collection is held to be identical with the objects collected under
it. Some verbal usages point to this direction. But there are
some other usages which point to the fact that there is diffe-
rence between a collection and the objects collected. The
examples, viz., the forest of mangoes and the forest of wood-
apples, clearly indicate their difference. But there is no single
instance which refers to the difference of a Sabda from letters.
The verbal usage, viz., this is a Šabda of 'g' 'au', etc. is cons-
picuous by its absence.
Again, you may contend that the word 'forest' points to the
identity of the aggregate of objects with the objects included in
the aggregate since a verbal usage that the mango trees are
nothing but a forest is noticed. A sentence that the letters 'g'
etc. are nothing but a Śabda will also be put to use. But such a
verbal usage is not noticed. Again, we distinguish the mango
trees etc. from a forest. We do not employ the word 'forest' if
we intend to convey a particular mango tree. It is well-known
that words forest' etc, are nouns of multitude. If this is so then
one may in a figurative sense think of the identity of the mean-
ing of the word 'forest' i.e., an aggregate of trees with theSphota not a Perception
particular trees such as a mango tree etc. Thus, the sentence that
mango and other trees are a forest may be employed. But, in
the above case, the letters 'g' etc. cannot be distinguished from
a Sabda. So we never use a sentence that this is a Šabda of
letters 'g' etc. Therefore nobody can even in a secondary sense
think of the identity of the particular letters 'g' etc. with 'Sabda'
which denotes the multitude of all letters. Thus, those who hold
those letters are Sabda cannot fairly justify the usage that Sabda
communicates a meaning.
803
Now, the critics of sphota-vådins give a reply to the above
criticism. They hold that they should not bother to discuss the
problem whether the word 'Sabda' may be appropriately or
inappropriately employed to denote the individual letters 'g'
etc. It matters little if it exactly denotes such letters. It is also
of little importance if it does not exactly denote such letters.
The reason behind our remark is this that mere verbal usages
current in the world do not establish the existence of things.
O rival thinkers-Sphoța-vādins the authors of sciences of
philology also corroborate our thesis. The grammarians hold
that a verb denotes an action. But they do not hold that
sphota, represented by a verb, denotes an action. Even if we
take into consideration the practice of the authors of several
sciences then the existence of a sphota which is not based upon
sound proof cannot be admitted. Can we identify popular
usage with any proof? We have already refuted the thesis that
a sphota is an influence. We shall also prove that a sphoţa is
not perceived. A sphota lies beyond the range of other proofs.
Therefore the Sphota-vădins take vain pride in citing the
popular usage "A Sabda communicates meaning to us". They
should forget it.
If we uphold the thesis that a letter communicates a meaning
then the said popular usage stands justified. The reason is as
follows. The last letter accompanied by the impressions of the
preceding letters conveys meaning. If this is the thesis then the
use of singular number in the word 'Sabda' is logically tenable
since the letter in question is a Sabda and has singular number.
The thesis that letters, referred to by a recognitive judgment,
communicate meaning suffers from no defect since the word
*Sabda' not employed here to denote such letters as are in-Nyāyamanjari
dividually taken into consideration. Let us take a concrete
example, e. g., the word 'gauh'. The collection of letters 'g', 'au'
and 's' which is not other than the word 'gauh' communicates
a meaning. A word which denotes a collection has singular
number. It may be used as a predicate of a subject which has
plural number. (In Sanskrit grammar there is no hard and
fast rule that the subject and the predicate of a proposition
should have the same number. So, the proposition that such
and such letters are 'śabda' is quite appropriate. Here, the
word 'Sabda' denotes a collection of letters. It has singular
number. It may be predicated of the subject, such and such
letters. Moreover we come across verbal usages like the follow-
ing, "The vedas are the authority on this matter" etc.).
Moreover, the mention of the statement, "We make out a
meaning from Sabda" is highly illogical on the part of the
Sphota-vādins. The word 'Sabda' does not denote 'sphoța'. In
other words, sphota does not constitute the primary meaning
of the word 'sabda'. No linguists are seen to employ the word
Sabda' to denote a sphoţa as they are noticed to use it in the
sense of a letter. The Sphoța-vadins may contend that Šabda
is defined as the indicator of an object. This contention is hard-
ly tenable since the definition is too wide. Smoke which points
to fire should also be denoted by the word 'Sabda'.
Now, the Sphota-vādins, having reflected on the problem
from its initial stage, may revise the said definition and hold
that Sabda is such as being audible indicates an object. (This
definition shows an improvement upon the previous one since
it does not apply to smoke and similar other indicators, None
of these objects is audible. Hence, the defect of being too wide
is overcome). But this definition is not applicable to a sphota
since a sphota is not audible. Moreover, some portion of the
definition is superfluous. The definition should be like this
"What is audible is Šabda". This amended definition is compc-
tent enough to distinguish Sabda from all other objects. Hence,
the shorter definition is logically sound. The definition in ques-
tion should not consist of two elements necessary and super-
fluous. Letters are only audible but no other objects. There-
fore letters are only Sabda. A sphota is not Sabda. Kumárila
has also directed his criticism against the sphota-theory thus.
804Sphota not a Perception
Letters independent of one another are distinctly grasped by
our auditory sense-organ. Neither the constituent factor of a
letter nor a sphoța is presented to auditory sense-perception."
Now, an objection may be raised against the above defini-
tion. If the definition of Sabda is this "What is audible is
Sabda" then it also becomes too wide since it applies to the
universal of existence (sattā). The above objection is not tena-
ble. The intended difinition is this "What is only audible is
Śabda." The adverb 'only' which denotes exclusion has not
been appropriately given since śabda is not exclusively heard by
means of ears. Ears require the co-operation of manas (the in-
ternal organ) to hear Sabda. Hence, no purpose is served by
the above exclusion. Such an objection is not tenable. The in-
tention of the said exclusion is to distinguish the instrument of
this sense-perception from all other such homogenous instru-
ments. Thus, the definition implies that the sense-perception of
Sabda is produced only by ears but not by such other sense-
organs. Hence, eyes etc. are only excluded but not the inter-
nal organ viz., manas. Even if the amended definition is accept-
ed then it remains still too wide since it is applicable to the
universal of Sabda. Such an objection does not hold good.
This defect will be easily mended if the clause is possessed of a
universal' is added to the definition. Thus, the complete
definition of Sabda is as follows:
805
**What is audible and is possessed of a universal is Šabda".
(This is the correct definition of Sabda. It suffers from no de-
fects. The universal of Sabda possesses no universal. Hence,
the definition does not apply to it). The trend of this discus-
sion from its very beginning requires the further qualification
as has been proposed just now. This definition will not be too
wide even if it applies to the thundering of clouds or to other
inarticulate sounds since they all belong to the class of sound.
Vätsyāyana, the author of Nyâya-bhäşya, has stated that sound
admits of two kinds viz., letters and inarticulate sound. The
definition, "What is the indicator of an object is sound" is not
a correct one. We have stated it before. We shall now contro-
vert it and assign our reasons. Suppose an articulate sound
reaches our ears. We are still ignorant of the relation of denota-
tion. Hence, the above sound carries no sense. As it communi-806
Nyāyamañjart
cates no sense, it ceases to be sound since according to the
said definition every sound points to an object. When the rela-
tion of denotation has been known to us after some time the
same thing again becomes sound since it conveys now a sense to
us. Therefore the above definition is not universal.
Again, we do not follow your intention behind the procedure
of determining the true character of sound. Why do you imagine
the identity of sabda with universal, attributes, actions etc. i.e.,
objects denoted by words? Why does this misgiving arise in
your mind? Why do you refute the imaginary identity ? We
fail to appreciate the value of your useless attempts. Why do
you raise absurd propositions and refute them? We have well
understood that words are distinct from their meanings. There-
fore what is audible is Sabda (sound). But a sphoța is not
audible. Hence, those who hold that letters constitute words,
sentence etc. and convey a meaning can only justify the popu-
lar view "We make out a sense from a sound (Sabda)". Hence
the popular view goes in favour of the varņa-vădins but does
not favour the sphoța-vādins. This is our conclusion.
The sphota-vādins join issue with the Varna-vādins. They
raise an objection "Why do not you admit that a sphoța is
audible?" They also state that every body is aware of the fact
that sound produces an awareness of common element which
finds expression in the verbal sign ‘a word, a sentence etc.' But
they also point out that the auditory sense-perception pro-
duced by a sound, does not refer to letters. Such a hypothesis
is not logically sound. The reason behind our criticism is as
follows. Whenever we perceive individual cows, viz., Śâbaleya,
Bahuleya etc. we recognise a common property in each of them
and name it as the universal of cowness. Similarly, if we had
recognised a word or a sentence in every letter then we would
have admitted that a word or a sentence is a type of common
property which belongs to every letter. But, as a matter of
fact such an awareness does not occur to our mind. Let us
illustrate another type of common property which belongs to
each of its constituents. A piece of cloth is made up of threads.
It inheres in each thread that constitutes it. When we have the
first perception of a piece of cloth we perceive the whole with-
out having the discriminative krowledge of its constituent fac-Sphota not a Perception
tors. Similarly, do we hear a word or sentence without attend-
ing to each constituent letter one after another? If we had
heard a word or a sentence as a distinct whole without having
the distinct auditory perception of each of its constituent letters
then we would have gladly accepted the thesis "A word or a
sentence stands on the same footing with a piece of cloth." As
a piece of cloth is constituted by its parts so a word or a sente-
nce is not framed by its parts. A word or a sentence does not
inhere in letters. It is not a common whole which is shared by
all letters. We do never grasp it as a whole at a time.
807
Now, the Naiyãyikas refute the thesis of the Sphota-vädins.
They state that the thesis of the Sphota-vădins that if the word
'gaul' (a cow) is repeatedly heard then a persisting same ele-
ment is perceived. They now criticise it and point out that the
perception of a persisting same element owes its origin to an
adjunct, viz., a single vowel. But if words consist of many vowels,
e. g., Devadatta etc. then many letters are but slowly perceived
by us. Thus, when a peace of cloth is presented to our consci-
ousness its parts are not cognised as separate from its whole.
Hence, when a word or a sentence is presented to our consci-
ousness a same identical object is not grasped like a universal
or a whole.
Now, the Sphoța-vädins contend that consciousness which
arises from the generic form of a word but not from its specific
form is called the awareness of Sphota. Now, the Naiyâyikas
ask, "Do you hold that the universal of sound (soundness) is
same as Sphoţa? They point out, you cannot answer in the
affirmative: A Sphota has a distinct entity. It is not identical
with the universal of sound. A universal is called common
property (sāmânya) because when a particular is perceived
another particular of the same class is remembered. When we
see a particular cow, called Sabaleya we remember another
particular cow, named Bāhuleya. But, in the present case, if
the letter 'g' is presented to our consciousness, the letter 'au' is
not remembered. Hence, Sabdatva is not a universal. It is
also to be noted that when letters, words and sentences are pre-
sented to our consciousness they all produce similar conscious-
ness. This consciousness points to the same object, viz., theNyāyamañjari
fact of being a sound. Therefore, a sphota is nothing but a
sound in general.
808
The critics of the Sphota-hypothesis join issue with the
Sphota-vādins and subject the above suggestion to a severe
criticism. They point out that some thinkers of the sphota-
school, being apprehensive of the existence of a sphota, have
hesitated to identify a sound in its generic character with the
universal of sound. They have concealed the real thing and
mystified it. But their apprehension has been misplaced. It is a
truism that the universal of sound is not a sphoța. When each
letter is cognised it is presented to our consciousness as a sound.
A letter is not a sphota. The consciousness of each letter refers
to two elements-universal and particular. The universal ele-
ment is constituted by the universal of sound, i.e., soundness.
The above consciousness refers to no other common element.
The piece of consciousness which is expressed in the verbal
form 'sound' refers to the universal of sound but not to a
sphota. Jayanta has also conclusively proved the hollowness of
the thesis that when a particular of a class is grasped by one
another particular of the same class is necessarily remembered.
Therefore, a sphoţa is not referred to by such consciousness as
is expressed by the term 'a sound'. Similarly, the awareness of
a word and a sentence does not involve a reference to a sphoţa.
It has been rightly said that the knowledge of words and sen-
tences bears the stamp of sameness because they conjointly
produce one and the same effect. It resembles the knowledge
of a forest or an army. It is a piece of knowledge which simulta-
neously refers to many objects. A sphoța does not bear a resemb-
lance to a universal. Their distinction has been noted before.
The Sphota-vădins hold that a word is presented to conscious-
ness as identical with a sentence because they conjointly pro-
duce the same effect, viz., the communication of the same
meaning. Such a hypothesis involves the fallacy of a vicious
circle. The communication of the same meaning is at the root of
the awareness of the identity of a word with a sentence. Again,
the awareness of the identity of a word with a sentence
is the source of the communication of the same meaning. It is
not fair to overlook the above fallacy. It has been stated before
that the aggregate of letters remembered and perceived helpsSphota not a Perception
to communicate the meaning of a word. It is not a universal
rule that the knowledge of identity of a word with a sentence
brings about the communication of a meaning. Therefore, how
does the hypothesis of the critics involve the fallacy of a vicious
circle?
809
The Sphota-vădins may now contend that if a word is not
identical with a sentence then how is it that the consciousness
of an object, denoted by a word, forms an integral part of a
judgment, expressed by a sentence? The assumption that a word
and a sentence are identical is a foolish one. If objects are iden-
tical or different then and then only their corresponding acts of
consciousness are identical or different. If two objects are
different, the corresponding acts of consciousness are identical
but if the former two are identical then the latter two are also
identical. It is a long-standing hypothesis that the acts of cons-
ciousness which refer to the same object are identical. It is not a
law of Epistemology that if the conditions of acts of conscious-
ness are different then the acts of consciousness are distinct
from one another and if the said conditions are the same then
the acts of consciousness are identical. Let us take an example.
The conditions of the acts of perception of one and the same
object, viz., the eyes, light and inner organ are different but they,
in spite of their difference,generate such acts of perception as re-
fer to the same object. If acts of consciousness are the same then
the objects referred to by them should be the same But one cannot
subscribe to the view that several acts of consciousness are same
because one and the same word has produced all of them. If
different judgments are similar then the object referred to by
them is one and the same. But we should not think that they
all are similar because they have been produced by one and the
same sentence. Many consecutive letters convey an object as
their meaning. But they do not point to the identity of a word
with a sentence. The grammarians who are under the sway cf
illusion think of the identity of a word with a sentence as a
current view. Their illusion lies in their assumption that a
word and its meaning are identical. We have established with
strong argument that a word is absolutely different from its
object. Our very experience contradicts the attributed identity
of a word with its meaning. Hence, we do not accept such aNyayamanjari
theory. Therefore, we do not feel the necessity of discussing
this subject. In fine, we say that a sphota is not established
by perception.
810
The Refutation of the Hypothesis that a Word or a Sentence is
partless
A judgment refers to a unified whole of objects which are
mutually related to one another. Two judgments will differ if
their objects are different; and two judgments are identical if
they refer to the same object. As these two epistemological
rules are honoured, there is no inner difference in the meaning
of a sentence. The object referred to by a sentence, should
have its abstract identity. The critics admit that the relational
object which constitutes the meaning of a sentence is a unified
whole. But they point out at the same time that though the
said object is a unified whole yet it admits of parts. But
those who hold that a sentence conveys a partless whole have
no sound theory of knowledge.
The question whether a part exists or not is highly imperti-
nent. But sound thinkers should discuss the problem whether
the meaning of a sentence consists of parts or of no parts.
In every sentence a word is distinguished from the sentence
itself and the meaning of a word is differentiated from that of
a sentence. If in a sentence its parts and their meanings are
not distinctly grasped then the sentence remains unintelligible
to us. Hence, in every sentence its parts and their meanings
are presented to consciousness with their distinctive features.
Now, the Sphoţavãdins may contend that a sentence and its
meaning are partless and if they are grasped by us as having part
then this knowledge is illusory. Such a contention does not hold
good since a judgment which is contradicted is illusory but if it
does not meet with contradiction, it is not illusory. One cannot
pass his judgment on a piece of knowledge as illusory at his
own sweet will. An illusion is not baseless. There must be
some ground for its falschood. The Sphota-vadins should
mention some ground for its falsity. They may say that the
knowledge of a sentence having parts is false because it bears
resemblance to an illusory judgment. The critics point out
that they fail to detect a false judgment which it resembles.A Word or a Sentence not Partless
If a sentence is well known as having parts and if another
sentence having no parts, appears as consisting of parts owing
to its resemblance to the first one then the knowledge of the
second sentence may be called illusory. Now, the sentence in
question is partless. It appears to be possessed of parts owing
to its likeness to a sentence having parts. If the Sphota-
vādins argue in this way then they must admit that there is a
sentence which has parts. But they do not make such an
admission since they hold that all sentences are partless. Even
in the body of a man-lion the two parts maintain their distinc-
tion and are presented to consciousness as distinct. Hence,
a man-lion is not the instance of a partless whole. Hence, it
must be admitted that there are parts in a sentence.
picture the colour of red Arsenic is distinguished from that of
vermillion. In a drink the taste of each ingredient such as
Năga-kesara etc. is distinctly felt. In different forms of music
In a
the different notes of a scale are distinctly heard. Therefore,
F
these are not illustrations of partless wholes. Now, the Sphota-
vädins may cite a new type of illustration, viz., the aware-
ness of a picture etc. The critics admit that such awareness
is partless. They also point out that the knowledge of the
meaning of a sentence is also partless since every form of
consciousness is partless. But an object which is referred to
by our consciousness and which is either an illustration or is
illustrated is only possessed of parts. Hence, a sentence and
its meaning are not partless.
Let the second thesis of the Sphota-vådins be examined.
From the usage of the experienced persons the relation of deno-
tation obtaining between a word and its meaning is learnt but
not that holding between a word and its meaning. We cannot
express an idea by means of a word. The above thesis is not
tenable since in order to know the relation of denotation holding
between a sentence and its meaning the meaning of a word
cannot be dispensed with. If a man is acquainted with words
and their meanings then he can even make out the meaning
of a sentence newly constructed. If by means of insertion and
elimination the meaning of a word is not grasped then each
sentence being an indivisible unit the number of sentences will
know no limit. In that case one is to know the meaning of
811812
Nyayamanjari
each sentence. As such it will be absurd to know the meaning
of a sentence. In order to know the meaning of a sentence we
must admit that a sentence is divisible into words and each
word has its meaning.
The Sphota-vãdins have also stated that mere words are
never employed and words, for this reason, enjoy no real ex-
istence. Such a thesis is not tenable. Let us cite a concrete
case in support of our criticism. When a big complex sentence
is employed, subordinate clauses are not' independently used.
Hence these clauses which constitute the said complex sentence
turn out to be unreal. Now, the Sphoța-vădins may contend
that these clauses are real in order to render the said complex
sentence significant. Such a contention does not hold water.
The Naiyayikas will also hold that words are invariably employ-
ed in order to do the same function, i.e., to make the said
sentence expressive. There are a few sentences the meaning of
which is obtained through the context. Even, in these cases,
words play an important part since they are uttered to convey
such matters as are beyond the reach of a context. [The text
is very corrupt in this paragraph. In order to have a consi-
stent meaning we have made necessary corrections. We ask
our readers to be careful and request them to examine our
corrections. Now, the Sphota-vādins make another suggestion
in favour of their thesis. When a boy gets by heart a book
he does not realise the result of his study. Similarly,
when a sentence is read out one may not realise the distinct
indiv duality of letters or words. In the face of this suggestion
the Naiyāyikas strongly assert that letters and words must have
a necessary place in a sentence just as parts of a chariot
occupy a necessary place in the chariot though they cannot
discharge its function. Now, it may be contended that parts
of a chariot are necessary because they render some other
service which a chariot cannot do. The Naiyayikas say in reply
that letters and words will also be capable of doing something
which a sentence cannot do. The parts of a chariot make a
partial contribution towards the function of a chariot. Do
letters or words make any such contribution? Yes, letters or
words also make a partial contribution towards the function
of a sentence. Some letters of a sentence are significant byA Word or a Sentence not Partless
813
themselves. Therefore, letters and words are not creatures of
our imagination. They enjoy reality,
The Sphota-vădins have also raised an objection that as
words constitute parts of a sentence and letters are elements of
a word, so letters should have also parts. Such an objection
expresses the unprecedented scholarship of the said objectors.
A jar is a whole consisting of parts. On that ground one can-
not hold that an atom should consist of parts. One determines
the nature of an object through cognition and non-cognition.
An object possesses only such nature as is revealed through
cognition. An object does not possess such nature as is not
presented to our consciousness. Parts of a sentence and 3
word are cognised but those of a letter are not presented to
our consciousness. Kumärila has also said to this effect.
If a letter is slowly uttered, it is not at all grasped. If it
is distinctly uttered then it is grasped in its entirety.
Kumârila means to say that if a letter had been a whole consi-
sting of parts then some of its parts would have been grasped
sometimes. He also states that nobody should postulate a
whole having parts if its parts are never cognised. Therefore,
letters are partless wholes. Therefore, it is a foolish statement
that a letter should have also parts like a word or a sentence.
Letters have no parts.
A sentence and its meaning are relational wholes because
if the constituent words are present then the sentence in ques-
tion is significant and if such words are absent then the sentence
in question conveys no sense. If the same logic is applied
then the conclusion that a word consists of parts is arrived at,
It is also understood that the stem of a word and its suffix are
real. These parts of a word are not merely imaginary. In
the inflectional words 'vçkşam' 'vşkşeņa' etc. the stem has the
same meaning but the case-endings are different. In the infl-
ectional words ‘vṛkşam', 'ghatam etc. the stems have different
meanings though the case-ending has the same meaning. In
those cases the meaning which a particular word denotes is
expressed by it (the word). The above conclusion has been
unmistakably established. How can one say that these parts
are unreal ?
The Sphota-vadins have argued in favour of the reality of aNyayamanjari
sphota that though the words 'kūpa’, ‘sūpa’, ‘yūpa' etc. contain
many similar letters yet they do not convey the same meaning.
They draw the conclusion from the above premise that the
possession of the same letters does not help to communicate
the meaning of a word. The drift of this argument is that
the letters, contained in a word, do in no way contribute
towards the communication of the meaning of the word. Such
a conclusion is contrary to reasons. Every word has its fixed
meaning. The mere presence or absence of similar letters
does not help to convey a meaning which a word does not
denote. If only similar letters had determined the meaning of
a word then the words 'küpa' etc. would have conveyed the
same meaning. But a word conveys only the same meaning
as is denoted by it. A word which is not denotative of a
meaning does not convey it. Our experience points to the
conclusion referred to just now. Now, by the joint method of
agreement and difference we determine that this word denotes
this meaning. If, in a particular case, the constituent letters
of a word are similar then it will not be reasonable to enforce
the conclusion that in other cases all constituent letters are
similar though some of them are not so. (Jayanta means to
say that in words 'kūpa', 'supa' and 'yūpa' the letter 'u', 'p'
and 'a' i.e., the 2nd, the 3rd and the last one are similar but
the initial one of each word is different. Hence, one cannot
hold that all letters are similar. (Therefore, the above words
do not convey the same meaning.) If a heap of dust moves
along with a row of ants then the latter is not the cause of the
former. With this remark the Sphota-vādins take an exception
to the hypothesis of the Naiyãyikas. (They mean to say that
though a meaning is related to a word yet the constituent
letters of the word do not contribute towards the communica-
tion of the same meaning.) Such an objection is pointless.
Sometimes a heap of dust is raised by the hoofs of horses. It
is also noticed that a row of ants is rendered motionless by
such a heap of dust. Hence, one cannot arrive at the conclu-
sion that a group of letters does not condition the communica-
tion of the meaning of a word. We do not definitely know
the exact cause of the above heap of dust since it may be
raised by horses or by young camels or by elephants. If
814A Word or Sentence not Partless
815
a condition is wrongly stated of the above effect, viz., the
heap of dust then the critic may find fault with the above
suggestion. But still it is unmistakably true that the said heap
of dust has been raised by many animals since heaps of dust
which have been raised either by horses or by camels
or by elephants are similar. Therefore, animals have raised
the above heap of dust.
The Sphota-vădins have argued that as the words like 'aśva-
karna', etc., have lost the sense of their constituent words
(aśva and karna), so the other compound words may also
imitate them. In other words, they suggest that the formation
of compound words is futile. They hint at the hypothesis that
words have no parts. (The word 'aśva' means a horse and the
word 'karna' denotes an ear. But the word 'aśvakarna'
denotes a species of tree. Thus, the meaning of the consti-
tuent words 'aśva' and 'karņa' do not contribute towards the
meaning of the compound word 'aśva-karna'. They generalise
that all words are partless.) Such a hypothesis does not
stand to reason. The word in question finds a place in the
list of such words as convey conventional meaning only. The
constituent words do not express their true meaning. A com-
pound word in the above context expresses a distinct meaning.
This is the law which governs the meaning of a word. Accord-
ing to this law the meanings of the components of a compound
word have gone to the background. Accordingly, the mean-
ings of the constituent words have been given up. If, in a
particular context, the meanings of the constituent words have
no part to play then it does not follow that the component
terms of words like aśva-karṇa, etc., will never convey their
meanings. The words 'aśva' and 'karņa' convey their sense
when they remain either compounded or uncompounded. But
if the compound word formed by them expresses a conventio-
nal meaning then its constituent words lose all their signifi-
cance. Let us illustrate the point that the components of the
compound word ‘aśva-karṇa' are significant when they do not
form a compound word. Ride a horse (aśvamaroha). There
is an car-ring on the ear (karne kundalam). The words 'asva'
and 'karṇa' are also expressive of meaning when they are
compounded. The compound word 'aśvakarṇaḥ' is expressive816
Nyayamanjari
of its meaning, viz., the ear of a horse. Thus, we see that
component words which constitute a compound word are not
absolutely meaningless,
The Sphota-vādins have also stated that the analysis of a
word into its elements is not logical since the interpreters
agree to differ from one another with regard to the said
analysis of a word. Hence, the division of a word into a stem
and a suffix does not hold good. This criticism is not sound.
As a person places his confidence in the statement of the
authoritative persons, SO the illustration "tri-muni
Vyakaraṇam" admits of an analysis. This analysis gets the
approval of Pāṇini. So it is true but not imaginary. In
many details of analysis the interpreters agree. They only
differ from one another in vikaraņas (signs of the different
classes of verbs), etc. Such differences are insignificant. There-
fore, the analysis of a word into its stem and suffix is really
true. One cannot suggest a novel analysis by mere imagination.
The Sphota-vädins have also offered another criticism which
points to the difficulty of analysing a sentence. They cite an
example "kälenadantināgāḥ" in support of their criticism.
There are two sentences "kälena dantināgāḥ" and "käle
nadanti nāgāḥ". But it is very difficult to find out the consti-
tuent words of these two sentences since letters which compose
these words are the same. Such a criticism does not stand to
reason since difference between the two words constituted by
the same letters is detected by their varying accents. A section
of grammar deals with accents. So, it is not difficult to learn
words with their proper accents. Let us take an example
‘sarāmaḥ'. It may be a verb or two distinct words (a pronoun
and a noun) or a compound word. If it is a verb (sarāmaḥ-
we go) then its accent is different from that of a noun. If the
word 'sarāmaḥ' stands for two words, viz., 'sah' and 'Rāmaḥ'
then words and their accents are different. If it is a compound
word denoting one co-existing with Răma then the word itself
and its accent are also different. The contending party will
also be able to note these differences. Hence, it is easy to
understand the analysis of a sentence.
The Sphota-vadins have also stated in continuation of their
criticism that in the examples "Dadhyatra”, “Madhvatra”,817
Sphota not a Perception
etc. the original words have undergone euphonic changes and
do not retain their original forms. How is it that they convey
their meaning though they are not perceptible in their original
forms? Such a deviation from their original form is not open
to a serious defect. These two words have only undergone
partial changes since they are recognised. The above defence
has been offered by a section of logicians.
The other logicians hold that the words 'Dadhi' and
'Madhu' respectively end in vowels 'i' and 'u'. Though they
respectively end in 'y' and 'v' yet they will convey the same
sense as is denoted by the original words. This is the teaching
of the science of grammar that the words 'dadhy' and 'madhy'
will respectively convey the same meaning as is respectively
expressed by the words 'dadhi' and 'madhu'. Hence, the
words, in spite of their euphonic changes, will convey their
meaning. No defect will arise from the said euphonic change.
Let us stop here since it is fruitless to prolong such discussion.
We, the Naiyāyikas, have got something more to add in this
connection. If words are merely imaginary then why do the
ancient servants take so much pain to explain the growth of
consciousness of words? The critics think that imaginary
objects are also means to the real things. They cite examples
in order to prove their hypothesis. They hold that false snake-
bite and similar imaginary events bring about the effects of
actual ones. If the examples are critically examined then we
see that, truly speaking, false snake-bite is not the cause of the
state of unconsciousness. It is the apprehension of taking
poison that is the cause of such state. An apprehension is a
form of consciousness. It is not true that consciousness does not
produce an effect. Moreover, an act of consciousness is not an
imaginary object. Thus, a cause produces an effect. The
drift of this argument is this that words are real.
The Sphota-vadins also state that scripts are false but pro-
duce the consciousness of the real objects. It is a foolish
statement. Written letters are nothing but lines drawn on
writing materials. These lines in themselves are not false.
When they are taught by the trustworthy teachers such as
khandika, a reputed teacher mentioned in the ancient literature,
the disciples receive proper training and have deep-rootedSphota not a Perception
etc. the original words have undergone euphonic changes and
do not retain their original forms. How is it that they convey
their meaning though they are not perceptible in their original
forms? Such a deviation from their original form is not open
to a serious defect. These two words have only undergone
partial changes since they are recognised. The above defence
has been offered by a section of logicians.
817
The other logicians hold that the words 'Dadhi' and
'Madhu' respectively end in vowels 'i' and 'u'. Though they
respectively end in 'y' and 'v' yet they will convey the same
sense as is denoted by the original words. This is the teaching
of the science of grammar that the words 'dadhy' and 'madhy'
will respectively convey the same meaning as is respectively
expressed by the words 'dadhi' and 'madhu'. Hence, the
words, in spite of their euphonic changes, will convey their
meaning. No defect will arise from the said euphonic change.
Let us stop here since it is fruitless to prolong such discussion.
We, the Naiyāyikas, have got something more to add in this
connection. If words are merely imaginary then why do the
ancient servants take so much pain to explain the growth of
the consciousness of words? The critics think that imaginary
objects are also means to the real things. They cite examples
in order to prove their hypothesis. They hold that false snake-
bite and similar imaginary events bring about the effects of
actual ones. If the examples are critically examined then we
see that, truly speaking, false snake-bite is not the cause of the
state of unconsciousness. It is the apprehension of taking
poison that is the cause of such state. An apprehension is a
form of consciousness. It is not true that consciousness does not
produce an effect. Moreover, an act of consciousness is not an
imaginary object. Thus, a cause produces an effect. The
drift of this argument is this that words are real.
The Sphota-vädins also state that scripts are false but pro-
duce the consciousness of the real objects. It is a foolish
statement. Written letters are nothing but lines drawn on
writing materials. These lines in themselves are not falsc.
When they are taught by the trustworthy teachers such as
khandika, a reputed teacher mentioned in the ancient literature,
the disciples receive proper training and have deep-rootedNyayamanjari
impression of these scripts. When they see these lines they
infer letters. They have been initiated into the relation of
invariable concomitance holding between scripts and letters.
Hence, whenever they see scripts they infer letters. When a
boy, thus initiated, reads written scripts he at first infers letters
and later on grasps the meaning of words. Therefore, imagi-
nary objects are not means to real ends. Why does one mis-
take a line for a letter? The reason behind this mistake is
this that one sees probans but takes it to be probandum in a
figurative sense. Examples in support of this view may be
cited. We measure a quantity of fried barley powder with a
certain weight. We say that this is such and such weight (say
prastha). The letter 'g' is inferred from a particular line.
We hold that the particular line is the letter 'g'. If our
opponents do not subscribe to this view then an ignorant
person who is innocent of scripts should make out a sense out
of lines, i.e., a written word since lines which pass under the
namse of unreal letters exist. But, as a matter of fact, such a
person gathers no sense from the above lines. Therefore, one
grasps the meaning of a word after having inferred letters
from lines. One is habituated to such inference. The different
processes of inference occur in the subconscious mind since they
take place very quickly. The intervening time-gaps between
these processes are beyond the range of knowledge. If one
does not subscribe to this hypothesis then he cannot explain
how a sense is gathered from a few lines. As words and their
meanings are real so a sentence and its meaning are not part-
less wholes. This is our final conclusion. You have embraced
the path of concealing the constituent words and the consti-
tuent letters of words of a sentence but tried to point to Sabda
Brahman as the only reality. We shall discuss this topic in
a detailed manner later on.
818
You have admitted the three broad divisions of a sentence.
We agree to differ from you in this point. We admit the
existence of Vaikharī vāk only since Vaikharī vāk is well
known as a sentence (Vaikhari-articulate).
The vãk which has been designated by you as madhyamã
is nothing but the mental resolution. It is a form of consciousness.
It is not a division of a sentence. An act of consciousness whichHypothesis of Sphota Refuted
is expressed in language and refers to its corresponding object
does not give up its own character, i.e., the characteristic fea-
ture of consciousness.
819
The form of vâk which is called Paśyanti bears the title In-
determinate perception. The Naiyãyikas consider it to be so.
All forms of consciousness are not invariably associated with
words. In other words, all sorts of consciousness are not nece-
ssarily associated with words. When an act of consciousness
which reveals an object comes into being, it may be or may
not be so associated. But an act of consciousness which is not so
does never fail to reveal its object even if its name is not known.
The concluding portion of the refutation of the Hypothesis of Sphota
Let us now refrain from the discussion about the Absolute
and discuss the point at issue.
The letters which are objects of our distinct awareness are
not imaginary. They constitute words which make up a senten-
ce. They are conditions of the comunication of meaning. A sphoţa
which is distinct from letters is not presented to our auditory
perception. A sphota which has been undermined by ill luck
cannot convey a sense.
The meanings of words condition the meaning of a sentence
Thus the hypothesis of a sphota being refuted the hypothesis
that letters convey the meaning of a sentence comes to the fore-
front. Some critics take an exception to it. They say, 'Let
letters convey the meaning of a word. But they are incapable
of conveying the meaning of a sentence'. Now, an objection
arises in our mind. It is this 'How is the meaning of a sentence
conveyed? In order to meet this objection they suggest that the
meanings of words which constitute a sentence help to convey
the meaning of the said sentence. They explain the raison detre
of their hyphothesis thus. Letters exhaust all their powers when
they convey the meaning of a word constituted by them.
No power is left to them to convey the meaning of a
sentence. But the power of word-meanings remains unexhaust-
ed to communicate the meaning of a sentence. Hence, they
convey the sense of a sentence. The potential energy of letters is
assumed by us by means of implications. As we cannot other-820
Nyayamanjari
wise explain the communication of the meanings of words so we
assume that letters have potential energy to convey the mean-
ings of words. But the communication of the meaning of a sen-
tence does not necessarily require letters as its condition. Hence,
we should not assume the hypothesis that letters have potential
energy to convey the meaning of a sentence.
Another point of criticism flashes in our mind in this context.
Do letters bring about one and the same impression in order to
convey the meaning of a word and that of a sentence? Or, do
they produce the two different sets of impressions in order to
perform the above two effects? A verse which contains the
above point runs thus: How can one and the same impression
bring about two diverse effects? It is well understood that
letters produce no new impression other than the known one.
As we can explain the communication of the meaning
of a sentence in a different manner so there is no justifica-
tion for the assumption that one and the same letter
produces the different types of impressions. In the case of words
when the last letter is perceived by us it is not very
difficult for us to recollect its antecedent letters in their
proper order since they have not passed away long ago.
But in the case of a sentence, as some of the antecedent letters
ceased to exist long before so it is very difficult to remember them
in their due order. Hence, it is impossible and unprecedented
to hold that such letters are recalled in memory and combined
to form a sentence. Moreover, though words which compose a
sentence are uttered at intervals yet they are experienced to con-
vey the sense of the said sentence. In this case there is no cha-
ce of the recollection of the antecedent letters. For this reason
letters do not contribute towards the communication of the
meaning of a sentence. Another point may be added to the cri-
ticism in question. If letters are to convey both the meanings
of words and sentences then do they do it simultaneously or
successively? Now if these letters are uttered only once then it
will be unreasonable to hold that they simultaneously discharge
both functions since they are incapable of doing them (func-
tions). If it is held that they sucessively convey the above two
meanings then it will be unreasonable to hold that they convey
the meaning of a sentence at first since the meaning of a sentenceMeanings of Words, their scope
is never observed to be conveyed if the meanings of its consti-
tuent words are not known.
821
Now, the upholders of the above hypothesis may contend that
letters convey the meanings of words at first and then convey
the meaning of a sentence. But it is a matter of great regret
that letters unnecessarily redouble their efforts to convey the
meaning of a sentence since the meaning of a sentence is commu-
nicated as soon as the meanings of its constituent words are con-
veyed. Words fully exhaust their capacities in order to convey
their meanings. Therefore, it is established that the meanings
of words communicate the meaning of a sentence.
Moreover, it is learnt by the joint method of agreement and
difference that the meanings of words precede the meaning of
a sentence. A person who inattentively listens to words and
fails to grasp their meanings does never comprehend the mean-
ing of a sentence. But though a person does not listen towards
yet he is acquainted with the meaning of a sentence provided
that he is in a position to know the meanings of words through
some other sources of knowledge.
One who sees the white colour of an object and hears sounds
of neighing and trots knows that a white horse is running. But
if a person is not acquainted with the meanings of words then
he is never observed to comprehend the meaning of a
sentence.
The above view has been presented by Kumarila in Śloka-
värttika (Chapter on a Sentence verse 358). He intends to
convey that a person beholds from a long distance the white
colour of an object. He fails to identify it.
Then he hears its neighing. He infers from the sound that it
is a horse. He also hears the sound of its trots. He also infers its
motion. The said white colour is an attribute. Horseness is
universal. The said motion is an action. They cannot float in
the air. They require a locus i.e. a substance to stand upon.
The coordination of an attribute, a universal and motion is
possible since they are capable of being mutually related.
Their mutual relation is well-indicated by the sentence, 'A
white horse is running.' Words which constitute the above
sentence are not presented to his consciousness. But the mean-
ings of such words have been gathered by sources of knowledge822
Nyayamanjari
other than auditory perception. The knowledge of the mean-
ings of words contributes towards that of the meaning of a
sentence. But the meaning of a sentence is never grasped
without comprehending the meanings of words.
The knowledge of the meaning of a sentence invariably pre-
supposes that of the meanings of words but does not necessa-
rily presuppose that of words. Therefore, the knowledge of the
meaning of a sentence cannot be effectuated by that of words.
The critics raise another point against the above hypothesis.
The awareness of the meaning of a single word fails to con-
dition the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence. Moreover,
the totality of the awarenesses of all words which constitute a
sentence does not invariably precede the knowledge of the
meaning of a sentence. In some cases, such conditions assem-
ble. Therefore, the relation between the said condition and
the conditioned is not universal. The antecedence of the said
condition is accidental and hence variable. Its variableness
i.e., non-universality is a defect which prevents the awareness
of the totality of meanings of all constituent words from being
the condition of the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence.
Such an objection is not sound. The first part of the said
objection is pointless since the upholders of the above hypo-
thesis do not contribute to the hypothesis that the conscious-
ness of the meaning of any single constituent word conditions
the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence. On the other
hand, they take share in this view, i. e., they deny the causality
of such a condition. Though the condition viz., the totality of
the awarenesses of all meanings of constituent words is variable
i.e., non-universal yet the causal relation which has been
pointed out to be defective is not really so. The reason behind
this defence is this that the meanings of words do not require
the help of the knowledge of universal concomitance to indi-
cate the meaning of a sentence. Hence, the said defect of
variableness which invalidates a mark takes no effect on it.
The knowledge of the meaning of a sentence is not an infere-
nce. The canons which govern sound processes of reasoning
do not apply to it. Though the meanings of all constituent words
are not armed with the knowledge of universal concomitance
yet they become combined with one another, taking into con-Meanings of Words, their scope
sideration mutual requirement, proximity and material non-
contradiction (yogyatã). The mutual combination of the mean-
ings of all words constitutes the meaning of a sentence. The
meaning of a word, being related to those of other words, is
equivalent to the meaning of a sentence. Thus, as the meaning
of a sentence is conveyed through the agency of the meanings
of constituent words so the knowledge of the meaning of a
sentence is not a piece of verbal knowledge. Such a conclusion
may be anticipated but does not turn out to be true. Words
play an important part in bringing about such knowledge at
the out-set. Hence, the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence
is verbal. Words communicate their meanings. The conscious-
ness of such meanings is followed by the knowledge of the mean-
ning of a sentence. Therefore, the conclusion that the know-
ledge of the meaning of a sentence is verbal is free from all
defects. Sabara has also said to this effect. He holds that words
complete this task by communicating their meanings. As soon
as the meanings of words are presented to consciousness, they
generate the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence.
The Refutation of the Hypothesis that the Meanings of words
Communicate the Meanings of a sentence
823
Let us now examine the hypothesis proposed in the precedent
section. Meanings of words do not convey the meaning of a
sentence. But a sentence conveys its own meaning. Then reason
behind the above remark is as follows. It is well-known that
this is the meaning of a sentence. Nobody says that this
is the meaning of words. It is imagined that a word is a
collection of letters, such a word which is no better than the
collection of letters conveys its meaning. Similarly,a sentence
which is an imaginary collection of words will also communi-
cate its meaning.
Now, the upholders of the hypothesis under criticism may
contend that there is no such sentence as is a collection of words
and is distinct from the so-called constituent words. These
words themselves are equivalent to a sentence. And they satis-
fy an obligation when they communicate their own meaning.
It has been stated before that they exhaust all their power by
fulfilling the above duty, and become absolutely impotent toNyāyamanjari
convey the meaning of a sentence. This argument does not
stand to reason since the meanings of words have also comp-
leted their task and have nothing to do. How do they fulfil
an obligation? They have completed their task by producing
their own knowledge.
824
Now, the upholders of the hypothesis in question may con-
tend thus: "Words have fufilled their obligation as they com-
pletely convey their own meaning. It has been stated that
they convey the meaning of a sentence over and above their
normal duty. To convey the meaning of a word is one thing
and to convey the meaning of a sentence is another thing. How
can a word discharge twofold duties which are distinct by their
nature? But our hypothesis does not suffer from this defect
since the meaning of a word, having produced its own consci-
ousness, does not engage itself in discharging some other duty.
Hence, the meanings of words should convey the meaning of a
sentence." The critics point out that the above contention is
not logically tenable. The reason behind their criticism is as
follows. The last word of a sentence has not fulfilled its mission
as it has not some other task. The last word of a sentence,
being benefited by the recollection of its antecedent words, is
called a sentence. Some say that the meaning of the last word,
being mutually related to the rest of its antecedent words, is
known as the meaning of a sentence. Hence, the meaning of a
sentence is conveyed only by a sentence.
Now, the contenders have taken an exception to the above
suggestion. They put a few questions to the critics. Let us dis-
cuss some of them. Do words discharge double functions, viz.,
the communication of its own meaning and that of the mean-
ing of a sentence the strength of recollection which due to
a single impression ? Or, do they do these two duties by means
of different impressions? Let us clarify the purport of the ques-
tions. The knowledge of the meaning of each word produces an
impression. One type of impression is represented by it. An-
other type of impression is produced by such knowledge as
refers to the aggregate of all words, constituting a sentence.
The well-known accepted principle is this that the diversity of
effects points to the heterogeneity of their causes. In order to
explain a particular effect a transcendental impression is asMeanings of Words, their scope
825
sumed. If effects are different in their nature then many diverse
transcendental impressions will be assumed in order to explain
them. (Thus we see that the above questions are not hard nuts
to crack. No gratuitous assumptions are made. The assump.
tion of the two types of impressions is necessary. Such an as-
sumption offers an answer to the above questions.)
The defenders of the hypothesis in question have also stated
that it is impossible to recollect letters, passed away long ago.
Such a statement is not logically sound. We may somehow
imagine that as letters are contents of the knowledge of a word
so words may be contents of the knowledge of a sentence. We
shall immediately discuss this supposition.
Let us now turn our attention to another problem, viz., 'Do
letters convey the meaning of a word and that of a sentence
simultaneously or successively?' We answer this problem thus.
Letters discharge their function in this order. They convey the
meaning of a word at first. Afterwards they convey the mean-
ing of a sentence. Now, the upholders of the hypothesis under
discussion may contend that the solution, offered by the critics,
amounts to this that the meanings of words point to the mea-
ning of a sentence. The above remark of the defenders in ques-
tion is not logically tenable. The meaning of a word is an
object of knowledge. It cannot be included in the source of
knowledge. Moreover, the difference of the meaning of a word
from that of a sentence is not absolute. Hence, the relation
between an indicator and the indicated, which holds between
smoke, accompanied by the relation of universal concomitance,
and fire and between a lamp, unaccompanied by the relation
of universal concomitance and the colour, does not obtain be-
tween the meaning of a word and that of a sentence. If the
defenders of the above hypothesis judge it impartially then they
will realise that an object cannot be both the illuminator and
the illumined. Hence, their verbal statement that the meanings
of words point to the meaning of a sentence is empty but not
founded upon the rack of solid facts. If they contend that
nature divides them into such two halves then they behave like
the disciples of the Buddhists who hold that one and the same
phenomenon by its very intrinsic nature plays the part of a
mark and the object marked.826
Nyayamanjari
Now, the defenders of the hypothesis in question may con-
tend thus Words denote universals. A sentence points to a
particular. There is a great gulf fixed between a particular and
a universal. As a universal is not cognised without the
medium of a particular so a universal points to a particular.
Hence, a universal plays the part of an illuminator and a par-
ticular is illumined by it. As there is a real difference between
an illuminator and the illumined, so a universal differs from a
particular. The implication of the above contention is this
that their suggestion is logically sound and they do not follow
the foot-steps of the Buddhists in order to defend the above
hypothesis.
Let us examine the above solution. We all accept the con-
clusion that there is a real difference between the meaning of a
word and that of a sentence. But we also submit the following
by way of criticism in this connection. If words which consti-
tute a sentence cease to function then no meaning is conveyed
by them. Just as the eyes do not reveal an object when they
cease to function. Hence, the suggestion of the defenders, "As
smoke and such other objects which are knowable objects point
to fire and other objects so the meanings of words which are
knowable objects point to the meaning of a sentence" does not
hold good. Words, conveying their own meaning, are capable
of communicating the meaning of a sentence. Why do you not
follow the text of your own school. Kumārila has said to this
effect.
When words function to communicate the meaning of a sen-
tence as their main task they also convey their own sense which
invariably precedes the final meaning just as a bundle of
faggots emits flame in order to boil some articles of food. The
sense of this statement is that words, having communicated
their own meaning, convey the sense of a sentence.
The secondary operation of a cause does not interfere with
its main operation. Words have two kinds of power to convey
their meaning viz., (1) the power to convey the primary
(etymological) meaning and (2) the power to express the inner
meaning. Words exhaust their first type of power to communi-
cate their own meaning. The second type of power is fully app-
lied to express the meaning of a sentence.Meanings of Words, their scope
Though words have fulfilled their mission, to some extent,
communicating their own meaning yet they have not as yet
completed their main task for which they have assembled. Thus,
the knowledge of the sense of a sentence will not fail outside
the scope of verbal knowledge. If words do not operate at all
in order to convey the meaning of a sentence then the know-
ledge of such meaning does not surely come under the jurisdic-
tion of verbal knowledge. If it is admitted that the knowledge
of the meaning of a sentence is verbal because of its causal
connection with the knowledge of words then one should also
hold that it is also a piece of auditory sense-perception
since it is indirectly connected with the auditory sense-organ.
Let us now examine the critical remark of the defenders of the
hypothesis under discussion. If they hold that the meaning of a
sentence is communicated when words have completely ceased
to operate then we fail to understand which kind of proof will
effectuate the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence. The
knowledge of the meaning of words is not perceptual since
the meaning of a sentence is supersensuous.
The knowledge of the meaning of a sentence is not inferen-
tial since the propounders of the said hypothesis themselves
have said that it is not an inference and elaborately refuted
the affirmative view. Again, this knowledge is not verbal since
words have completely ceased to operate. Universals are not
known without particulars. Hence, a universal points to a
particular. The drift of this line of argument is that the
meaning of a sentence is known through presumption. Do the
upholders of the said hypothesis say it in the affirmative? If
they say so then the very meaning looks like dharma which is
revealed only through presumption. Such a conclusion is nei-
ther sound nor acceptable to you. Thus, the meaning of a
word turns out to be the seventh source of true knowledge.
Such a conclusion is not acceptable to you. Therefore the
meanings of words do not determine the knowledge of the
meaning of a sentence.
The defenders of the said thesis have stated that the joint
method of agreement and difference reveals that the meanings
of words are the source of the meaning of a sentence. Something
may be stated on this point. The meaning of a sentence is not
827828
Nyayamanjari
an independant reality. It is nothing but the meanings of words
in their relational character. The meaning of a sentence is possi-
ble only when the meanings of words constitute it. There is no
doubt about it. But the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence
cannot be causally traced to the meanings of words. Words
communicate the meaning of a sentence since words have not
ceased to operate. When a man remains inattentive he does
not listen to words since he, being attentive, says shortly after.
"I have not heard your words as my mind was otherwise
engaged. Please repeat them." If words had not conveyed sense
then he would have made out the meaning of words, having
recollected the words but would not have made a request to
repeat them for his hearing. Therefore, the knowledge of the
meanings of words lies at the root of that of the meaning of a
sentence. But the meanings of words do not convey that of a
sentence.
The defenders of the said thesis have said "One, seeing the
white colour and hearing the neighing sound, comes to know
that a white horse is running." They have made an observa-
tion in this connection that the said judgment is derived from
the meaning of words but not from words. Such a conclusion
is not convincing. Do we not see a white cow move? Does no
sentence convey the sense that a white cow moves. When we
perceive her to move the resulting judgment that a white cow
moves is a percept. The judgment in question is not the mean-
ing of the sentence that a white cow moves. The judgment
that white horse is running is deducive in its character just
like the syllogism that there is fire on the hill. If a judgment
flashes in our mind but a sentence is not heard before then
we cannot say that the said judgment is the meaning of a
sentence.
There is no need of prolonging this discussion.
The concluding Portion of the above Topic is that a Sentence Conveys
its own Aleaning
By means of an imaginative synthesis letters are combined
into words and a sentence. Thus letters, having assumed the
forms of words and a sentence, convey the meaning of words
and a sentence. Therefore, the knowledge of the meaning of aA Sentence to convey its own meaning
sentence is not produced by the meaning of words. Such know-
ledge owes its existence to a sentence which has not ceased to
operate.
How do letters constitute a word and a sentence ?
What is the hypothesis according to which letters constitute
a word and a sentence by an imaginative synthesis and convey
their sense? Jayanta refers to it in order to solve the problem
thus -
829
The ancient teachers of the Nyaya school have framed the
following hypothesis. At the out-set the initial letter is pre-
sented to our consciousness. When this consciousness passes away
an impression which is produced by it survives. Then the second
letter is grasped. The awareness of the second letter coupled with
the impression of the first letter produces a more effective second
impression. Afterwards the third letter flashes on the mind. The
awareness of the third letter accompanied by the two previous
impressions produces a more powerful impression of the third
letter. As long as the last component letter of a word is not
cognised, the inner process of framing impression will go on in this
way. When the last letter is apprehended a strong impression is
generated. An act of recollection recalls all antecedent letters
in memory. The apprehension of the last letter passes away at
the third moment of duration of the said recollection. Hence,
the apprehension of the last letter is on the point of destruction
at the second moment of duration of the said remembrance.
The last letter which is an object of apprehension is on the
verge of destruction and the group of letters which are recalled
in memory constituted a word. Then the knowledge of the
initial word produces an impression. Afterwards in accordance
with the procedure of letters the knowledge of the second
word arises in the mind. The knowledge of the second word
coupled with the impression of the first word produces a very
strong impression of the second word. Then, according to the
order of apprehension, impression and recollection, the knowl-
edge of the third word takes place. All the impressions previ-
ously strengthened and the knowledge of the third word co-
operate to produce a more powerful impression. Thus, the
modus operandi will continue unless and until the knowledge
of the last letter flashes in our mind. The very powerful830
Nyayamanjari
impression which comes into being immediately before the
knowledge of the last word revives the memory of all antece-
dent words since the impression which is made strong immedia-
tely before the knowledge of the last word becomes exceptionally
strong. The collection of words which consists of letters and
one of which is known and the remaining ones are recalled in
memory passes under the name of a sentence.
A sentence, having thus come into being, communicates its
own meaning. One must admit that an impression produces
another impression and an impression has skill in producing
such impression. If one does not subscribe to this hypothesis
then in all cases, the repetition of an act will become futile.
The Refutation of the above Hypothesis Regarding the Constitution of
words and Sentences by letters
The critics take an exception to the above hypothesis and
point out the following defects in it. They hold that the said
solution is not satisfactory since if it is admitted then the sim-
ultaneity of the two acts of consciousness should be accepted.
They, now substantiate their charge. As antecedent words are
recalled in memory just after the presentation of the last word
to our consciousness so the relation of denotation holding be-
tween a word and its meaning will also be at that very point
of time recalled in memory since the meaning of a word will
not be cognised if the relation of denotation is not remem-
bered. Again, if the meaning of constituent words is not
grasped then the meaning of a sentence will not flash in our
mind. And without the remembrance of the relation of deno-
tation the meaning of a word is not presented to consciousness.
When we employ words to convey objects of every day occurr-
ence the listener follows us without being consciously aware of
remembering the relation of denotation holding between words
and their meanings. Memory also subconsciously or uncon-
sciously helps us when we infer an accustomed object. The
inference of such an object is not preceded by the conscious
process of recollecting the relation of universal concomitance.
But one is compelled to admit that the relation of universal
concomitance is somehow remembered. Similarly, we should
also assume that the relation of denotation is subconsciously831
On the Constitution of Words and Sentences
or unconsciously recalled in memory. The reason behind this
assumption is this. An inhabitant of the cocoanut island who is
absolutely innocent of the relation of denotation obtaining
between a word and its meaning cannot make out the mean-
ing of a word. As the apprehension of the relation of denotation
has happened before so the recollection of the said relation
renders the useful service. Therefore, the recollection of words
antecedent to the last one and that of the relation of denotation
simultaneously take place just after the presentation of the last
word to consciousness. Thus the simultaneity of the two acts of
consciousness unavoidably occurs.
Now, the defenders of the above hypothesis may contend that
the remembrance of the antecedent words follows that of the
relation of denotation. Thus, they try to evade the charge of
simultaneity. The critics point out a fresh defect in the present
solution. If this is their contention then they will admit that at
the time of the recollection of the antecedent words the mean-
ing of words flashes in their mind. Thus, the simultaneity of
the two acts of consciousness takes place in another form. They
cannot say "The meaning of words does not flash in the
mind."
The reason is this that if all the conditions of an effect really
assemble and the obstructive element is conspicuous by its
absence then the appearance of the said effect cannot be pre-
vented. Now, in order to face the charge of the simultaneity of
the two acts of consciousness the defenders may suggest that
the remembrance of all antecedent words will succeed the
knowledge of the meaning of a word. If this is their contention
then the sentence in question will surely be bereft of the last
word since the auditory perception of the last word has passed
away at that time. Let the point in question be clearly stated.
When the relation of denotation obtaining between antecedent
words and their meanings is recalled in memory the perception
of the last word is on the point of destruction. And when the
meaning of words is presented to consciousness the said percep-
tion of the last word has passed away.832
Nyayamanjari
The Refutation of the above hypothesis Regarding the constitution of
words and sentences by letters
Now, the defender may argue in his defence that the last
word continues to exist though it is no more presented to our
consciousness. We say only by way of criticism, "May the
elaborate system of Logic be safe!" (The critics suggest that
such an admission contradicts all accepted hypotheses and
invalidates the system of logic itself.) Again if it is held that
the last word is not presented to consciousness though it persists
then we simply put this question to them viz. "What service
it render, thus persisting ?" He may say in reply to the question
that it will be presented to our consciousness again. We put
another question to him. The question is "What is the source
of the second consciousness?" If the auditory organ once
suspends its function then it does not resume its work. At least
we have no knowledge of such working of the auditory sensc-
organ. Nobody has direct knowledge of an external object in
and through mere introspection. The inner organ has no
direct access to an external object. When it receives the aid of an
external organ it is able to be aware of an external object. If
the consciousness of the last word re-appears anyhow then the
charge of the simultaneity of the two acts of consciousness stands
irrefutable.
Moreover, all these antecedent words are mere empty sounds
and as such they continue to exist as sounding brass and a
tinkling symbol. Such unintelligible sounds, being remembered,
convey no sense. What benefit do we derive from their reco-
llection ? Now, if you (the upholder of the thesis under criti-
cism) hold that those words along with their meanings are
recalled in our mind then in every case the simultaneity of the
two different acts of consciousness will be inevitable since an
act of consciousness will surely be crossed by an act of remem-
brance, i.e., the remembrance of the relation of denotation.
Therefore, the hypothesis of this type is highly inconsistent.
A Revised Hypothesis that Letters Constitute Words and Sentence in
Another Way
Some interpreters represent the process of the word-building
in a different manner. All letters are combined in a single833
Letters as Constituents of Words and Sentences
word.
unit to form the first word. The first word, thus formed, is
presented to our consciousness at the outset. Then the relation
of denotation is recalled in our mind. When the said relation
flashes in our memory
the consciousness of the first
word is on the eve of destruction. During this state of
crossing the antecedent act of consciousness, referring to
of knowledge
the first word, produces another event
which points to such meaning as is denoted by the first
Afterwards, the knowledge of the said meaning
produces an impression. Then following the order of events
stated above, the consciousness of the second word comes
into being. Then, the relation of denotation holding between
the second word and its meaning is recalled in our memory.
The consciousness of the second word is on the eve of destruction
at that time. At this stage of its life the immediate antecedent
consciousness of a word, in co-operation with the remembrance
of the relation of denotation, produces the knowledge of the
meaning of the second word. The meaning flashes in our
mind as determined by its own denotative word. The
knowledge of the meaning of the second word, in co-
operation with the impression of the knowledge of the
meaning of the first word, makes a stronger impression.
Now
comes the turn of the formation of the third word.
A few letters which consecutively follow one another are
combined into a word. Thus, the third word is revived. It is
presented to our consciousness. Again, the relation of denot-
ation which obtains between the third word and its meaning
is recalled in our memory. Again, the consciousness of the third
word on the verge of its destruction, assisted by the memory of
the relation of denotation, produces the knowledge of the mean-
ing of the third word as determined by the third word. This know-
ledge in co-operation of its antecedent impression, strengthens
the existing impression. Thus, the process of the growth of know-
ledge goes on unless and until the last word of the sentence is
presented to our consciousness and its meaning is communicated.
At last, the awareness of the last word produces the knowledge
of its own meaning as determined by the denotative last word.
Afterwards, the antecedent strong impression produces a judg-
ment of memory which refers to all meanings as determined by834
Nyāyamanjari
the past words. The said judgment of memory and the judg-
ment which refers to the meaning of the last word point to all
words as determinant of their contents. The collection of words,
thus revealed, constitutes a sentence. The meanings which are
presented to our consciousness as denoted by these words cons-
titute the meaning of the sentence in question. Thus, a
collection of words and their meanings some of which are
recalled in memory and some of which are directly experienced
constitutes a sentence and the meaning of a sentence
respectively.
The Review of the Alternative Hypothesis
The alternative hypothesis does not stand to reasons. When
the meaning of the last word is known by us the last word is
also presented to our consciousness as its determinant in
the capacity of a denotative word. The word in question
is undoubtedly one of the conditions of the knowledge of
the said meaning. There is no divergence of opinion
regarding the view in question. If the word is cognised,
no body can deny existence to it. The word cannot cognise
itself. It must be an object of some kind of cognition. Let us
now define the exact nature of this cognition. What is its
cause? The cognition in question does not owe its existence to
the auditory sense-organ. The first apprehension of the last
word is perceptual. The perception in question is auditory.
The auditory sense-organ, having produced the above perce-
ption of the last word, has become inactive with regard to the
same effect.
As it has been inactive so it cannot de novo
produce that cognition which points to a word as a determinant
of some meaning. We cannot directly introspect an external
object with the help of our inner organ. If an external object
had been directly introspected then all the words first, second
and so on would have been thus introspected. In that case why
do you say that they are recalled in memory? As the last word
is the cause par excellence of the knowledge of its meaning so
it will also be the cause par excellence of such cognition as
reveals itself as a determinant of a meaning. Such a hypothesis
is contrary to reason since as a word is cognised, it is an object
of cognition. One and the same thing cannot be both an objectA Sentence to convey its own Meaning
and cause par excellence of the same act. We have elaborately
discussed this point in our definition of perception. We have
also refuted the hypothesis that an object, qualified by its
denotative word, is perceived. An elaborate refutation of this
point is superfluous.
The Hypothesis that A Sentence Conveys its Own Meaning is Somehow
Established.
Some other interpreters put forward an alternative suggestion.
At first the first word is cognised. Then the relation of denot-
ation holding between it and its meaning is recalled in mind.
It is followed by the knowledge of its meaning. The knowledge
of the meaning acts as a destructive agent of the cognition of
the first word. [A law is honoured in the Vaiseșika system that
a distinctive attribute of an all-pervasive substance is destroyed
by its immediately succeeding attribute]. The auditory sense-
organ, receiving the help of the cognition in question
which is about to pass away, produces the cognition of the second
word which is qualified by its immediately antecedent word.
Thus the cognition of the second word comes into being. It is
again followed by the recollection of the relation of denotation
holding between the second word and its meaning. Then the
knowledge of the meaning of the second word follows in its
wake. It goes to destroy the cognition of the second word.
The auditory sense-organ, co-operating with the cognition of
the second word which is on the verge of destruction, produces
the cognition of the third word as qualified by the second word
in the capacity of its immediate predecessor. In this way the
cognition of all the remaining words of a sentence appears.
This process continues to work unless and until the last word is
not cognised. When the cognition of the last word takes place
the recollection of antecedent words is not more required as an
accessory condition in accordance with the process of ideal
construction mentioned above. The reason behind this state-
ment is this that the remembrance of antecedent words yields
such a result as is automatically established by the cognition of
a word which is on the eve of destruction. The contribution of
the said cognition towards the form of its immediate successor
is this that an antecedent word is presented to our consciousness
835836
Nyayamanjari
as qualifying its immediately succeeding word. Let us now see
the result of the act of remembrance. When the last word is
cognised all the antecedent words are also presented to our
consciousness. The cognition of an antecedent word which is
on the verge of destruction produces another cognition which
refers to a relational whole in which the antecedent word
qualifies its immediate successor-word. Thus, the arrangement
of words in a definite order is worked out by the above cog-
nition itself. What is the need of remembering all past-words ?
As an additional act of recollection is not required, there is no
occasion for the simultaneity of the two acts of cognition. We
have already mentioned how the cognition of the last word
comes into being and presents its content to our consciousness.
The cognition of the last word working out its effect in the way
mentioned above, brings about the knowledge of the meaning
of a sentence. Thus, the hypothesis that the meanings of the
constituent words of a sentence imply the meaning of a sen-
tence does not stand to reasons. Therefore, a sentence will
convey its own meaning and the meanings of words will not
point to the meaning of a sentence.
A Refutation of the Alternative Hypothesis
Some other interpreters subject the above hypothesis to severe
criticism. They point out that the said hypothesis is not im-
mune from defects. The second word is never cognised as being
qualified by the first word. The cognition of the first word
comes into being at first. It is followed by the recollection of
the relation of denotation. This act of remembrance acts as
destructive agent to the cognition of the first word. The said
cognition is now on the verge of destruction. When the mean-
ing of the first word is conveyed to us the cognition of the first
word has passed away. We are generally informed of a maxim
that a piece of consciousness which has passed away renders no
service favourable or unfavourable
to any other event of
consciousness.
Now, the upholders of the hypothesis may contend thus :-
An act of consciousness which conditions another act of cons-
ciousness is opposed to the latter, as the former is destroyed by
the latter. But we should also bear in mind that one act ofA Refutation of the alternative hypothesis
837
consciousness is not necessarily opposed to another such act be-
cause the relation of the destroyer and the destroyed obtains
between them. Such a statement is not sound because in some
cases the relation of the destroyer and the destroyed does not
hold between an act of consciousness and another act of cons-
ciousness. Though we admit the truth of the above critical re-
mark yet we say "Let the relation of the destroyer and the
destroyed be fixed between the cause-consciousness and the
effect-consciousness." Though such a relation obtains between
the said acts of consciousness yet the consciousness of a word is
held to be the condition of the recollection of the relation of
denotation just as an impression conditions the remembrance of
the said relation. Because the said relation of denotation will
not come into being if it is not conditioned by the cognition of
a word just as it does not appear if an impression does not re-
vive it. If it is held that the revival of an impression is the
function of the said cognition then the cognition in question is
surely the condition of the act of recollection since the former
produces the latter through the intermediate process viz., the
revival of impression. Thus, the three acts of consciousness viz.,
the cognition of a word, the remembrance of the relation of
denotation, and the knowledge of the meaning of a word, are
simultaneously present. Thus, they commit a serious blunder.
. Moreover, the cognition of a word is not that of a partless
whole. But it is an ideal construction of a series of consecutive
letters since the hypothesis that a word consists of no parts has
been refuted. We should also remember in this connection that
two or three, or three or four, or five or six letters constitute a
word, these letters are consecutively presented to our cons-
ciousness, and the consciousness of each letter comes into being
and passes away in a consecutive order. All the letters which
constitute a word are never simultaneously presented to our
consciousness. The cognition of the last word turns up in this
way. The cognition in question does not endure long. The
antecedent ones among letters which constitute the last word
will also pass away. Hence how does a judgment present its
content in which the last word is a subject and its antecedent
word is a predicate qualifying it? They build castles in the air.
A sentence conveys its sense even if its constituent words areNyayamanjari
uttered at interval of time. The master of a house who is busy
with various calls of duty directs the attention of his servant,
uttering his name "Kaṇḍālaka" and then attends to some other
business. Having finished it he says "On my horse". Another
call of business interferes with his order. He pays his attention
to it. Having completed it, he says again "Put harness". Hav-
ing done something else he says again "And bring him." But
his servant follows the sense of such a sentence viz., "Oh
Kaṇḍālaka put harness on my horse and bring him". It is im-
possible from your point of view to make out the meaning of
the sentence in question since an antecedent word does not
qualify its succeeding word and all words of a sentence are not
called up.
Moreover, as the followers of the master logician (Pravara)
hold these logicians also subscribe to the thesis that a judgment
which is relational in character does not refer to its subject and
predicate. But it refers only to the subject. The distinction of
the awareness of a mere successive word from that of a succes-
sive word following an antecedent word is explained by the
diversity of their conditions.
838
Though the antecedent word qualifies its succeeding word yet
it is not presented to our consciousness. Hence, the second word
is only grasped by our consciousness. If this is so what is the
good of admitting that an antecedent word qualifies its succeed-
ing one?
The suggestion that an antecedent word does not qualify its
succeeding word does not hold water since the relation of
denotation which obtains between the second word and its
exclusive meaning has been only recalled in mind. The word
has been employed, in some cases, to convey its own meaning.
But it is, now, qualified by another word. But the meaning of
the second word as qualified has been never grasped. Hence
such a qualified meaning cannot be communicated. Let this
discussion be stopped. This speaks of the unprecedented
scholarship of Sankara Svāmin.
Jayanta's own theory regarding the communication of the meaning of a
sentence by itself is established
An objector comes up and points out
"If all suggestions,A Sentence to Communicate its own Meaning
839
put forward by the expert logicians, are defective then
you should frame a better and defectless hypothesis and place
it before us." Jayanta says in reply to the above remarks, "We
cannot suggest a novel theory which is highly original. Short-
sighted as I am, I cannot discover even a blade of grass which
my predecessors, logicians of keen insight, have failed to take
notice off."
Now, you may put a question to me viz., "Why do you
entertain an ardent desire for composing a logical treatise-a
sphere of rational thinking of the great scholars? My humble
reply to this charge is that the ardent desire, referred to, does
not invite criticism and an advice, given by others to relinquish
it, will take no effect on me,
The king of Kashmere has confined me in a solitary cave-a
prison cell. I have been passing my days in pleasure of com-
posing the book in question.
Though it is a recreation to me yet, I should explain how
the constituent letters communicate the meaning of a sentence,
constituted by them.
Our humble suggestion on this point is as follows. The re-
cent or remote destruction of objects which are recalled in
mind does not condition our memory. It is an impression
which is only responsible for memory. The objects which are
remembered may have passed away recently or long ago.
But their passing away does not affect the impression in ques-
tion in the least. In conformity to the law of memory all
antecedent words which had passed away long before and had
been uttered at a long interval left an impression on our mind.
This impression will revive memory. Now, if we admit that
earlier words are called up and the last word is directly appre-
hended then we are to face the charge of the simultaneity of the
two acts of consciousness. In order to avoid this problem
we should rather admit that the remembrance of the last
word takes place immediately before the communication of
the meaning of a sentence. All the words of a sentence, being
recollected, will convey the meaning of a sentence. To this
effect we make the following suggestions. At the outset we
cognise the first word which is a combination of some consecti-
tive letters. It is followed by the recollection of the relation ofNyayamanjari
denotation together with the impression, left on our mind, by
the cognition of the first word. We suggest that the said re-
collection and the said impression simultaneously appear in
our mind. The hypothesis of the simultaneity of the two acts of
cognition has been disapproved by the recondite logical treatise
but compresence of two mental phenomena, such as an event of
cognition and an impression, has not been disfavoured. The
knowledge of the meaning of a word follows in their wake. It
also leaves an impression on our mind. Then we again combine
a series of consecutive letters and construct the second word.
We cognise it. Then we remember the relation of denotation
which holds between it and its meaning. At the same time the
cognition of the second word receiving the co-operation of its
antecedent impression produces a stronger impression. Again,
just as the earlier two series of consecutive letters have been
combined to form the first two words so the third series of
consecutive letters are combined to form the third letter. The
third word is now presented to consciousness. The relation of
denotation obtaining between it and its meaning is also called
up. Receiving the help of its antecedent impression a stronger
impression of this word and that of the nowlege of its mean-
ing came into being. In this way the cognition of a word
produces a deeper impression and the knowledge of the mean-
ing of a word, also, produces a similar impression. All these
impressions survive in our mind. Our subconscious mind is a
store-house of all such impressions. In this mental background
the last word of a sentence is presented to our consciousness.
This consciousness is followed by the remembrance of all words
as the impressions of all words survive in our mind. The impres-
sions of the meanings of words revive their memory. As the
impressions of words precede those of their meanings so these two
sets are successively recalled in accordance with the order of
their succession. The collection of words which are recollected
constitutes a sentence. The other assemblage of meanings which
are recalled constitutes the meaning of a sentence.
Now, a fresh objection arises. As recollective knowledge per
se is erroneous so the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence,
being representative in character, is not true. Such an objection
does not hold good since the representative knowledge of a
840841
A Sentence to communicate its own Meaning
meaning in question perfectly accords with the direct acquain-
tance of the relation of denotation of a word. If we know that
this word denotes this particular object but remember that it
denotes something else then our remembrance is faulty. Just as
if we know that smoke is the right probans of fire i.e., the rela-
tion of universal concomitance holds between smoke and fire
but infer fire, seeing mist then our knowledge is wrong. But in
the present case the consecutive letters have been recalled in
that very order of succession in which they have been presented
to our consciousness at the time when the relation of denotation
holding between the word, constituted by these letters, and its
meaning has been taught. So, the hypothesis suggested by us,
suffers from no defects. Representative knowledge which
immediately follows a presentative one bears a close resemblance
to the latter.
There is no need of entertaining the suggestion of judgments
of memory. When the meaning of the last word is known to us
a judgment of introspection will arise. It will refer to all words
and their meanings. It will resemble the referential knowledge
of the number a hundred' etc. Words which are introspected
constitute a sentence. Their meanings which are introspected
constitute the meaning of a sentence. Such an introspection
cannot be disapproved since every body bears witness to it.
Now, a fresh question arises in our mind. Why do you hold
that the recollection or the introspection of all antecedent words
and their meanings follows the knowledge of the meanings of
the last word? What is the motive of framing such a suggestion?
If the meaning of the last word is known to us then all our task
has been completed. What remains to be done? Say what will
be referred to by a judgment of memory or by that of intro-
spection. Such an argument does not carry conviction since no
body can dare deny that the meaning of a sentence which is
experienced by every body is presented as an integrate whole.
nor introspected then such
If its parts are neither recalled
a whole cannot be constructed. Thus we see that recollection
or introspection renders some service. In this way, words,
being recalled and referred to by a synthetic judgment, consti-
tute a sentence. And the meanings of words, being thus re-842
Nyayamanjari
called and referred to by such a judgment, constitute the
meaning of a sentence.
An introduction to the hypothesis of mutual relations
Let not a sphoţa which stands for a word or a sphota which
stands for a sentence convey a sense. Let not a sentence or the
meaning of a sentence be partless. Let the hypothesis of words
or sentences as suggested by you be approved. But say how are
the meanings of words mutually related.
The meanings of words such as a cow, a horse, a man and an
elephant remaining unrelated do not constitute the meaning of
a sentence. A judgment of memory or of introspection which
closely follows the knowledge of the meaning of the last word
only refers to the meanings of words as cognised before. Now,
we should discuss how the knowledge of their mutual relation
comes up.
Rival hypothesis on this Topic
We admit that teachers differ in opinion so far as this point
is concerned. Some hold that words convey their meanings as
mutually related. If we do not subscribe to it, words cannot
constitute a sentence. Others hold that words denote their
meanings as mutually unrelated. They, being thus denoted,
point to their mutual relation when they are judged from the
stand-points of reciprocal reference, material non-contradiction
and proximity.
This point is to be debated. Instruction plays the very im-
portant part to reveal the meaning of a word or of a sentence
since a word or a sentence remains ever unintelligible if the
meaning of a word or of a sentence is not taught. Are we ini-
tiated into the meaning of a sentence or into that of a word ?
Are we taught that this sentence conveys this meaning or that
this word conveys this meaning? If we hold that we are initiat-
ed into the meaning of a sentence then we advocate the
doctrine of Anvita-abhidhána. If we hold that we are initiated
into the meaning of a word then we subscribe to the doctrine
of Abhihita-anvaya.843
Doctrine of Abhihita-anvaya
The doctrine of abhihita-anvaya
Now, a question arises viz., "which one (of the above two-
hypotheses) is to be accepted ?" Our simple answer is that the
hypothesis of Abhihita-anvaya should be approved since the
ascertainment of the meaning of a sentence presupposes the
determination of the meanings of its constituent words. If one
is not acquainted with the meanings of words, he cannot make
out the meaning of a sentence. The meanings of words are
classed under different heads. We say "This word denotes a
universal, this word means a substance, this word stands for an
attribute and this word conveys an action. This statement
becomes relevant if words express the above meanings which
remain at first unrelated. But if the meaning of a word is
qualified by the meanings of other words then there is no hard
and fast rule that a particular meaning is determined only by
another particular meaning since all meanings are simultaneously
presented to our consciousness." In other words, the propoun-
ders of the hypothesis of abhihita-anvaya substantiate their
hypothesis by a negative argument. They hold that if the
hypothesis of anvita-abhidhāna had been true then the mean-
ing of each word would have been presented to our conscious-
ness as qualified by the meanings of all other words since it is
impossible to draw a line of distinction. Now, the upholders of
the hypothesis of anvita-abhidhãna may contend that by the
joint method of agreement and difference the meaning of one
word is distinguished from that of another word.
Such a contention does not hold water since there is no
occasion for the application of the joint method of agreement
and difference to individualise the meaning of a word. The
presentation of all meanings as being mutually related does not
come to a stop. We do never hold that a sentence is construct-
ed with words the meanings of which are mutually related.
But if words are isolated from a sentence, they express such
meanings as are in themselves, i.e., as stand unrelated. If all
words which are the source of meanings assemble together then
all the meanings of words are also presented to our conscious-
ness in their mutual relation. In that case, it is very difficult
to single out the meaning of a word. Now, if a sentence isNyayamanjari
independant of the meanings of words then the sentence
"Bring a cow" may be taken as the mandate "Tie down a
horse." Thus we see that real meanings of words are required
for the understanding of a sentence. If they are so required
then they should be grasped in their well-defined character.
Hence, one is compelled to admit that the relation which holds
between a word and its meaning is natural. When one learns
the meaning of a sentence from the usage of the experienced
persons he does so deciphering the meaning of each constituent
word. If one does not subscribe to this view then he will have
to learn the meaning of each sentence. As sentences are infinite
in number so it is impossible to obtain mastery over language.
The net result of this hypothesis is this that all verbal trans-
actions will be defunct. It is also noticed that a person who is
conversant with word-meanings makes out the sense even of a
new poem, composed by a poet. This is possible because of the
knowledge of words and their meanings. If one subscribes to
the hypothesis that a sentence is the indivisible unit of a
language and the meaning of a sentence is to be learnt then
none will understand the meaning of a new poem. Therefore,
the hypothesis of anvita-abhidhâna is not sound.
844
Reasons which invalidate the rival hypothesis of anvita-abhi-
dhāna are as follows. If the hypothesis under discussion is
accepted then only one word in a sentence should be competent
enough to express the meaning of the sentence and all words
should be rudundant. As we know the meaning of a word, we
also know the meanings of other words which qualify it. The
dictum of anvita-abhidhāna-vädins is that a word conveys its
own meaning as qualified by the meanings of other words.
Thus we see that a single word conveys a word of objects to be
denoted by other words. Now, let all our verbal transaction be
executed with a single word. But, as a matter of fact, we cannot
transact all our business with a single word. If we say "A
cow" then all predicable attributes and actions flash in our
mind. But we cannot select the acceptable meaning. To know
all things at a time is in a sense to remain ignorant since a
listener can take no action upon a word. To a man of taste an
ocean, full of water, does not appear to be distinct from a
desert since saline water does not serve the purpose of pureDoctrine of Abhihita-anvaya
water. But we see no reason why the word 'cow' will convey
its own meaning as qualified by the exact attribute or action
which will suit the purpose of the listener.
Now, the upholder of the hypothesis of anvita-abhidhāna
may contend that the word in question is accompanied by other
words and these accompanying words will fix up the exact
meaning of it. Does the said association of words help to convey
the above meaning? Or, does the word itself communicate its
own meaning? If you insist on the truth of your suggestion
then we say in reply that the association of other words is not
as significant as that of some words in a mantra which is
muttered. It makes no difference whether these words are
present or absent since a word serves no useful purpose if we
do not know that it denotes such-and-such meaning. Now, if
you hold that other words help to determine the meaning of
the said word by conveying their own meanings then you
subscribe to the hypothesis of abhihita-anvaya. Therefore, we
arrive at the conclusion that the hypothesis of abhihita-anvaya
is better. The meanings which are conveyed by words become
related to one another from the stand-points of mutual re-
quirement, recíprocal proximity, and absence of contradiction.
The meaning of a word which is required by that of another
word is related to that. The objects denoted by words which
are adjacent to one another are mutually related. If the object
denoted by a word is not incompatible with another such object
then they are mutually related. In other words, an object
which is related should be fit to be related. If these con-
ditions of being related are not fulfilled then a relation
between two objects does not take place. For this reason, the
sentence, "A hundred herds of elephants stand on the finger-
end" has the meanings of its words mutually unrelated since
these meanings are unfit to be related. In other words, there is
material contradiction. Thus, the above sentence conveys no
meaning. But if we subscribe to the hypothesis of anvita-
abhidhāna then the said sentence should convey a sense since
according to the above hypothesis a sentence does never express
a meaning which is unrelated. But, in reality, the said sentence
communicates no meaning. Hence, it is reasonable to hold that
the meanings of words which are conveyed enter into relation-
845Nyayamanjari
ship. Some scholars have also said to this effect that words,
having conveyed their own meanings, complete their task and
afterwards these meanings, being grasped, point to the meaning
of a sentence.
846
1
The refutation of the hypothesis of abhihita-anvaya
Now, the upholders of the hypothesis of anvita-abhidhāna take
their stand and review the remarks of the propounders of the
hypothesis of abhihita-anvaya. They point out that a word does
not illuminate an object just like a lamp since a listener must be
initiated into the meaning of a word in order to understand it.
One learns the meaning of a word, noticing the usage of ex-
perienced persons. The experienced employ sentences in order
to communicate their ideas. The sentences are never replaced
by words. The reason is that mere words are never used to ex-
press one's ideas.
When a matter is discussed some other matter flashes in our
mind. A word is employed to communicate this new idea. This
word should be considered as a sentence. A speaker employs a
sentence in order to communicate a system of ideas in which all
ideas are mutually connected. The listener also understands in
that way. A third person who stands by them also learns the
meaning of a sentence in that manner.
This is what is called the communication of the meaning of a
sentence. Do you say what is a sentence? Words which con-
jointly express a unity of meanings are called a sentence.
Linguists hold that a collection of words, expressing a unity of
meanings, is a sentence. If we subscribe to this view then a
collection of words conveys a unity of meanings. If only a
single word had expressed such a unity of meanings then words
could not conjointly convey a complex whole of meaning. As
external conditions such as faggots etc. conjointly maintain the
act of cooking, all bearers conjointly carry a palanquin and
three pieces of stone keep a pot boiling so all words without an
exception point to the meaning of a sentence. This is what is
called anvita-abhidhāna (an expression of mutually related
meanings). If a word could express a self-complete meaning
which is in no way connected with the meanings of other words817
Hypothesis of Abhikita-anvaya Refuted
then all words would have no usefulness to convey the mean-
ing of a sentence.
Now, the adverse party invites the attention of the uphol-
ders of the hypothesis in question to the open question, viz., if
a single word is capable of conveying the same meaning as all
words conjointly do then the utterance of all other words is
superfluous since a single word completes the whole task. The
said objection is not tenable. It is impossible for a word to
express a complete idea without receiving the assistance of
other words. Now, you admit that a single word cannot convey
a complete meaning. Such an admission is contrary to the
corollary of your own hypothesis. The reason is as follows.
Each word falls within those the operation of which yields a
complete result. If such a single word is present then an
operation which brings about a complete result takes place.
Again, such an operation does not take place if such a single
word is not present. Thus we say that a single word produces
a complete result.
Now, if the above objection goes to such a length then we say
"Let the collection of words convey the requisite meaning."
We also feel no necessity of holding that individual words
which constitute the said collection convey the meaning in
question. The hypothesis, thus revised, amounts to this that a
sentence and its meaning admit of no parts. Such a logical
conclusion is not sound since as the working of an assemblage
is noticed so the working of an individual is also observed.
What is the working of a collection? And what is the work-
ing of an individual? The communication of the meaning of
a sentence is what a collection does-whereas the exact express-
ion of the meaning of a word is the work of an individual word.
Let us cite an example. The assemblage of all conditions
produces an act. viz., the act of cooking whereas individual
conditions perform separate acts, e.g., faggots burn and a pot
holds articles to be cooked.
If a word has a distinct operation of expressing its own
meaning then it should be admitted that the meaning of a
word keeps itself aloof from those of other words. Now, the
upholders of the hypothesis under discussion join issue with
their opponents and emphatically assert that the meaning of a848
Nyayamanjari
word does not stand unrelated. The reason is this that a word
is employed to serve the purpose of a collection of words.
Though a word is included in a collection of words yet it is
not a fact that the specific operation of a word is not grasped.
Hence, we do not share the view that a sentence is partless
since the specific contribution of each word comprised within
an assemblage of words is known to us. It is also observed
that words which fall within a collection of words conjointly
perform the work of the collection. The said collection is not
noticed to maintain itself as distinct from the constituent words
themselves. Though words in a body perform a team work
yet the individual activity of each work is detected by us. Let
us cite an example to elucidate our point. A carriage consists
of several parts. We do not single out each part and say that
this part, being made up of this stuff and that part, being made
up of that stuff, separately perform the action of a carriage.
Similarly, a single word is never employed. Even if it is
employed, it does not point to the meaning of a sentence. But
a word, being combined with other words, engages itself to
convey the meaning of a sentence. So, it is reasonable to
think that the above word throws light on the hypothesis of a
complex whole of meanings. Hence, we have stated that words
conjointly convey their meaning. Words which convey their
meanings in this way constitute a sentence. In other words,
a collection of words which expresses a complex whole of
meanings is a sentence. For this reason as we know the
contribution of each part so we agree with the grammarians
in not denying etymological meanings to words. Again, as we
definitely know that each word goes on with its operation unless
and until the final goal is reached so we agree to differ from
other Mimamsakas in the point that a word denotes its mean-
ing as qualified by those of other words.
An answer to the charges levelled Against the Hypothesis of Anvita-
Abhidhāna
Our objectors have pointed out that if one subscribes to the
hypothesis of anvita-ahhidhâna then he should admit that the
meaning of each sentence is to be learnt, otherwise, a person
who knows only the meanings of words cannot make out the
PHypothesis of Anvita-Abhidhana
meaning of a verse composed by a modern poct. Such an
objection has been raised by one who is ignorant of the science
of meanings. The word 'a cow' does not convey its meaning,
viz., a white cow since an exception is noticed. It also refers
to a black cow as its meaning. One cannot also hold that
the word 'a cow' denotes cows having all sorts of attributes
since objects, thus denoted, are infinite in number and difficult
to comprehend. But the meaning of a word is fixed up by
means of requirement, fitness of relation, and proximity. A
sentence is only competent to suggest the meaning of a word.
The ascertainment of the right meaning is arrived at by means
of the joint method of agreement and difference. The applica-
tion of this method is also confined only within the four walls
of a sentence. Though the knowledge of the meaning of a
sentence extends up to that of a word yet the starting point
of the knowledge of a meaning is that of a sentence. From this
we understand that there is no reference to a meaning which
remains unrelated. This reason behind the above conclusion
is this that an experienced man who orders and an experienc-
ed man who is ordered do never employ a mere word. This
point has been stated before. Though we subscribe to the
hypothesis of anvita-abhidhäna yet it is not a truism that the
exact meaning of a word is not determined. With the illustrat-
ion of the different functions of various parts of a carriage we
have shown the different workings of various words in a
sentence by means of the joint method of agreement and
difference.
Thus we see that the meaning of a sentence does
not necessarily constitute an indivisible unit. With the help of
accessory conditions such as requirement, fitness of relation and
proximity we have sometimes determined the meaning of a
sentence together with those of words. These meanings of
words are also exactly determined. This knowledge of the
meanings of words furnishes us with a clue to understand the
meaning of other sentences which consist of these words since
the denotation of a word, properly deciphered, does not change.
Hence, we shall be able to understand the meaning of a new
poem, composed by a modern poet. We have also stated
before that if words denote merely isolated meanings then we
shall have never an access to the meaning of a sentence since
849850
Nyayamanjari
such meanings are not the means of the determination of the
meaning of a sentence.
Another objection to this hypothesis has been recorded to
this effect that the utterance of other words is superfluous. An
answer to it has also been given. The reason behind our
answer has been stated thus-"when other words come in close
proximity all words play their part full well. You may ask,
'If other words come in close proximity, what does a word
do ? Our answer is that the same charge may also be levell-
ed against all conditions. But you admit that all conditions
conjointly bring about an action. i.e., produce a result. Similar-
ly, if all words co-operate to convey the meaning of a sentence,
expressing their own meanings then the hypothesis of abhihita-
nvaya (unrelated meanings) does not stand to reason since
one is never initiated into the unrelated meaning of a word.
Again, if we do not admit that the meanings of words are
presented to our consciousness in their relational character then
we cannot establish that they are related to one another after-
wards since an unrelated meaning finds no ways and means of
being related.
Now, the objector may contend that unrelated meanings
may relate themselves to one another with the help of accessory
conditions such as requirement, fitness and proximity. This
point has been already discussed. Our reply to this contention
is this that the said contention is not tenable. This require-
ment belongs to whom? Does it belong to a word, or to
its meaning, or to a knower? As a word and its meaning are
unconscious so they have no requirement since requirement
presupposes consciousness. Hence, we simply display empty
words when we say that a word requires another word and a
meaning requires another meaning. But a knower who definite-
ly understands the meaning of a sentence enjoys the freedom
of thought. But this requirement is not a source of valid
knowledge since one cannot acquire the true knowledge of
things by an act of will. At the outset words reveal things as
they are the source of valid knowledge. Then, a desire for
relating these things springs up in the mind of a person. It
follows the direction of words. It is, thus, the source of the
knowledge of mutual relation among things. If words are held851
Hypothesis of Anvita-abhidhana Concluded
to be responsible for the knowledge of things then we are to
admit that words have long-lasting operation like arrows since,
if words
pass away, then the mere desire of a person cannot
manufacture the mutual relation of things, denoted by words.
Thus, we see that the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence
is not derived from the verbal source without an impediment.
If we are in a position to demonstrate that words directly
convey the meaning of a sentence then it is unwise on our
part to hold that words indirectly convey the meaning of a
sentence.
+
The concluding portion of the hypothesis of Anvita-Abhidhāna
In fine, we arrive at the conclusion that words convey relat-
ional meanings since it is the only way of communicating
relation.
As we know for certain mutually related meanings so it is
understood that related meanings have assembled. There is
no other source of the knowledge of relation. If one says
'Bring a white cow,' he does not necessarily refer to a relat-
ion. In some cases of usage the experienced persons make
mention of words denoting relation. Though an ignorant
person uses a sentence involving a word which points to relat-
ion yet the relation does not function as a bond of union. Let
us cite an example. If such a person says 'There are ten
pomegranates' the meaning of the word 'ten' is not related to
we see that the
that of the word 'pomegranates'. Thus
hypothesis of anvita-abhidhāna (related meanings) is reason-
able.
Now, the upholder tries to find out an answer to the problem
"How do you explain the sentence that there are a hundred
herds of elephants on the tip of a finger from the stand-point of
anvita-abhidhāna ?'
The defender puts the same question to his objector and says
O upholder of the hypothesis of abhihita-anvaya! how do
you solve this very problem? As you hold that meanings, being
expressed, enter into mutual relation so you just explain how
the meanings of words contained in the sentence are related to
one another after their expression.'852
Nyayamanjari
Now, the upholder of the hypothesis of abhihita-anvaya says
in replies to the question, 'As the meanings of words of the
sentence are not fit to be related, they are not mutually related.
What we intend to say is this that expressed meanings are
mutually related only when the conditions of mutual relation,
viz., requirement, fitness and proximity are satisfied.'
The upholder of the hypothesis of anvita-abhidhāna (ex-
pression of related meanings) says, "I have also held that words
convey mutually related meanings provided that they satisfy the
conditions of requirement, fitness and proximity. As the said
conditions are not fulfilled, words contained in the above
sentence, do not express a related meaning."
The propounder of the hypothesis of abhihita-anvaya presses
his point with the following words, 'As you preach the doctrine
of anvita-abhidhãna so you hold that the above sentence will
convey no sense since it is absurd for the meanings of words to
be mutually related. In other words, if the meanings of words
cannot unite themselves with one another then a sentence
which contains words having unrelated meanings clearly fails to
communicate its meaning. But I advocate the doctrine of
abhihita-anvaya. Hence I hold that though the meanings of
words in the above sentence stand unrelated yet the sentence
conveys its meaning. Saying this I am not open to the charge
of inconsistency.'
The upholder of the hypothesis of anvita-abhidhāna retorts
thus Though you are a judge, having keen insight yet you
have not followed the process adopted by a word to convey its
meaning. It is natural function of a word to convey its mean-
ing. But the speaker may have merits or demerits. When
they are taken into consideration it is determined whether
these words of the speaker have been rightly or wrongly used.
Words convey an additional sense. It is this that they point to
the relation which holds between a case and a verb. But ow-
ing to the perversion of the intellect of a speaker the knowledge
of relation which holds between a case and a verb becomes
false.'
Some thinkers have said on this point that knowledge, deriv-
ed from other proofs, contradicts the truth of the said verbal
knowledge.853
Hypothesis of Anvita-abhidhăna Concluded
Now, the upholder of the doctrine of anvita-abhidhāna says,
"The intrinsic validity of verbal knowledge is, therefore,
supreme. This or that sentence produces verbal knowledge
without being disturbed as long as it does not face an opposi-
tion. Let us discuss whether the sentence that there are a
hundred herds of elephants communicates a meaning or not.
There is nothing wrong with the syntactical arrangement
relating to words since the sentence consists of words which
indicate the locative case, the subject standing upon the locus
and the verb along with this meaning is clearly communicated
If the said meanings were not communicated, the said
sentence would not have been constructed. But, in reality,
both of us hold the same view that it is an impossible feat for
the meanings of words to be mutually related since they are
not fit to be so related.
to us.
If it is held that there is no syntactical arrangement of words
in the above sentence then the so-called sentence should be a
mere enumeration of several letters like a mention of letters
such as ka, ca, ța, ta, pa, etc., but should not be a real
sentence.
If we take into consideration the mere syntactical
arrangement of words in this case as we do in the case of the
sentence "There are ten pomegranates' then the hypothesis
of anvita-abhidhāna does not violate the rules of reasoning.
The sentence is formally correct but materially incorrect.
The opposition which it faces comes from another quarter but
not from the quarter of words. This point has been clarified
already. Words have an intrinsic power by dint of which they
operate smoothly. Under these circumstances we can botellý
assert that the Vedas will carry their intrinsic validity, facing
opposition. As the Vedas do not owe their existence to an
author so they do their work i.e., correctly convey their mean-
ing without any hindrance. The knowledge which is derived
from the Vedas bears the stamp of intrinsic validity. It is
A lengthy discussion on this point is
no
above all defects.
unnecessary.
Thus we see that if we subscribe to the hypothesis of anvita-
abhidhāna, we can explain how a sentence communicates its
meaning. May we also suggest that the learned scholars sho:854
Nyayamanjarí
discard the hypothesis of abhihita-anvaya' since it has no
educative value.
The Refutation of The Doctrine of Anvita-Abhidhāna.
The critics do not endorse the above solution. Your state-
ment that one learns the meaning from the usage of the
experienced persons is true. It is also a truism that all verbal
transactions are executed by means of sentences. It is a fact
that all words, like the bearers of a palanquin, assemble toge-
ther to convey the meaning of a sentence by their joint effort.
Let us now discuss how one acquaints himself with a meaning.
Does he acquaint himself only with a composite meaning which
is worked out by the totality of all words? Or, is he taught
only the meaning of each word. Now, if one is to learn an
indivisible whole of meaning then it is unavoidable for him to
gather the meaning of each discrete sentence. In that case, as
we have pointed out, learning will be impossible since sen-
tences are infinite in number. If the truth of the second
suggestion is admitted, the exact meaning of each word should
be ascertained. The propounders of the hypothesis of anvita-
abhidhāna have cited an example, viz., the different parts of a
carriage have distinct functions. The narration of it suggests
that the distinct function of each word is to be admitted. If
the truth of the above suggestion is denied then the necessity of
the knowledge of the etymological meaning of a word will not
be required for the understanding of the meaning of a
sentence. In that case, a speaker who intends to communicate
the meaning of the sentence "Bring a cow" may also
use the word "a horse" instead of the word 'a cow'.
Unlike the grammarians you hold that the knowledge of
the meaning of a word is necessarily required for the under-
standing of the meaning of a sentence. By the joint method of
agreement and difference one picks up the extent of the mean-
ing of the word 'a cow'. The same extent of this meaning
becomes active to constitute the meaning of a sentence in which
the word 'a cow' finds a place.
The Refutation of the Hypothesis of Anvata-Abhidhāna.
O Mimãmsakas! You have held that the word 'cow' in855
Hypothesis of Anvita-abhidhāna Refuted
question conveys its meaning qualified by such other meanings
as are required, involve no material contradiction in order to be
related and are in close proximity. You do not commit this
mistake because the word 'cow' is always noticed as engaged in
the service of a collection of words. The word 'cow' conveys
as much meaning as its force of conveying primary meaning
permits it to do. We shall have to make out what is the exact
primary meaning of a word, i.e., how much a word denotes and
how much it does not do. Though the primary meaning of the
word 'cow' is invariably associated with other meanings which
are reciprocally required, are mutually related without involv-
ing material contradiction, and are in close proximity yet it
cannot be left out. What cannot be brushed aside constitutes
its meaning. The meaning may be only the mere universal of
cowness or the concrete universal. Thus the primary meaning
of the word 'cow' maintains its identity in the midst of its
relation with other meanings. This meaning cannot be ignored.
method of agreement and
It is detected by the joint
difference.
Moreover, a single word is never used. In order to use a
word, a sentence shall be constructed. The series of a colle-
ction of words are essentially required for this purpose. Nobody
has noticed the skill of a single word in constructing a sentence
without having the aid of a collection of words. An individual
word, being included in the collection of words, plays its part
of conveying
power
of
to convey the meaning of a sentence. Its
the primary meaning does not help it much. But its power
conveying the intended meaning helps it to communicate the
The Mimāṁsakas, having failed to
meaning of a sentence.
recognise this distinct power of conveying the intended meaning,
of convey-
admit the truth of the hypothesis of anvita-abhidhāna. But
such an admission is not logically sound. The
ing the primary meaning has no special aptitude for the
expression of one and all meanings. If one is not acquainted
with distinct laws which govern the communication of the
In other
meaning of a word and that of sentence then he cannot escape
the charge of using superfluous words in a sentence.
words, if a word, contained in a sentence, expresses the meaning
of a sentence then other words, used in it, become superfluous.
powerNyayamanjari
The hypothesis of anvita-abhidhāna cannot get rid of such
defects. The word 'cow' has been used in a sentence. Its
meaning is related to those of other words in it. Now, the word
'cow' should denote the related meaning by its power of
conveying the primary meaning. If it does not do it, the
knowledge of the related meaning does not arise in our mind.
How does the hypothesis of anvita-abhidhana stand this
criticism? The hypothesis of anvita-abhidhãna leads to another
absurd conclusion. The word 'cow' denotes a mean-
856
ing which is related to another object. If the second object
is not denoted by the word 'cow' then the related meaning
cannot be communicated by it. Thus the hypothesis amounts
to this that an object which relates to a cow is not apprehended
but a cow as related to it is presented to our consciousness.
Such a conclusion (faces) a glaring contradiction in the above
hypothesis. Now, if the upholders of the said hypothesis admit
that the word 'cow' also denotes the relation of a cow then
they should admit that each word denotes all objects. So, we
hold that the power of expressing the primary meaning cannot
logically communicate all shades of meanings which the words
are competent to convey. Therefore, the hypothesis of anvita-
abhidhāna is not tenable.
The upholders of the hypothesis of anvita-abhidhåna should
also explain the problem, viz., 'How does the syntactical
relation take place in the sentence that there are a hundred
elephants on the tip of a finger ?' The sense of the objection
lies in this. As the meaning of the sentence involves material
contradiction, how can a related meaning be denoted by a
word? Now, they may contend that in the above case the
syntactical relation is merely verbal and there is no actual
relation between the meanings of words. Such a contention
does not hold good. If the meaning of a sentence involves
material contradiction then words are not related to the real
meanings to be conveyed by them. In other words, there is
no syntactical relation among words. Now, the upholders
of the hypothesis may further contend that the function
of a word is to reveal its meaning only but a word does not
judge whether a meaning is consistent or not. The critics
review this contention and hold that there is an element of857
Hypothesis of Abhihita-anoyaya
truth in it that a word does not judge the consistency or other-
wise of its meaning. But they should also know that a word
does not denote a related meaning. We cannot also frame a
general proposition that all words cannot but denote related
meanings. We notice instances which contradict the truth of
the above general proposition. The sentences, viz., 'There are
ten pomegranates' etc., are an exception to it. Now, if the
upholders of the hypothesis hold that the so-called sen-
tences are no sentences then the critics will also point out that
the sentence that there are a hundred elephants on the tip of
a finger is no sentence. But the knowledge of the locus, the
located, the verb and their relation is merely illusory. Therefore,
the hypothesis that words denote related meanings does not
stand to reason.
If words denote
Do words denote such meanings as stand mutually unrelated
like iron-pikes ? A hypothesis which points a view like this is
not also sound since usage does not justify it.
unrelated meanings then it is next to impossible to find out
their mutual relation since words, having completed their task,
are never noticed to resume their work. In other words, a
word does never accomplish its work by fits and starts. When
it works it completely exhausts its capacity to bring about the
result. Thus, the hypothesis of abhihita-anvaya does not get
the sanction of our experience. Therefore, the above two
hypotheses, i.e., the hypothesis of anvita-abhidhana and that of
abhihita-anvaya, do not come off well.
Some critics have said to this effect. The above two hypo-
theses do not hit our fancy. The hypothesis of anvita-abhidhāna
does not take its stand upon reasoning. Similarly, the hypo-
thesis of abhihita-anvaya does not stand to reason.
Another Hypothesis and Its Refutation.
quibbles and hold that words
Some other logicians use
denote meanings which, being related point to the relation of
such meanings as are being expressed. This hypothesis is not
to our taste.
These
These two distinct acts are not experienced by us.
two acts have been mentioned thus :-One is the act of858
Nyayamanjari
expressing the meanings and the other is the act of relating
them.
Do these acts occur successively or simultaneously? If they
take place successively and if the act of relating precedes then
the new hypothesis is nothing but that of anvita-abhidhāna. It
is not the hypothesis of anvīyamâna-abhidhāna (the expression
of meanings being related). Again, if words convey their
meanings at first then it is the hypothesis of abhihita-anvaya but
not that of abhidhīyamāna-anvaya (the relation of meanings
being expressed). In other words, they mean to say that as
soon as meanings are expressed, they are cognised as being
related and that meanings are related as soon as they are being
expressed. These two acts are not simultaneously experienced.
The act of expressing refers to words. The act of relating refers
to meanings. When words are employed the act of relating
which refers to meanings is not experienced.
The competent judges have arrived at the conclusion after
close examination that the act of expressing is absolutely
distinct from that of relating since if meanings are not expressed,
they cannot be related. The judgement that this is a white
cow points to the co-ordination of the two properties of an
individual cow. These two properties are the universal of
cowness and the colour 'white'. If there are no terms to
indicate their co-ordination then how can we grasp their
mutual relation?
Thus we see that the propounders of the two hypotheses,
viz., the hypothesis of anviyamāna-abhidhāâna and that of
abhidhiyamāna-anvaya simply play upon words. They have
coined new words only. They express no new objects which
are experienced by us. All defects which cling to the above
two hypotheses do not fail to infect it.
The Knowledge of meanings in Relation by means of Tâtparya-Sakti
Some logicians hold that the hypothesis of anvita-abhidhāna
represents the rough draft of the real thesis but that of abhihita-
anvaya stands for the minute draft of it. Let us illustrate this
point. If the word 'a cow' communicates its meaning as being
related to abstract universals of attributes and actions but not
as being related to specific attributes and actions then the hy-Tälparya Sakti
859
pothesis is called as anvita-abhidhana. If the relation of a cow
to a specific attribute such as the colour 'white' etc.. is commu-
nicated by other words and a minute information is thus given
then the hypothesis is known as abhihita-anvaya. This new
exposition makes no improvement upon the old one.
The defects which have been pointed out in the hypothesis of
anvita-abhidhāna visit the new exposition of the said hypo-
thesis viz., words express their meanings in relation to abstract
universals. The same defects as have been shown to vitiate the
hypothesis of abhihita-anvaya infect its new explanation, viz.,
the relation of the meaning of a word to a specific attribute
etc., is conveyed by other words.
The hypothesis in question points to nothing new. It is in no
way distinct from the hypothesis of abhihita-anvaya. When the
specific meaning of a sentence is stated the hypothesis of
abhihita-anvaya is adhered to. Thus it is evident that the
ancient path is welcome to convey the meaning of a sentence.
How do you explain everything by adopting the routine method
that words point to the meaning of a sentence only by their
power of expressing primary meanings? But we find that this
path is also beset with various troubles as all the previous hypo-
thesis are infected with many defects.
The defenders of the hypothesis under discussion say in reply
that the path of conveying the meaning of a sentence is
immune from all defects since it has been said before that words
conjointly express the meaning of a sentence. The meaning of
a sentence which all words conjointly communicate is nothing
but the meaning of a principal word as related to the meanings
of other subordinate words. In other words, the meaning of a
sentence is nothing but the organization of the meanings of
words in which one plays the important part and others play
the secondary ones. Where is the room for defects ?
Now, a question arises in our mind. Do you intend to revive
the old hypothesis of anvita-abhidhāna? They say in reply
"No sir! the hypothesis in question is not that of anvita-abhi-
dhana'. The critics ask, 'If this is not the hypothesis of
anvita-abhidhāna, how is it that words conjointly express the
meaning of a sentence ?' The defenders give the following
answer 'Though these words conjointly express the meaning860
Nyayamanjari
of a sentence yet this is not the hypothesis of anvita-abhidhāna.
Words conjointly bring about the related meaning but do not
convey the related meaning'. The objectors again ask 'what
do you say? Do words conjointly produce the meanings of a
sentence as lumps of earth and other factors in mutual co-ope-
ration produce a jar? The defenders answer, "This is not so
since words simply indicate the above meaning but do not produce
it'. The objectors again put this question to them. 'Do you
not indulge in quibble if you hold that words conjointly work
but do not convey the related meaning? The answer to the
above question is as follows:-
We mean to say that words indicate the mutually related
meaning but do not convey such a related meaning. The
power of conveying the primary meaning does not point to the
related meaning. But the joint method of agreement and diffe-
rence reveals the exact meaning of each word.' But these words
have another power which is called Tātparya-śakti. The fun-
ction of this power is to reveal the meanings of words contained
in a sentence, as being in relation with one another since this
power is the common effect of powers belonging to all words.
This new power lasts so long as these words do not produce an
independent judgment which represents a self-contained unity
of ideas.
Let this suggestion be fully explained.
Perceptual or indirect non-verbal knowledge reveals its object
in different manner. It incompletely or completely reveals
its object which is in front of us.
But verbal knowledge is a class in itself. Its working is abso-
lutely different. Words go on functioning unless and until a
self-contained judgment is not produced.
For this reason, in this world, a single word is never employed.
Because a single word cannot produce as much knowledge as
purpose of a listener.
serves the
Now, we put a question to you. It is this—Do words possess
some other power beside the power of expressing their primary
meanings? Is it conducive to a complete result? (A complete
result stands for a self-contained judgment). An answer to
this question is in the affirmative. Those who subscribe to the
thesis of relation cannot refute the existence of such a power.Tātparya Sakti
The relation of meanings is not conveyed by the power of con-
veying the primary meaning, But a sentence conveys the corre-
lation of meanings,
Now, some logicians suggest that if the related meaning
is denoted by a word then the relation of meanings is
presented to our consciousness and if this condition is not ful-
filled then the relation of meanings is not cognised. This sugg-
estion is not tenable. The meanings of words are bound up
together by means of a relation since words denoting these
meanings work conjointly since if causes produce jointly their
effects then these effects are never seen to remain isolated. A
stem and a suffix, attached to it, imply each other and convey
their meanings jointly. But a stem does not denote the mean-
ings of a suffix since an injunction, the meaning of a lin suffix,
is not denoted by the basic root, yaj, and the lin suffix does
not denote the meaning of a basic root, such as yaj. A sacrifice
is denoted by the basic root 'yaj'. It cannot be denoted by the
lin suffix. They do not independently bring about their effects.
Similarly, words conjointly produce their own effects but one
word does not denote the meaning of another word. Sentences
also convey their meanings with reference to their context but
point to no independent meanings. This view has been express-
ed by some other thinkers.
As a stem and its suffix împly each other so a word implies
another and a sentence implies another.
861
This hypothesis is better. According to it words conjointly
produce their effects but the meanings conveyed by words,
maintain their individuality but do not interpenetrate.
If one denies that words imply one another then words look
like so many detached iron-pikes. But if the hypothesis of
anvita-abhidhāna is adhered to then the use of words other than
one in a sentence becomes superfluous.
But if we stick to the hypothesis that words conjointly com-
munícate their meanings then it becomes free from all defects.
This path should be followed since it is not beset with thorns.
We agree to the point that words have power to denote their
own primary meanings. They have an additional power which
is called 'Tătparya-śakti'. This power continues to work unless862
Nyayamanjari
and until the meanings of words are presented to our conscious-
ness as being in relation with one another.
Hence, we do not subscribe to the hypothesis of anvita-abhi-
dhana. But of course we surely hold that a sentence conveys a
unity of meanings in which they are mutually related.
We utter words with this object in view that they will con-
jointly produce their main effect but not that they will merely
communicate their own primary meanings. In other words, we
utter words with the intention of communicating the meaning
of a sentence. The author of Śloka-vārttika has said to this
effect.
Words which constitute a sentence engage themselves in
communicating the meaning of a sentence. In order to do it
they have an intervening process as its invariable associate viz.,
the expression of their primary meanings. Similarly, sticks of
wood burn in order to accomplish their main task, viz., the act
of cooking.
It is this great creeper of understanding. Knowledge is its
main root. The arrangement of words is its bright sprout. The
impressions due to the experience of all antecedent letters are
its broad leaves. The meanings of ords which have been
expressed are its full blown blossoms. The excellent meaning of
a sentence is its palatable fruit. One should not put it in mouth.
It is to be put in heart. When it enters our heart the listeners
long for no other objects.
Kumarila has said in his Tantra-Värttika to this effect. The
knowledge which is derived from words by a listener blooms in
the shape of the meanings of words and lastly bears fruits in the
shape of the meaning of a sentence.
The knowledge which follows from this method is sound. We
have said before that the meanings of words, being mutually
related, constitute the meaning of a sentence.
An objection to the ascertainment of the Meaning of the Vedas
The path to ascertain the meaning of a sentence has been
shown before. All worldly transactions are conducted by means
of it. The same path will help to determine the meaning of the
Vedas since the words which are used in the classical Sanskrit863,
Hypothesis that Meaning of the Vedas are not ascertainable
language have also been used in the Vedic Sanskrit in the same
sense.
the
Some critics raise an objection to this effect. Sentences which
are used in the classical Sanskrit language convey such meanings
as are grasped by other sources of knowledge. Hence, we are in
a position to apply other ways and means to find out the mean-
ings of words. The objects which are denoted by the Vedic
sentences are supersensuous. We who are ordinary people have
our mind polluted by impurities such as love, hatred etc. We
possess no power of seeing transcendental objects. One who is
not endowed with the mystic power of intuiting supersensuous
objects is not initiated into the meaning of the Vedas, observing
usage of the experienced persons. Suppose I desire today to
learn the meaning of the Vedas and may approach an expert
teacher for this purpose. But he also cannot intuit supersensuous
objects. So, his knowledge of the Vedas is not up to the mark.
As his knowledge is limited so he will have to approach an-
other teacher in order to receive proper instructions. The
teacher whom he will approach will also sit at the feet of an-
other teacher like me because of his imperfect knowledge. He
will also wait upon another. Thus we see that the entire tradi-
tion rests upon the consecutive series of blind teachers. As
Pāṇini teaches the meaning of the conventional term 'vṛddhi'
in his sūtra 'Vṛddhir ādaic', as Piñgala explains the technical
term 'ma' in his work on Prosody as three consecutive long
syllables, as the author of Abhidhāna-mālā, a lexicographer,
mentions the synonyms of the word 'hasta' as kara and pāņi so
the Vedas themselves do not teach in the same strain viz.
the words which are contained in the Vedas denote such
and such meanings. Hence, the true meaning of the Vedas is
incomprehensible.
Some other critics also have expressed the same view. If a
person
who has fondness for worldly objects does not himself
understand the meaning of the Vedas then he will not learn it
from others. The Vedas themselves do not explain their own
meaning. Hence how is it possible for a man to gather the
sense of the Vedas?
Now, if one may argue that a learner is initiated into the
meaning of the Vedas with the help of their accessories suchNyāyamanjari
as Nigama, Nirukta, and Vyakaraṇa. Such an argument is
not sound. The reason is as follows. The authors of these
works agree to differ. Words which have been taught admit of
various meanings. Words, prepositions which are prefixed to
verbs, and indeclinable words have no fixed meaning. Other
plausible meanings of the Vedas may also be imagined.
Some critics have suggested the different meanings of one
and the same Vedic text. One who is desirous of Heaven
should perform the sacrifice of Agnihotra. This is the traditional
meaning of the Vedic sentence 'Agnihotram juhuyāt svarga-
kamah'. Who knows that the same sentence does not point to
the sense 'One should take the flesh of a dog? Is there any
crucial proof to decide the truth of any one of either meanings?
A rejoinder to the above charges is as follows. Now we under-
stand that all our previous discussions about the Vedas are like
the recital of the Rāmāyaṇa before a deaf person. These critics
have heard everything with regard to the ways and means of
finding out the meaning of the Vedas. But they still search for
the means of explaining the Vedas. All problems, raised by the
critics, stand refuted since the ways and means of interpreting
the Vedas have been revealed. We have said that there is no
new Vedic word. The arrangement of these words is only
different. But words which have been arranged are not diffe-
rent from those used in the classical Sanskrit language. From
the very dawn of creation the tradition of the Vedic scholars
has been working. I had learnt the meaning of the Vedas long,
long ago in my previous birth. If I today go to learn the mean-
ing of the Vedas, I shall learn the same meaning.
Where are gone Grammar and Mimāriisā Šāstra, the means of
interpreting the Vedas? These sciences still exist. But you can-
not determine the meaning of the Vedas. O fool! one word
more to add. A man who is under the sway of love and hatred
may not set out for the realisation of transcendental objects.
But it is not a fact that such a person who is desirous of Heaven
will not be able to understand that the Vedic sentence 'Agni-
hotrati juhuyāt svarga-kamah' points to the meaning 'Agni
hotra sacrifice is a means to the attainment of heaven.' Now,
a question may be raised, viz., "How do we receive regular
training in the supersensuous matter?' We have said before
864Hypothesis that Meanings of the Vedas are not ascertainable 865
what we have got to say with regard to this problem. The
tradition of the Vedic scholars throws unflinching light on the
meaning of the Vedic texts since it has been flowing from time
immemorial. The Vedas, their meanings, their knowledge,
their accessories and the performance of the Vedic rites are not
events of our modern age. Some thinkers hold that the Vedic
tradition knows no beginning. But we, the Naiyãyikas, hold
that the said tradition has commenced its work from the very
first day of the creation of the world. Is there any occasion to-
day for heaping contumely on them? Some wicked critics have
disgraced the Vedas with the damaging interpretation of the
Vedic sentence, viz., 'One should eat the flesh of a dog." The
only object which they will accomplish is that they will be
ornamental flowers of hell. No novel criticism has been offered
by them.
Some other thinkers take an exception to this criticism. They
say 'why do you take them to task? Have they offended
against the law? Have they made any inconsistent remark?'
One cannot learn the meaning of the Vedas from an ordinary
person. You may now ask 'who is an ordinary man ? Is he an
uneducated person or an educated grammarian? Of these two
types cabmen are innocent of the use of chaste and correct
words. They are in the habit of using vulgar words in a loud
tone. These words are 'gavi' etc. How will they be acquainted
with the Vedic words?
Though the rustic people employ a few sanskrit words, e.g.,
in Kasmir they use eşi, emi etc., in Darvabhisāra 'gaccha'
etc., and in Madra 'karomi', etc, yet their words are very
small in number. The usage of such words is very limited since
these persons are ignorant of the Vedic Literature.
Now, the defenders of the Vedic tradition may agree in the
following line. The science of Sanskrit Grammar is ancillary to
the Vedas. One distinguishes with its help the correct words
from the incorrect ones. His mind is restrained by the following
injunction-cum-prohibition that a learned man should use
correct words in speaking but should not use incorrect ones.
Thus, learned men always attend to their work, using correct
words only. It has been thus suggested that learned men may
acquire proficiency in the Vedic Literature with little effort.Nyāyamanjari
This suggestion is not sound because it involves circular
reasoning. If the validity of the Vedas is established then its
ancillary science, Grammar, may be carefully studied. With
the help of grammar one will draw a distinction between
correct and incorrect words. Mature consideration given to
correct and incorrect words and acquaintance with the usages
of the learned scholars help us to acquire mastery over the
Vedic words. When one is initiated into them his acquaintance
with the Vedic vocabulary helps him to understand the Vedic
work. Thus, the charge against the Vedas that they are unin-
telligible is answered. Then and then only the Vedas are
considered to be the source of true knowledge. In other words,
the movers of this proposal reason in a circle. The Vedas depend
upon the grammar and the grammar depends upon the Vedas.
Now, the defenders of the Vedic tradition may take up a
different line of argument. They may contend thus-If one
discards with contempt the traditional view that Grammar is
ancillary to the Vedas but reads grammar at his sweet will and
learns to distinguish the correct words from the incorrect ones
then the above hypothesis is not open to the fallacy of circular
reasoning. If this is their contention, let it be thoroughly exa-
mined. Should one study grammar as he takes interest in the
study of Indian dialects (Prākṛta) in order to acquire profici-
ency in classical Sanskrit literary works such as dramas, social
dramas etc.? If the said defender admits the truth of this new
suggestion then the science of grammar will be no more treated
to be affiliated to the Vedas as their ancillary science like a
work on Indian dialects. In that case it should be admitted
that the usages of Indian dialects help to understand the
meanings of the Vedic words. Thus, they jump out of the frying
pan into the fire.
866
Another point in criticism deserves mention. One may
acquire sound knowledge of grammar. He may receive instru-
ction from a truthful person that he should always use correct
words in speaking. He may form the habit of performing Vedic
rites. He may develop his conscience, strictly obey Vedic inju-
nctions and carefully avoid prohibitions. He may be a sound
Vedic scholar. He may entertain respect for the Sastras. Such
a person is very seldom noticed by us. The number of suchHypothesis that Vedas are unintelligible
867
persons is not many. He uses correct words in transacting all
his business which relates to a sacrifice. He moves in
society, paying his sole attention to such actions as are necess-
ary to his main duty, i.e, the performance of sacrifices. If he
is not observed by his disciples in the time of his moving
about in response to the call of duty then how will you utilise
this great savant who is skilful in using correct language as a
teacher? Hence the suggestion that one is initiated into the
meaning of Vedas, noticing the practice of a sound Vedic
scholar does not stand to reason.
The Hypothesis that one learns the Vedas with the Help of Grammar
is not Tenable
If one thinks that the science of grammar will constitute the
means of access to the Vedic lore then he should reflect on it
and solve the problem viz., 'How is it possible for grammar
to open the door?" Pāṇini does not interpret the Vedic texts
as elaborately as the author of Vivaraṇa has explained the
sūtras of Paņini.
Even though we assume that Panini has
interpreted the Vedic texts yet short-sighted and tainted by
hatred, etc., as we are, how shall we, the students of Vedic
Literature, pin our faith in the truth of his interpretation ?
A doubt, viz., whether his interpretation is right or wrong may
arise in our mind. One may now argue that the science of
grammar is a means of access to the Vedic lore because it
If this is his
distinguishes correct words from incorrect ones.
contention then he should admit that the science of grammar
bears a new relation to such rites as are enjoined by the Vedic
injunctions since grammar does not enjoy the status of an
independent science like the Vedas and is affiliated to the
Vedas as their auxiliary science.
Now, the above speculator may contend that the Vedas are
to require grammar because of the injunction 'One should
use correct words in speaking and of the prohibition 'One
should not use incorrect words in speaking'. This contention is
met thus. Let us examine the character of the injunction and
the prohibition in question. Do they find place in a certain section
of the Vedas? Or, are they known to a well circulated topic?
Or, does it deserve discussion ?868
Nyayamanjari
!
The Distinction Between Chaste and Vulgar Words is not Tenable
Let this discussion be stopped since it is a very long one. There
are no such words as bear the lable 'chaste' and similarly the
label 'vulgar' is not attached to some other words. Let us now
put a premium on discussion regarding the jurisdiction of an
injunction and that of a prohibition. Let us take an illustration
of injunction viz., 'One should sacrifice with Vrihis' and an
example of Prohibition viz., ‘One should not take kalanja'.
In the above two examples one knows of the characteristic
features of Vrīhis and Kalañjas from the people at large.
Therefore, an injunction concerning Vrihis or a prohibition
with regard to kalañjas is not impossible to understand. But
as one knows what is Vrihi and what is Kalañja from the
common people so he does not know the distinction between
chaste and vulgar words from the same source. (Hence, an
injunction prescribing the use of chaste words and a pro-
hibition restricting the use of vulgar words remain ever
obscure). Though our ears feel tired with the hearing of
words yet they depend upon simply the undiscerning know-
ledge of words. But the chastity or otherwise of words is
never directly apprehended. As one senses the universal of
soundness belonging to all sounds or the qualities of sound
viz., different accents so he does not perceive with his ears the
chastity or otherwise-ness of a word. As we do not perceive
the chastity or otherwiseness of a word so we cannot infer it
since an inference is invariably based upon perception which
lies at the root of generalisation.
There are two types of words viz. (1) words coined by
human beings and words used in the Vedic Literature. Of these
two types of words, what has been coined by human beings
denotes an object which is either perceived or inferred. As the
chastity or otherwiseness of a word is neither perceived nor
inferred so chaste or vulgar words do not owe their origin to
human agency. Vedic words are now to be discussed. If the
chastity of these words is established then they may come
within the province of injunction and if their non-chastity is
proved then they may fall within the jurisdiction of prohibition.
In that case we cannot admit the truth of following statement
viz. 'As the distinction between chaste and nonchaste words isHypothesis that Vedas are unintelligible
869
well-established so injunction or prohibition concerns only with
the
If we admit the truth of the above state-
proper words.'
ment then it will be inevitably open to the fallacy of a vicious
circle. If injunction and prohibition are established then the
existence of chaste and non-chaste words is proved. Again, if
the existence of these words is established then the existence
of injunction and of prohibition is proved beyond dispute.
What is the exact meaning of the term 'chastity'? Does it
mean that a chaste word is such as has denotation? If we say
in the affirmative then words such as gavi etc. are full well
denotative. Why are not they to be treated as chaste words?
If the communication of meaning decides the chastity of a
word then words like gavi etc. more quickly carry their sense
than words such as 'go' etc., Hence, the so-called chaste words
such as 'go' etc., firstly become non-chaste. Some hold that
non-chaste words cannot directly convey their sense. They
convey their meaning through the medium of their basic chaste
words which are inferred. Hence, they indirectly communicate
their meaning.
The above suggestion does not hold good. It simply points
to another way of communicating the sense of a word. But
the way which is contrary to the suggested one is well-known
in this world. The rustic people who are innocent of Sanskrit
Grammar are well contented with words like gavi etc. since
when they hear these words their meaning is immediately
conveyed to them but is not an inference. In other words, a
common man having heard a vulgar word does not try to find
out its basic chaste word. Recollecting the meaning of the
original word and observing the invariable relation of the
vulgar word with the chaste one he does not indirectly grasp
the meaning of the vulgar word. As trees and fruits which
grow on the northern side of the Mount of Gold are not seen
before, they are beyond our reach, similarly, the chaste
words of Sanskrit Literature are inaccessible to the common
folk. The common man has not grasped the invariable relation
of a vulgar word with a chaste one. Hence how will it be possible
for him to infer the meaning of a vulgar word from that of a
chaste one ?
The learned scholars who are helmsmen in the ocean of870
Nyayamanjari
grammatical literature and are in constant touch with nice
.expressions do not indirectly grasp the meanings of vulgar
words when they use them. In other words, they do not think
in terms of Sanskrit words and gather the sense of other words
through the medium of Sanskrit words. Every body has direct
experience of the truth of the above statement. The power
of communicating a meaning constitutes the chastity of a word.
As such power belongs to chaste words such as 'go', etc. so it
belongs to non-chaste words viz., 'gavi' etc. So, these non-chaste
words may be considered as chaste ones. If the nonchastity
of a word stands for the non-communication of meaning then
it exclusively belongs to the cawing of a crow etc. But non-
chastity does not belong to articulate sounds consisting of
letters. Hence, the vulgar words are not non-chaste.
Now, an objector may argue the chastity of a word is not
merely the pointing to an object since such a definition is too
wide. It also applies to smoke and such other objects which
indicate some other objects. But the power of denotation is
that which tends to bring about some specific acts. Such
power belongs to words like 'go' etc., but does not belong to
words e.g. 'gavi' etc. Hence, words like 'gavi' etc., are not
chaste.
1
The above criticism has been offered by a person who
lacks far sight. A denotative word is that which conveys a
primary meaning. We have thoroughly discussed the point
that denotation means the communication of a meaning by
means of the primary power. This power of denotation is
equally shared by words like 'go' etc., and also by words such
as 'gavi' etc. Therefore, all these words are chaste.
Now, the critics may argue that words which obey the rules
of Sanskrit Etymology are chaste and those which do not obey
such rules are nonchaste. This argument is logically tenable
since the procedure adopted by the science of Etymology is
purely conventional. It is an expression of his arbitrary will.
So its findings are not absolute. Our mature intellect fails to
invent any new definition of chaste and nonchaste words.
Hence, we reaffirm the conclusion that a denotative word is
chaste and a nondenotative word is nonchaste. Hence, an
injunction concerning chaste words and a prohibition with870
Nyayamanjari
grammatical literature and are in constant touch with nice
expressions do not indirectly grasp the meanings of vulgar
words when they use them. In other words, they do not think
in terms of Sanskrit words and gather the sense of other words
through the medium of Sanskrit words. Every body has direct
experience of the truth of the above statement. The power
of communicating a meaning constitutes the chastity of a word.
As such power belongs to chaste words such as 'go' etc. so it
belongs to non-chaste words viz., 'gavi' etc. So, these non-chaste
words may be considered as chaste ones. If the nonchastity
of a word stands for the non-communication of meaning then
it exclusively belongs to the cawing of a crow etc. But non-
chastity does not belong to articulate sounds consisting of
letters. Hence, the vulgar words are not non-chaste.
Now, an objector may argue the chastity of a word is not
merely the pointing to an object since such a definition is too
wide. It also applies to smoke and such other objects which
indicate some other objects. But the power of denotation is
that which tends to bring about some specific acts.
power belongs to words like 'go' etc., but does not belong to
Such
words e.g. 'gavi' etc. Hence, words like 'gavi' etc., are not
chaste.
"
The above criticism has been offered by a person who
lacks far sight. A denotative word is that which conveys a
primary meaning. We have thoroughly discussed the point
that denotation means the communication of a meaning by
means of the primary power. This power of denotation is
equally shared by words like 'go' etc., and also by words such
as 'gavi' etc. Therefore, all these words are chaste.
Now, the critics may argue that words which obey the rules
of Sanskrit Etymology are chaste and those which do not obey
such rules are nonchaste. This argument is logically tenable
since the procedure adopted by the science of Etymology is
purely conventional. It is an expression of his arbitrary will.
So its findings are not absolute. Our mature intellect fails to
invent any new definition of chaste and nonchaste words.
Hence, we reaffirm the conclusion that a denotative word is
chaste and a nondenotative word is nonchaste. Hence, an
injunction concerning chaste words and a prohibition withHypothesis that Vedas are unintelligible
-871
regard to non-chaste words should be futile. The reason behind
the above remark is as follows :-
'One shall speak chaste words' is a well-known maxim.
Why shall we issue an injunction to this effect? "One shall
not speak non-sense" is also well known. Why does a prohibi-
tion come in? As speaking is not possible so the prohibition
of speaking non-sense is meaningless.
As the injunction, 'One should drink water', is absurd so
the prohibition 'One should not cat fire', is equally absurd.
A man naturally seeks to drink water. So any injunction
regarding it is superfluous. What is enjoined by the Sastras
is beyond the reach of normal activities of a person. As under
no circumstances it is possible for one to eat fire so any
prohibition with regard to it is unnecessary. The general rule
which governs prohibition is this that what is possible is
prohibited. Even a camel, being afflicted by the heat of
summer, will not try to eat fire in order to quench his thirst.
Now, the critics may argue in the following manner. Though
words like 'go' etc. and words like 'gavi' ctc. are equally
denotative yet an injunction and a prohibition are fruitful
since their function is to impose restriction upon the indis-
criminate use of words. The use of non-chaste words injoin-
ed,by the Šāstras entails merit. The non-use of unchaste
words prohibited by the Sastras helps one to avoid commission
of sin. Hence an injunction and a prohibition, recorded in
the Sastras, are fruitful. It has been said by Kumarila that
though words, chaste and nonchaste, are denotative alike yet
a restriction, imposed upon their use, is significant since it
regulates merit and demerít.
Such a restriction is an impossible feat to materialise. When
a restriction is to be imposed upon the use of words the use of
which is to be enjoined should be individually mentioned and
words the use of which is to be prohibited should be distinctly
stated. The said injunction should be like this that one
should utter these words. And the said prohibition should be
like that one should not utter these words. If this suggestion
is accepted then the above words are to be mentioned indivi-
dually and their number is also to be recorded. What will be
the net result if they are individually mentioned and theirNyayamanjari
number is counted. This task is impossible even for Brahmă,
the personal creator of this world whose span of life extends
over a hundred kalpas. It is also beyond the range of imagi-
nation even of the god Ananta who has a thousand mouths
wide open. It is also too difficult for the Lord of speech to
perform. It is also too heavy a load for the goddess of
learning to carry. As these words are infinite in number so it
is absurd to have a record of them.
872
Now, the objectors may contend that some common proper-
ties will be discovered and words will be classed under two di-
fferent heads. In other words there will be a group of sădhu
words and another group of asadhu words. But this grouping is
possible if so exclusive common properties of these two groups
are discovered. The critics remark that one may try to find out
such common properties but it is not possible for him to find
them out.
The universal of soundness which belongs to chaste and non-
chaste words is an indivisible entity. Words are not divided
into two classes viz. (1) a class of chaste words and (2) a class
of vulgar words (words used in spoken languages and dialects).
There are no two distinct species under the common genus of
soundness. But a hypothesis (which suggests their existence) is
unknown to the logical world. Nobody experiences that the
species of chastity belongs to all chaste words and the species of
vulgarity belongs to all non-chaste words.
As two distinct species are not cognised so it is not at all possi-
ble to classify words in two groups. As the basis of classification
is not possible so we do not understand this: Why shall the use
of words be regulated by an injunction? Though in the Šāstras
restrictive injunctions have a necessity yet one has got to ex-
plain what is the object of such injunctions. What is the pur-
port of the injunction in question ?
Does it mean that one should utter chaste words only but not
non-chaste ones? Or, does it mean that he should only speak,
uttering chaste words? Both meanings of the said injunction
are infected with defects. Some critics have made the following
observation. If one is enjoined to speak chaste words only then
it is not possible for him to utter non-chaste words. Hence, the
prohibition that one should not speak nonchaste words is ruledHypothesis that Vedas are unintelligible
873
out. Again, if one is enjoined to speak only then he will commit
a sin when he will remain silent.
It has been said before that a word which denotes a me
neaning
is chaste and no other definition of chastity is possible. Hence,
it is impossible to accept that what has no power to denote a
meaning is to be taken as a word. Therefore, there are no such
words as may be called unchaste or non-chaste. The drift of
this argument is that the said prohibition is meaningless.
Now, the contenders may argue that the above regulation is
significant since it prohibits the use of such words as are wrong-
ly pronounced through inadvertance or inability. Prohibition
is directed towards these wrongly pronounced words.
The critics review this new suggestion and point out that if
words which are wrongly pronounced through inadvertance or
inability do not convey meanings then there is no possibility of
applying the said prohibition to them since it follows from the
text that significant words will only be taken into considera-
tion. What is the need of taking unnecessary pains of pro-
hibiting them ?
Again, if vulgar words denote meanings as chaste words, cor-
rectly pronounced, does then prohibition not apply to their
use as it does not apply to the use of chaste words?
Now, the defenders may contend thus: Nobody can deny
that there are words of Indian dialects which are exclusively
used in transactions of secular business. In order to exclude
their use the said prohibition that one should not speak non-
chaste words has been given. Why is not the above restrictive
injunction significant? The critics join issue with the advo-
cates and point out that as many examples of conveying one's
ideas through the contraction of one's ideas through the con-
traction of one's eye-balls, gestures of hands, and such other
expressions are noticed so regulations should also be issued
prohibiting their practice.
In continuation of their criticism the critics remark that a
restrictive injunction has a positive content. It enjoins some-
thing positive. Let us take an example, viz., one should lie
with his wife during a fixed period after her menstruation. The
person enjoined is ordered to do something positive. But a
parisamkhyā injunction has a negative import. Let us take an874
Nyāyamañjari
example, viz., 'Five species of animals having five fingers with
nails are edible.' The above injunction implies that one should
not take the flesh of animals having such and such characteri-
stic features excepting animals belonging to the well-defined
five species. Now, the defenders may contend that the said
restrictive injunction has also a negative import, i. e, it intends
to prohibit the use of vulgar words. If this is their contention
then they simply contradict themselves since they say in the
same breath that the said injunction is both positive and nega-
tive (niyama and parisamkhyā).
Now, the defenders may contend that the said injunction has
only a negative import and is a parisaṁkhyā vidhi, such a con-
tention does not hold good since chaste and vulgar words do not
simultaneously come within the jurisdiction of this injunction. In
case of the above parisamkhyā injunction one may take the flesh
of all animals having five fingers with nails. There is a possibility
of taking flesh since a man is actuated by his natural propensity.
Where there is a possibility there negation is significant. Thus,
the taking of the flesh of certain animals has been prohibited.
As there is no possibility of simultaneously using chaste and
vulgar words so the injunction in question does not fall within
the Parisamkhyā class.
The critics add a new point to their criticism. The defenders
hold that the use of a chaste word brings about merit and the
use of a vulgar word results in demerit. This hypothesis is not
sound. It is unreasonable to assume that both produce trans-
cendental results, viz., invisible merit and demerit since the
tangible result, viz., the communication of a meaning, which
stands to reason has been discarded. It has been said that a
chaste word, properly used, produces the desired result in
Heaven. This statement is not literally true. It falls within
Arthavada. Its object is to praise a chaste word. A word which
has been improperly used is a thunderbolt and kills the institu-
tor of a sacrifice who improperly uses a word. This statement,
also, comes under Arthavada. Its object is to condemn an im-
properly pronounced word. It has been clearly proved that
these statements are subordinate to a sacrifice. They render
assistance to a sacrifice. As they are merely laudatory or con
demnatory Arthavadas so chaste and vulgar words have noInefficacy of the Study of Grammar
connection with transcendental results, i. e., merit and demerit.
A rule, laid down in the Mimāṁsă sutra, clearly expresses the
following decision that a material substance used in a sacrifice,
viz., a special kind of ladle etc., any qualitative change of a
sacrificer, and accessory sacrifices are means to an end but
produce no transcendental result. The injunction that one
should use chaste words in conversation and the prohibition
that one should not use nonchaste words in conversation are
well-circulated but not based upon the authority of the Sastras.
On the basis of this hearsay evidence the science of grammar is
considered to be authoritative. But we shall hope against hope
if we think that it (the science of grammar) is ancillary to the
Vedas on the strength of the said weak evidence. If an injunc-
tion and a prohibition are read in a particular section then
they exercise their influence only upon it since their service
has been meant for the said section. The universal application
of the said injunction and the prohibition is not permissible.
Thus, considering the problem from every possible aspect we
arrive at the conclusion that the injunction and the prohibition,
mentioned above, cannot constitute the basis of the authenticity
of the science of grammar.
875
Inefficacy of the Study of Grammar
Some hold that the injunction 'One should study the Vedas
along with their six ancillary sciences for their own sake' im-
plies the obligatory character of the study of grammar since it
is as ancillary as the other branches of Learning, viz., Phone-
tics, Ritual, Etymology, Prosody, and Astronomy are. This
view does not stand to reason. It is reasonable to hold that the
five branches of Learning (Phonetics to Astronomy) are really
ancillary to the Vedas since each of them renders some unique
services to the Vedas and many Vedic injunctions involve nece-
ssary references to them. Though grammar tries to attract
attention by a show of runs and jumps yet it may be ancillary
to the Vedas only because of the possible reason that it is a
normative science which regulates the use of chaste words but
not because of any other reason. The said function of grammar
viz., the regulation of the use of chaste words is difficult to
establish. This point has been brought home before. Therefore,874
Nyayamanjari
example, viz., 'Five species of animals having five fingers with
nails are edible.' The above injunction implies that one should
not take the flesh of animals having such and such characteri-
stic features excepting animals belonging to the well-defined
five species. Now, the defenders may contend that the said
restrictive injunction has also a negative import, i. e, it intends
to prohibit the use of vulgar words. If this is their contention
then they simply contradict themselves since they say in the
same breath that the said injunction is both positive and nega-
tive (niyama and parisamkhyā).
Now, the defenders may contend that the said injunction has
only a negative import and is a parisamkhyā vidhi, such a con-
tention does not hold good since chaste and vulgar words do not
simultaneously come within the jurisdiction of this injunction. In
case of the above parisaṁkhyā injunction one may take the flesh
of all animals having five fingers with nails. There is a possibility
of taking flesh since a man is actuated by his natural propensity.
Where there is a possibility there negation is significant. Thus,
the taking of the flesh of certain animals has been prohibited.
As there is no possibility of simultaneously using chaste and
vulgar words so the injunction in question does not fall within
the Parisamkhyā class.
The critics add a new point to their criticism. The defenders
hold that the use of a chaste word brings about merit and the
use of a vulgar word results in demerit. This hypothesis is not
sound. It is unreasonable to assume that both produce trans-
cendental results, viz., invisible merit and demerit since the
tangible result, viz., the communication of a meaning, which
stands to reason has been discarded. It has been said that a
chaste word, properly used, produces the desired result in
Heaven. This statement is not literally true. It falls within
Arthavāda. Its object is to praise a chaste word. A word which
has been improperly used is a thunderbolt and kills the institu-
tor of a sacrifice who improperly uses a word. This statement,
also, comes under Arthavada. Its object is to condemn an im-
properly pronounced word. It has been clearly proved that
these statements are subordinate to a sacrifice. They render
assistance to a sacrifice. As they are merely laudatory or con-
demnatory Arthavadas so chaste and vulgar words have noInefficacy of the Study of Grammar
connection with transcendental results, i. e., merit and demerit.
A rule, laid down in the Mimãmsà sutra, clearly expresses the
following decision that a material substance used in a sacrifice,
viz., a special kind of ladle etc., any qualitative change of a
sacrificer, and accessory sacrifices are means to an end but
produce no transcendental result. The injunction that one
should use chaste words in conversation and the prohibition
that one should not use nonchaste words in conversation are
well-circulated but not based upon the authority of the Sâstras.
On the basis of this hearsay evidence the science of
grammar is
considered to be authoritative. But we shall hope against hope
if we think that it (the science of grammar) is ancillary to the
Vedas on the strength of the said weak evidence. If an injunc-
tion and a prohibition are read in a particular section then
they exercise their influence only upon it since their service
has been meant for the said section. The universal application
of the said injunction and the prohibition is not permissible.
Thus, considering the problem from every possible aspect we
arrive at the conclusion that the injunction and the prohibition,
mentioned above, cannot constitute the basis of the authenticity
of the science of grammar.
875
Inefficacy of the Study of Grammar
Some hold that the injunction 'One should study the Vedas
along with their six ancillary sciences for their own sake' im-
plies the obligatory character of the study of grammar since it
is as ancillary as the other branches of Learning, viz., Phone-
tics, Ritual, Etymology, Prosody, and Astronomy are. This
view does not stand to reason. It is reasonable to hold that the
five branches of Learning (Phonetics to Astronomy) are really
ancillary to the Vedas since each of them renders some unique
services to the Vedas and many Vedic injunctions involve nece-
ssary references to them. Though grammar tries to attract
attention by a show of runs and jumps yet it may be ancillary
to the Vedas only because of the possible reason that it is a
normative science which regulates the use of chaste words but
not because of any other reason. The said function of grammar
viz., the regulation of the use of chaste words is difficult to
establish. This point has been brought home before. Therefore,874
Nyayamanjari
example, viz., 'Five species of animals having five fingers with
nails are edible.' The above injunction implies that one should
not take the flesh of animals having such and such characteri-
stic features excepting animals belonging to the well-defined
five species. Now, the defenders may contend that the said
restrictive injunction has also a negative import, i. c, it intends
to prohibit the use of vulgar words. If this is their contention
then they simply contradict themselves since they say in the
same breath that the said injunction is both positive and nega-
tive (niyama and parisaṁkhyä).
Now, the defenders may contend that the said injunction has
only a negative import and is a parisamkhyā vidhi, such a con-
tention does not hold good since chaste and vulgar words do not
simultaneously come within the jurisdiction of this injunction. In
case of the above parisamkhyä injunction one may take the flesh
of all animals having five fingers with nails. There is a possibility
of taking flesh since a man is actuated by his natural propensity.
Where there is a possibility there negation is significant. Thus,
the taking of the flesh of certain animals has been prohibited.
As there is no possibility of simultaneously using chaste and
vulgar words so the injunction in question does not fall within
the Parisamkhyā class.
The critics add a new point to their criticism. The defenders
hold that the use of a chaste word brings about merit and the
use of a vulgar word results in demerit. This hypothesis is not
sound. It is unreasonable to assume that both produce trans-
cendental results, viz., invisible merit and demerit since the
tangible result, viz., the communication of a meaning, which
stands to reason has been discarded. It has been said that a
chaste word, properly used, produces the desired result in
Heaven. This statement is not literally true. It falls within
Arthavada. Its object is to praise a chaste word. A word which
has been improperly used is a thunderbolt and kills the institu-
tor of a sacrifice who improperly uses a word. This statement,
also, comes under Arthavāda. Its object is to condemn an im-
properly pronounced word. It has been clearly proved that
these statements are subordinate to a sacrifice. They render
assistance to a sacrifice. As they are merely laudatory or con-
demnatory Arthavādas so chaste and vulgar words have noInefficacy of the Study of Grammar
connection with transcendental results, i, e., merit and demerit.
A rule, laid down in the Mimâṁsā sūtra, clearly expresses the
following decision that a material substance used in a sacrifice,
viz., a special kind of ladle etc., any qualitative change of a
sacrificer, and accessory sacrifices are means to an end but
produce no transcendental result. The injunction that one
should use chaste words in conversation and the prohibition
that one should not use nonchaste words in conversation are
well-circulated but not based upon the authority of the Săstras.
On the basis of this hearsay evidence the science of grammar is
considered to be authoritative. But we shall hope against hope
if we think that it (the science of grammar) is ancillary to the
Vedas on the strength of the said weak evidence. If an injunc-
tion and a prohibition are read in a particular section then
they exercise their influence only upon it since their service
has been meant for the said section. The universal application
of the said injunction and the prohibition is not permissible.
Thus, considering the problem from every possible aspect we
arrive at the conclusion that the injunction and the prohibition,
mentioned above, cannot constitute the basis of the authenticity
of the science of grammar.
875
Inefficacy of the Study of Grammar
Some hold that the injunction ‘One should study the Vedas
along with their six ancillary sciences for their own sake' im-
plies the obligatory character of the study of grammar since it
is as ancillary as the other branches of Learning, viz., Phone-
tics, Ritual, Etymology, Prosody, and Astronomy are. This
view does not stand to reason. It is reasonable to hold that the
five branches of Learning (Phonetics to Astronomy) are really
ancillary to the Vedas since each of them renders some unique
services to the Vedas and many Vedic injunctions involve nece-
ssary references to them. Though grammar tries to attract
attention by a show of runs and jumps yet it may be ancillary
to the Vedas only because of the possible reason that it is a
normative science which regulates the use of chaste words but
not because of any other reason. The said function of grammar
viz., the regulation of the use of chaste words is difficult to
establish, This point has been brought home before. Therefore,Nyāyamanjari
grammar cannot compete with other ancillary sciences of the
Vedas in substantiating its claim. In the above injunction con-
cerning the study of the Vedas for their own sake the word
'niṣkāraṇa' has been used It indicates as much its non-utility but
not so much its fruitfulness. The Vedas have six accessories.
These accessories are not the six branches of learning. They
are six ways of establishing the connection of mantras with
the Vedic rites. They are called Śruti, Lińga etc. This point
will be discussed later on. Therefore, some other passages
which are often quoted to prove that grammar is an accessory
of the Vedas do not serve the purpose. The passages are as
follows: A Brahmin should not use vulgar expressions since
a vulgar expression is barbarism'. If a chaste word is properly
used, it fulfils the desire of its employer in heaven'. 'The in-
stitutor of Agnihotra sacrifice having used vulgar expressions
should observe an expiatory rite in honour of the Goddess of
Learning'; and 'A speech which is strictly classical is worthy
of its name'. Now, one may suggest that grammar should be
based upon the usages of savants just as the science of medicine
is based upon the experimental method of agreement and diffe-
rence. The drift of this argument is that the science of grammar
has a sound footing to stand upon. The critics review the
suggestion and put the following questions. Who are these
savants. Are they savants who employ classical words such as
'go' etc? Or, are they savants who use vulgar words, e. g., 'gavi'
etc., in speaking and writing? Or, are they savants who use
both classical and vulgar words in speaking and writing?
If the defenders answer the first alternative in the affirmative
then they involve an unanswerable vicious circle since the
science of grammar is based upon the usages of savants and
savants are those who are proficient in the science of grammar.
It is a fact that those who are not well up in Sanskrit Grammar
are not adept in using chaste classical Sanskrit words (words
which are grammatically correct). If they answer the second
alternative in the affirmative then coachmen and such other
persons who use vulgar words such as ‘gavi' etc, should become
savants and the science of grammar is nothing but a record of
refinements upon those vulgar expressions. Such a conclusion
appears to be absolutely irrelevant. If they answer the third
876Inefficacy of the Study of Grammar
877
alternative in the affirmative then the promiscuous use of the
chaste and the vulgar words, e.g., ‘go', 'gavi' etc., should go on
uninterruptedly. In that case the study of grammar will be
superfluous. But it is reasonable to hold that the medical
science owes its origin to the reliable teachers who have com-
posed it with the help of the experimental method of agreement
and difference. Even if the science of grammar is judged from
this point of view, it serves no useful purpose. Moreover, it has
no utility since the author of aphorisms of grammar has made
no mention of it. As Jaimini, the author of Mîmāṁsā aphorisms,
has clearly stated the usefulness of Mimämsä Sūtras in his Sūtra,
'athato dharmajijñāsā', as Gautama has expressed the utility
of his Nyáya-sūtras in his first Sūtra 'Pramāņādí-jñānāt niḥśre-
yasādhigamaḥ' and as Kaņāda has vindicated the efficacy of
the study of his Vaišeşika-Sutras in his initial sutra 'Sädbar-
myâdi-jñānam niḥśreyasādhigamah' so Pāṇini, the author of
grammatical aphorisms has given no indication of the usefulness
of the study of grammar. Now, the defenders may contend that
Pāṇini has made no mention of its utility because it may be
easily guessed. We, the critics, say, "What do you say? We
fail to discover it up to this time even after a thorough search
for it. The point in question is the subject of dispute among all
parties.
There are four different ends of human life, viz., (1) Celes-
tial happiness, (2) Wealth, (3) Realisation of secular ends and
(4) Final emancipation from bondage. Now, the defenders may
look forward to any one of these ends as the goal of gramma-
tical study. Of these four ends Dharma (means to celestial
happiness) does not constitute the goal of grammatical study
since Dharma consists in being a sacrifice, gift, and libation etc.
Or, Dharma is Apūrva, i.e., the transcendental result of the
various Vedic rites. It is revealed only by the Vedas. Those
who are well-acquainted with Dharma hold that the Vedas are
the only source of the knowledge of Dharma. Or, we take no
exception to the view if one holds that Smṛti of Manu which is
based upon the Vedas, good conduct of the pious men and
tradition is also authority on Dharma. But grammar-in-itself is
not competent to impart instructions on Dharma. It is not
reasonable to think that Dharma is the end of grammar because878
Nyayamanjari
it is ancillary to the Vedas. Dharma is the goal of that science
which gives directions to the performance of duties since such a
goal is bound up with the necessary directions of duties. Dharma
is not the goal of the study of grammar since it gives no such
directions. Therefore, the hypothesis that Dharma is the goal
of grammar has been refuted.
It is well-known that wealth is the goal of vocational subjects
and Political Science. But wealth is not attained through the
study of grammar since many scholars of grammar are generally
noticed to be very poor. Therefore, wealth is not the goal of
grammar. Fulfilment of desire is the object of the Sexual science,
composed by Vätsyāyana. Grammar has got the least connec-
tion with this science. Such pleasure is beyond its reach. Mokşa
or Final Liberation is attained through the realisation of one's
own self and the cessation of five kinds of klešas (five sources of
bondage an initial error, mis-identification, love, hatred and
fear of death). This is the verdict of the spiritual experts. It is
not very reasonable to hold that the proper knowledge of
cerebral șa and pa is a means to Final Liberation. Thus
we arrive at the conclusion that none of the four ends is attained
through the study of grammar.
Now, the defenders of the utility of the study of grammar
may contend that no distinct end of the study of grammar has
been mentioned since it is affiliated ancillary to the Vedic
lore, an embodiment of all instructions conducive to all these
four ends. They also add that ends which are attainable
through the study of the Vedas are also attainable through the
study of grammar. This contention has been already refuted.
The basic assumption that grammar is accessory to the Vedas
on the strength of its instructions on chaste words has been
refuted. It renders no other service to the Vedic study. Such a
grammar has no utility. Moreover, a branch of learning which
is not helpful to the Vedic study cannot be its ancillary.
The Vedas do not obey the injunctions issued by their
subordinate science since the Mîmāmsakas hold that they are the
sole authority on the matter of injunctions. The purport of this
point is that one should not logically hold that the science of
grammar is an ancillary of the Vedas on the basis of non-vedic
injunctions.Inefficacy of the Study of Grammar
879
. The celebrated Bhasya-kära of Panini has mentioned a few
utilities of the study of grammar, viz., the preservation of the
Vedas etc. As these purposes are served also by other methods
so we should not absolutely depend upon grammar for the
attainment of the said objects. The continuous circle of students
preserve the purity of the Vedas. If one student slightly
deviates from the proper pronunciation of an accent or a letter
then the other students give the following warning to him.
They say 'Do not mar the Vedas. This is the correct pronun-
ciation of the Vedic sentence. Pronounce it thus.' They
instruct him. Thus the Vedas are preserved. The second utility
is üha i.c., the necessary modification of a Vedic word etc.,
according to requirement. This modification takes place with
regard to mantras, tunes, and preparatory acts for purifying
substances. The modification of tunes is learnt either from the
Mīmāṁsa-sūtras or from the usages of the sacrificial experts.
The modification of words in a mantra is also learnt from the
same source. Any modification with regard to a preparatory
act of purifying something is beyond the scope of grammar,
What shall grammar do in this matter? The Vedas themselves
do not constitute the object of the study of grammar. This
suggestion has been already examined and criticised. Moreover,
the Vedas reveal ends of human life but they are not ends in
themselves. It has been said that the study of grammar
provides one with an easy access to literature. Does it do so ?
What do you say? One cannot master it even if he has been
reading it from his childhood and continues his study for many
years. If it is an easy way we do not know that will be a
difficult one. Grammar can solve no doubt about the meaning
of a Vedic sentence. It is Mimāṁsā Śästra which solves a good
number of doubts eclipsing the meaning of each Vedic sentence.
The science of grammar is never noticed to do this function.
The mention of five-fold utilities of the study of grammar viz.,
the preservation of the purity of the Vedas, necessary modifica-
tions of the Vedas, the easier method of learning language and
the removal of doubts has not been rightly made.
The said commentator has made mention of other minor
utilities of the study of grammar. Let us illustrate one of them.
*The demons who were innocent of grammar wrongly pronounc-880
Nyayamanjari
ed 'helayaḥ helayaḥ' etc. and were crushed. The correct pronun-
ciation of this mantra should be 'he arayaḥ, he arayah' etc.
These utilities have only minor significance. These are too
insignificant to record. Moreover, these are indirect utilities.
Kumarila in his Tantra-Värttika has said to this effect:-
The grammarians hope against hope if they try to establish
minor utilities of the grammatical study when its major utilities
are not established. They behave just like a drowning man who
catches at a straw, leaving aside big trees.
The Untenability of the Hypothesis that Grammar makes an Improve-
ment upon Words.
Now, the defenders may contend thus :-There is no need
of making an investigation for other utilities of the study of
grammar. The only object of grammar is to make an improve-
ment upon words. The critics say in reply to this contention that
they should explain their point, viz., the samskåra of a word.
What is this saṁskāra ? What result do we derive from it? As
sprinkling purifies Viihis, as looking at ghee purifies it, as the
establishing of sacred fires consecrates fire so grammar does not
make an improvement upon words. The Naiyāyikas hold that
letters are very short-lived. They pass away as soon as they
are uttered. What is the samskära that a sound has ? As
acceleration is the samskära of the flying arrow, as impression.
is the samskära of the soul as the branch of a tree has elasti-
city as its samskåra so what is the samskära of a sound? Again,
if we subscribe to the hypothesis that letters are eternal then
we are also compelled to admit that their manifestation is tran-
sient. In that case what is this samskåra that affects them?
Does a sarıskāra work upon a letter, or upon a word, or upon
a sentence? No solution can be given to any of these three
alternatives. The grammarians hold that a sentence is a
partless whole. Hence, a samiskära which is directed towards a
letter or a word has no ground to stand upon. Now, the gram-
marians may contend that the stems and suffixes will be elicited
from sentences and the remaining words will be brought under
samskära. Such a contention does not hold good. Such words
are non-existent. Hence, no saińskåra can be worked upon them.
Some have criticised the above attempt thus :-Do not inte-Inefficacy of Grammar
881
lligent persons who intend to introduce samiskära into words
after having distinguished them from a sentence by means of
imagination, wreath a garland of sky-flowers, having given up
flowers which emit fragrance and become ornaments of differ-
ent directions.
Nobody comes across a Vedic injunction (either universal or
sectional) which enjoins to formulate grammatical laws for
the better analysis of words or for the synthesis of parts of
words. There is no injunction on the authority of which we
shall take up the better study of words. A sacrificer is enjoined
to put a horn, brought to scratch the body of an antelope,
into a sacrificial hole. This act exerts a purifying influence
upon the rite which has been observed. A similar act in some
cases precedes a rite which will be performed.
One should sprinkle Vrihis. Sprinkling in accordance with
this injunction will make the future Darsa and Pūrņamāsa
rites more perfect. In these ways it is not possible for us to
make an improvement upon words. There is an injunction,
viz., one should study the Vedas. It concerns only with a
young boy of the twice-born class. It introduces some quali-
tative changes to him as he is taken to a Vedic teacher for the
learning of the Vedas. Upanayana ceremony is a symbol of
the beginning of the Vedic study. Or, the said injunction
exerts an influence upon the Vedas thus acquired. Let us stop
this discussion since it is a very long one. The drift of our
discussion is this that the study of grammar is not competent
enough to bring in such an improvement. It is also doubtful
to hold that grammar makes an improvement upon words by
formulating laws which govern inflexions, such formal changes
of words as do not affect a stem and its inflexion, the elision
of letters, formal changes which affect a stem and its inflexion
and such other things. Let us stop this discussion. Grammar
cannot work out a change which is a very hard task either in
organs of speech, or in the internal air which is instrumental
to the being of sound or in the organ of hearing which is
instrumental to its perception, or in the soul of a speaker,
or in the internal organ or in the intellect. For this reason it
is certain that grammar cannot create such situation as helps
the use of verbal expressions. Some may contend that theNyāyamañjari
services of grammar cannot be dispensed with since it explains a
few difficult compound words such as sthūlapṛṣatī etc. Such a
contention is not tenable since Kalpa-sūtra, a work on rituals,
and such other treatises will render the same service.
882
Some body has said in defence of grammar that grammar is
the only means of the clear understanding of words. Kumärila,
the author of Tantra-Värttika, smiles at his claims and remarks
that without the organ of hearing words are not otherwise
distinctly perceived.
Moreover, though grammar has chastened words yet many
ancient writers of acknowledged authority have used many
irregular words which violate the rules of grammar. Pāṇini,
the author of grammatical sutras, has used irregular words
in his sutras "Janikartuḥ prakṛtiḥ" and tat-prayojako
hetuśca". The compound words "Janikartuḥ" and "Tat-
prayojakaḥ" are illustrations of Tat-purușa compound. The
sixth case-ending has been dropped. But the rule “Tṛjakā.
bhyām kartari" opposes the formation of Tat-puruṣa compound
in these two cases. Again, the term 'jani' denotes a root. But
in the above sutra the word denotes a different meaning.
Katyayana, the author of Värttika on Panini's sūtras, has
indulged in irregular usages. Let us illustrate them. In his
sūtra "Dambher halgrahaṇasya jātivācakatvāt" the compound
word jäti-vacaktvät' is irregular since Şaşthi-tat-purușa is not
permissible. Let us take another example. In the sūtra
"Anyabhāvyaṁ tu kāla-śabda-vyavāyāt" the word ‘anyabhāv-
yam' is irregular. The nominal suffix 'şyañ' has been attached
to the compound word ‘anyabhāva'. The provision for the
said suffix has been made in the sūtra "Guna-vacana-Brahmanā-
dibhyah". The word 'anyabhāva' is not an abstract noun
since it has been said that an abstract noun ceases to be so if
it enters into a compound. In other words no compound word
should be treated as an abstract noun. The said suffix is also
attached to such words as fall within the group of words having
the word "Brāhmaṇa' at their head. The said word is not
included in the list. The author of bháşya on Pāņini's sūtras,
has not dropped the case-ending, intending to use a compound
word of the Tat-puruşa class, containing another compound
word of the Dvandva-type in the analogy of the word 'avira-On the nature of chaste words
vika'. He has violated the rule of Påņini, viz. "Supodhătu-
prätipadikayoḥ". He has also violated the rule of Păņini "Any-
athaivam katham ittham susiddhaḥ prayogaścet" since his sen-
tence "Anyatha kṛtvá codyam anyathā kṛtvä pariharaḥ"
illustrates his irregularity. He should have attached the suffix
"Namul" but not "Ktvä" to the root 'kṛ' preceded by the
word 'anyatha'. The above three sages are the propounders of
the system of Grammar. It is a matter of grave regret that
these great personages have deviated from the path of duty
i.e., the use of correct expressions. Whom shall we chastise?
In Manu's treatise and such other works a large number of
words which are irregularly formed is counted. He writes
“Jõātāram antimetyuktva". The euphonic combination result-
ing in 'antimeti' is not permissible. Aśvalayana has also
used "Akşini ajyati." The resulting form 'ajyati' is grammati-
cally incorrect. The author of Gṛhyasūtra has used "Mûr-
dhni abhijighrāņām." The suffix 'śānac' has been attached to
the root 'ghra.' It should not have been attached to the root in
question. Valmiki has written "Tubhyam ca Raghavasya". The
word 'Raghavasya' is incorrect. Vedavyasa has made a mistake
when he writes "Janme janme yadabhyastam." The word
janma' is not chaste. It should be janman. Hence he should
have written "Janmani janmani' etc. "Kumärila in his Tantra-
vârttika says that in the works on History and Purāṇa there is
no end of unchaste words.
883
Definition of a Chaste Word is Puzzling
There is no need of censuring the ancient personages. Our
concluding remark in a nut-shell is this that grammar renders
service neither to classical language nor to Vedic language.
Let us point out the initial failure of grammar not to speak of
other such failures. Patanjali commences his work with the
title 'Atha sabdānuśāsanam' (Instruction in words). He raises
a question, viz., "which words are to be discussed?" He solves
the problem by proposing to give instruction in classical and
"Vedic words. But he fails to enumerate the number of classical
and Vedic words. We are going to discuss the matter in ques-
tion. Shall we treat each word individually and give our
instruction? Or, shall we take up many words at a time andNyayamanjari
bring them under a general rule? It is an impossible feat to
treat each word individually. The ancient teachers have ex-
pressed their opinion regarding the subject-matter under dis-
cussion. They say "Brhaspati (the lord of speech) himself has
been uniting Indra into words, one by one, for a thousand
divine years but has been unable to complete his task since
the number of words is inexhaustible. It is not also possible to
determine all chaste words by means of general rules. The
reason has been given before. In a nut-shell it is this that no
common property which constitutes a mark of distinction from
all vulgar words belongs to all chaste words like the species of
cowness. How is an instruction in words to be imparted? He
raises the problem and solves it thus: a word is to be analysed
into two parts, viz., (1) its basic element and (2) inflexion
attached to it and a general rule, determined by a qualification,
is to be formulated. Let us take an example to illustrate the
above procedure. The sutra karmaṇyan is a qualified
general rule. The verbal suffix 'an' is attached to a verb.
This is the general rule. It is qualified by the word 'karmaṇi'
karma is such as denotes an objective case and is penultimate.
Thus, the meaning of the qualified general rule is this that 'an'
suffix is attached to a root provided it is qualified by a penulti-
mate objective case. The defenders of the utility of grammar
hold that words such as kumbhakara, nagarakãra etc., are
easily explained by means of the qualified general rule and
many other words such as goda, kambalada etc., are also
explained by general rules without any difficulty. We have
already elaborately criticised the supposition that a word
consists of two imaginary parts viz. (1) a basic element and
(2) a suffix and expressed our opinion about it. Now, we shall
examine the new hypothesis viz., the supposition of a qualified
general rule. Such a rule is not without its defects since the
determination of the two elements of a word is not exact.
884
Let us clearly state the ground of our objection. The general
rule is that a suffix is attached to a root. In order to make it
intelligible they should define a root. Now, the grammarians
may say by way of repartee that a root has been defined in
the sutra 'Bhuvādayo dhatavah" and its characteristic feature
has been indicated. Some words have been read as synonymsOn the nature of chaste words
in an order of succession and several such groups have been
included in the list of roots. These words have been defined
as roots. The inflexion 'tin' and several suffixes are attached
to them. The critics make the following remark :-Very
well, you have said this. But your definition does not point to
the true characteristic feature of a root. If you ask 'why' ?
then the reason of our critical note is as follows. Let us take
an example, say 'gandate.' The noun 'ganda' should be
treated as a root. Thus, the definition of a root suffers from
the defect of being too wide since according to your rule
inflexion 'tin' is attached to a root. There is a root 'ghata'
which denotes activity. There is also a noun 'ghata'. There is
a verb 'ama' which means to be sick. When its non-
essential termination 'a' becomes detached the essential form
of the root is 'am'. The second case-ending in the singular
number is also 'am'. There is a root 'bhu' and a noun 'bhū'
also exists. There is a root 'yati' denoting 'to act well'. It has
an accidental termination 'I'. When it drops off the root
assumes the real form 'yat'. There is also a pronoun 'yat'
which is well-known, being included in the list of pronouns.
As there is no difference between the roots and the words
mentioned above, so why should not inflexions 'tin' etc., be
attached to ghaṭa, bhū and yat (which are not roots) ? Now,
the grammarians may contend that a verb is such as denotes
activity. If this is their contention then the roots 'to be'
(bhū) and 'to stand' (stha) cease to be roots. They should
not be included in the list of roots.'
885
root.'
"Now, the grammarians may revise their definition of a root
and hold that there are two definitions of a root. These
definitions as are follows :-(1) That which is included in the
list of roots is a root and (2) That which denotes activity is a
Thus, 'bhū' and 'stha' will be treated as roots since
they find a place in the list of verbs. The critics put a ques-
tion to them whether these two definitions will apply severally
or jointly. If they say that they will apply severally then the
roots 'bhu' and 'stha' will not be treated as roots since the
second definition of a root does not apply to them. If the
definitions of a root do not apply to all roots then the charcter-
istic feature of a root remains indeterminate. In that case886
Nyāyamanjari
how will it be possible to attach inflexion 'tin' and suffixes to
a root? They are attached only to roots. As roots cannot
be defined where will they be attached to? If the grammar-
ians hold that the above two definitions of a root are to be
supplied jointly then they make no improvement upon the
situation i.e., the defect mentioned remains unremedied.
Some 'tin' inflexions are time-adjectives but are not denota-
tive of tenses. If they do not denote the different times of
actions then it is impossible to frame rules which speak of the
connection of the various tenses with different inflexions. The
sútras e.g. 'Varttamane lat', 'Bhavisyati Irt', 'Bhūte lań'
etc., try to do something impracticable since mentioning times
they try to establish the relation of various inflections with
them (times). Now, the grammarians may hold that these
inflections will denote tenses i.e., times. If they change front,
they contradict their own Bhâşya-kara who is an authority on
grammar. He has said that the root in question denotes the
past tense. If the findings of the Bhāṣya-kāra are accepted
then the said rules are absurd since the meaning of
cannot regulate itself, The inflexions such as lin etc. point
to such things as are incomprehensible. Hence, they are pres-
cribed to denote order etc. Such meanings of inflexions can
be determined neither by themselves nor by their adjuncts.
root
Similarly, rules which govern cases are also defective. An
ablative case expresses a noun or its equivalent which remains
motionless when an act of separation takes place. Devadatta
has fallen from a tree. A tree is said to be the ablative case. A
tree is motionless. But it has not the slightest relation to the act
of falling. Hence it does not fulfil the condition of being a case.
A case is that which is related to a verb. A tree does not relate
itself with the verb in question. A traveller has fallen behind
a caravan. A person has fallen from a moving chariot. A
caravan and a chariot are not motionless like a tree since an
action is noticed in them. It is a truism that they have their
own action. Any verb does not determine a case in a sentence.
But a case is determined only with reference to a verb which
finds a place in a sentence. In the above illustrations the two
verbs viz., to fall behind and to fall from have been used. As
a tree has no relation with the said verb so a caravan and aOn the nature of chaste words
887
chariot are in no way connected with these two verbs. Each
of them may be related to a particular verb and be a case. But
this connection with a particular verb does not mean that a
case maintains its status quo ante in relation to all verbs with-
out an exception. If this be so then the definition of a case
will be too wide. Thus we see that the definition of the
ablative case has a serious flaw.
The Definition of a Chaste-word is Puzzling
A dative case is that which is intended by means of a karma.
The word 'karma' requires an explanation. Does it mean an
action? Or, does it mean a case which is the most desired
one? If the first meaning is accepted then as all cases are
desired for the sake of an action, i.e., for its coming into being,
so each of them should be taken as a dative case. In the
sentence "A student gives honorarium to his teacher" the
teacher should not be a case at all since he has got no action.
He has been selected only as a recipient of a gift. He has got
nothing to do with the root 'to give'. He receives the gift.
Therefore, he has an action to perform. But the act of receiv-
ing is distinct form of giving. An object is the destination of
an action. It is the goal towards which an action proceeds.
Now, the defenders may hold that the word 'karma' stands for
an objective case. Such an interpretation does not stand to
reason since a noun or its equivalent does not become a case
because of its relation to a case. The universally accepted
view is this that a noun or its equivalent which is related to an
action is a case. The etymological meaning of the word
"karaka' is that what brings about an action is a kāraka (a case).
The best instrument by which an action is produced is
'karana' (an instrumental case). As the meaning of the
nominal suffix ‘tamap' (i.e., the suffix indicative of the super-
lative degree) is hard to comprehend so the word
'sādhakatama', contained in the definition of an instrumental
case, is inappropriate. An affect comes into being when all
conditions without an exception assemble. But it does not
come into being if anyone of them is absent. Such being the
state of things which particular case shall we select as the best.
one in order to sprinkle waters from an auspicious pitcher?Nyayamanjari
Now, the contenders may defend that the excellence of an
instrumental case lies in its having intensive operation direct-
ed towards the production of the principle effect. Such an
operation is shared by all cases. But it does not exclusively
belong to fuels an instance of instrumental case. In the example
'He is cooking with fuels' how do you say that fuels are the
instance of an instrumental case? The purport of the object-
ion is that fuels should not be taken as the instance of an ins-
trumental case since they have no distinctive feature to indicate
the above case-character,
888
A locative case is that which points to a locus. With regard
to this definition something should be said by way of criticism.
A locus in order to be so must contain something. What is
this 'something'? Is it a root or a case? In other words, does
it contain a root or a case? If you define it precisely and hold
that the container of a root (an action) is a locative case
then all cases should be included in the class of locative case
since all cases are syntactically connected with a root. Now,
the defender of the said definition may clarify the above
definition thus. Let us take an example of the locative case,
viz., 'He cooks rice on a pot'. A pot is a locative case since
it contains rice which is being cooked. The act of cooking
produces its effect on rice. Rice is the container of the result-
ing part of the act of cooking. A pot contains rice which is the
receptacle of the act of cooking in some form. Therefore, a
pot is taken as a locative case. In other words, a locative case
points to the indirect locus of a root. The above contention
is not tenable. The illustration that he cooks on an even spot
cannot be justified if the above meaning of the definition of a
locative case is accepted. One should rather say that he cooks
in water. The point in objection is this that water directly
contains rice which is being cooked but not a spot. Again, the
illustration that he takes his food on a mat becomes grammati-
cally incorrect since a mat is the container of a person who
takes his food but not of the act of eating. Now, the defender
may revise the above definition of locative case and hold that
a locative case is such as contains a root through the medium
of both nominative and objective cases. In that case the
above two illustrations of locative case, viz., 'He cooks riceOn the nature of chaste words
889
on a pot'. 'He takes food on a mat' should be incorrect since
a pot and a mat are not locii of both nominative and objective
cases. Now, the defender may say that the locative case is
the locus of anyone of the above cases. In that case, the locus
of an objective case involves a reference to the locus of a
nominative case and vice versa the locus of a nominative case
involves a reference to the locus of an objective case. Thus, the
new revised definition of a locative case is in no way different
from its immediate antecedent one. The last two definitions
are identical in their sense and content. Now, if the defender
holds that a locative case is the container of all cases then the
illustration that he cooks rice on a pot should not be gramma-
tically correct since a pot is not the locus of all cases. More-
over, a locative case should cease to be a case since a locative
case does not find its own locus in itself. Let a few examples
of locative case be examined. They are as follows :-'One takes
his bath at noon', 'One eats at night', 'One rambles in the
east' etc. In these cases time, space etc., having no operat-
ion to perform should be devoid of the essence of a case.
Thus, they cease to be cases. Thus, the illustrations in
question should be considered as grammatically incorrect.
An accusative case is that which refers to the most favourite
desideratum of a subject. As the term 'sādhaka-tama', contained
in the definition of an instrumental case, conveys no meaning so
the word 'ipsita-tama' involved in the definition of an objective
case, communicates no sense. Nobody can determine the most
favourite one since an action to be accomplished being desired
all cases are equally required for its completion by a subject,
hence all of them are the most favourite ones. Now, the con-
tender may say that the goal of an action is the desideratum of
a subject. The objector points out that the word to which the
case-ending 'am' is attached stands for some thing which is
other than an accusative case. The above goal of an action
cannot be an accusative case. A case stands for the cause of an
action but an object is the result of an action but is not its
cause. It involves contradiction to hold that what is the cause
of an action is also the most favourite desideratum to be achiev-
ed by the same action.
Now, the defender may contend his case thus. An object of890
Nyāyamanjari
an action is mentioned as a case because it is capable of produc-
ing an action. If this is your contention then the causality of
an action is very strange. The causality of an instrumental case
takes a unique form, that of a locative case takes another
peculiar form and that of a dative case takes a third distinct
form. In the case of an accusative case though boiled rice is
accomplished by an action yet the former is the invariable cause
of the latter since the said action is not performed if its object
is not its goal. In other words, an object is the final cause of an
action. The said hypothesis of the grammarians is not convinc.
ing. What is the final result cannot be said to be a means since
pleasure and such other phenomena which are the mere goal of
an action should also be called the means of it. One should
bear in mind that the designation 'case' does not depend upon
the arbitrary will of the founder of a branch of study. In
other words, such a nomenclature is not due to the convention
set up by a great teacher. A noun or its substitute becomes a
case when it enters into relation to an action. The exact nature
of the relation is this that what is the means to an action is a
case. If a contrary relation takes place between them, how will
a noun enjoy the status of a case? Now, the grammarian raises
an objection to the above criticism. They point out that if the
above criticism is accepted then one should say that a man cooks
rice but he should not say that a man cooks boiled rice since
boiled rice is the result of the act of cooking. The objectors review
the said critical remark and hold that they have already stated
what they have got to say with regard to the definition of the
accusative case. In the body of the said definition the word
'ipsitatama' (most desired) has been given. It is an objective
which qualifies the accusative case. This adjective carries sense.
If it applies to rice in the sentence "A man cooks rice" then it
loses its significance since it has no distinctive capacity for
bringing about a result.
That which is independent is the subjective case. What is
independence? You may say 'One who moves out of his own
will is independent'. In that case how do you explain the
sentence 'The bank of a river breaks down? The subject of
the verb 'breaks down' is 'bank'. The bank is an inanimate
object. It has no will. Hence, it cannot be the subjective case
►On the nature of chaste words
of the said verb. 'Now, the grammarians may revise
their definition and hold that the case the operation of
whi controls those of other cases is said to be the subjective
case. The objectors examine it and find defects in it. They
hold that an action is to be produced by all cases. As such one
fails to understand the point that the operation of which case
governs that of which one since all the cases constitute an
interdependent system. Now, the grammarians may hold that
the case which induces other cases to do an action but itself is
not induced by other cases to do it is the subject. In that case
all inanimate objects cannot be the subjective case. Thus, the
charge which has been already brought against the gramma-
rians remains unsolved.
891
Now, the grammarians may revise their definition and hold
that the subjective case is that the operation of which is
expressed by a verb. The critics join issue with them and point
out that they fail to grasp the import of this definition. A verb
does not express the operation of a particular case. But it
conveys all operations of all cases. If one does not subscribe to
this assumption then all cases cannot co-operate to do the same
action. Now, if a verb expresses the operations of all cases then
all cases should be taken as the subject of a verb.
Now, the grammarians may revise their thesis and hold that
the subjective case is that the operation of which is mainly
expressed by a verb. This revised thesis is not tenable. The
reason is as follows. When a sentence is communicated a verb is
uttered only once. If it is uttered once then how can it express
the operation of a particular case subordinately and that of
another case principally? In the Sanskrit Grammar two types of
the subjective case have been mentioned. The first and the second
types are represented by the independent and the causative
subjects. How does a verb convey the said additional meaning?
As the definitions of cases are not consistent so rules which
govern case-endings following the above definitions, are not
approved by us, the critics. The rules of the Sanskrit Grammar
run like this:-The Ablative case takes the fifth case-ending
and the locative case takes the seventh case-ending. These rules
cannot take effect if the ablative and the locative cases are not
properly determined by their exact definitions,892
Nyayamanjari
Another point may be added to our critical note. In the
Sanskrit grammar there are rules which govern the combining
of two or more correlative words into a single compound word
or the combining of a word and a nominal suffix, correlative,
into a single word. Are they correlative ab initio ? Or, they
have become correlative on the strength of the conventional
sūtra of Paņini viz. 'Samarthaḥ pada-vidhiḥ'? In any case the
term 'correlation' has got to be clearly explained. The gramma-
rians may say that if two terms relate to one and the same
meaning, they are correlative. In other words, correlation
consists in the relation to one and the same meaning. How do
the grammarians come by this meaning of the term 'samarthya'
(correlation)? They may say that the said meaning is revealed
through the use of compound words and nominal suffixes and
the knowledge of such uses. It is also evident that correla-
tion is cognised if there are examples of compound words and
nominal suffixes and they are cognised and that if correlation
exists then the examples of compound words and their know-
ledge becomes possible. Thus, the above hypothesis illustrates a
glaring instance of vicious circle.
Another point may be added to this critical note. There are
examples of compound words when the said correlation is
conspicuous by its absence. They are as follows (1) aśrāddha-
bhoji (the negative particle is syntactically related to the root
'bhuj' but not to śräddha. It signifies a Brāhmaṇa who does
not participate in a feast due to funeral ceremony), (2) dadhi-
ghataḥ (dadhi is not directly related to ghata. The word
'purna' has been dropped. It means a pot full of sour milk),
and gorathah (the word 'go' is not directly related to rathah.
The intervening word 'vähita' is missing. It stands for a cart
which is carried by bullocks). Similarly, many instances of
nominal suffixes are noticed in the absence of correlation. The
word 'angulika' is used. It means one who digs with a finger.
The word 'värkşamülika' has been used. It denotes one who
has come from the root of a tree. These usages presuppose the
instrumental and the ablative cases. These cases have not been
properly defined. Hence, these usages are not correct. If a
person speaks a sentence then he is a speaker. Suppose there is
a place where nobody speaks. How do we say that there are noOn the nature of chaste words
893
speakers on the spot? Hence, these rules of grammar are not
logically justifiable.
The definition of a nominal stem (prätipadika) as given by
Panini in the sutra "Arthavadadhaturapratyayaḥ prātipadikam"
is too wide since it is applicable to a sentence as well.
Now, the grammarians may contend that Panini has written
a complementary sutra to mend his defects. It runs thus-
'Krttaddhitasamāsāśca'. It has been mentioned as a special
injunction since the word 'samasa' finds a place in it. As it is a
special injunction so it excludes all sentences excepting com-
pound words from the province of nominal stems. Thus, a
sentence will be excluded from a nominal stem. In other
words; the definition of a nominal stem as given by Panini is
exact. If this is the contention of the followers of Panini then
the critics may as well point out that the above definition of
nominal stem should not contain two adjectives, viz. (1) adhātuḥ
(other than a verb) and (2) apratyayaḥ (other than an inflex-
ion) since a verb and an inflexion will be excluded from the field
of nominal stems on the strength of the special injunction.
Now, the followers of Päņini may contend that as a com-
pound word and its corresponding expounding sentence convey
the same meaning so they are one in different forms having
similar functions and the mention of the compound word in the
special injunction can exclude only a sentence but neither a verb
nor an inflexion. They simply hope against a hope. The words
which constitute an expounding sentence and those which con-
stitute a compound word have no similar function. Hence, there
is no necessity of holding that a compound word and its ex-
pounding sentence have similar function. Moreover, it has been.
established that a sentence is significant. Hence, the definition
of a nominal stem suffers from the defect of being too wide.
As a nominal stem has not been exactly defined so case-
endings such as 'sup' etc., cannot be added to a nominal stem
in accordance with the sūtra "ňyāp prātipadikāt" etc. There
is no need of discussing this matter. So, the science of grammar
is full of serious defects. Its rules exercise little influence upon
verbal transactions.
The following reasons exhibit serious defects in the science of
grammar. (1) The celebrated commentator of Panini has894
Nyayamanjari
taken pains to subject to a minute examination all which have
been clearly expressed, which have not been stated and which
have been subtly hinted at. (2) In some cases, straight defini-
tions have been refuted under the pretext that they contain
redundant long vowels or that they involve greater quantity of
syllables. (3) In some cases, the interpreters hold that this
plausible rule does not apply to this particular case because
the commentator has not explicitly approved of its application.
(4) The field of application of a sutra has been sometimes in-
definitely stated. A few illustrations have been mentioned and
a big gap has been left open. Such a measure leaves room for
indecision. The mention of âkṛti-gana illustrates the above
point. (5) In some sutras the word 'bahula' occurs. This shows
that rules involving the word 'bahula' are vague. In many cases,
these rules hold good. This shows that the field of these rules
has not been exactly described.
Some other critics remark that the following usages are found
in the grammar. They are as follows, (1) Sobhā; (2) cīrņam
(this word cannot be analysed); (3) kandiśika; (4) bhrājiṣṇu, (5)
ganeya; & (6) vareṇya. These usages find no place in the
authoritative collection of correct words. Definitions of memory,
doubt and illusion are conspicuous by their absence in the gram-
mar of Pāṇini. The said grammar has swerved from its duty.
These critics find fault with Pāņini's grammar and have heaped
contumely on it. The defects of a grammar are as palpable as
the disease of ascites. As we like to avoid the unnecessary
swelling of the bulk of our work so we close our examina-
tion here.
Now, the grammarians may contend thus :- "Let us take
for granted that Pāṇini, the framer of grammatical rules, has
no sharp intellect and the celebrated commentators have no
deep insight. But a grammarian who has very keen intellect was
born. Many other commentators who had penetrative insight
saw the light of the day. From such persons we have learnt the
correct rules of grammar. In other words, Pāṇini's failure has
not blocked the future of the Sanskrit grammar".
Such a contention does not hold good since critics, having
superior intellectual attainments, have exposed the hollowness
of the established conclusions, but the abler critics of the saidOn the nature of chaste words
defenders may join issue with them and find fault with their
decision and the others may also subject their view to severe
criticism. Hence, a regressus ad infinitum will be the inevitable
conclusion. Therefore, there is no work on grammar which is
free from all reproaches. The net result is that the great vow of
the study of grammar simply entails a great hardship on its rea-
der. Brhaspati has also given his voice to the above note. He
says that it is impracticable to get by heart the vocabulary used
in the Sanskrit Language if one studies each and every word,
the correct rules of Sanskrit Grammar have not as yet been
established, the existing grammar is open to serious defects and
the hope of correction faces the fallacy of regressus ad infinitum.
The followers of the great teacher Sukra hold that the science
of grammar is a fell disease.
895
Some other critics have also said that he who is under the
influence of bad stars or is cowed down with the fear of royal
punishment or has been cursed by his parents embraces the
study of grammar of a classical language.
Some critics have also said to this effect :-
In order to blunt the edge of one's sharp intellect Pāņini's
grammar and its commentary known as vṛtti should be prescrib-
ed for his study and sesame, a kind of pulses, wood apples and
boiled rice prepared from a particular kind of rice should be
prescribed for his food since these are the best instruments of
benumbing keen intellect.
Even if a learned man takes pains in the study of grammar
he cannot acquire proficiency in Vedic vocabulary as he is able
to understand only human dialects.
There is no acknowledged avenue of understanding Vedic
words. Hence, the Vedas remain unintelligible from the very
beginning. How can they be the source of valid knowledge ?
The Establishment of the Hypothesis that Chaste Words are Denotative
Let the adverse criticism, recorded in the preceding chapter,
be reviewed. It has been stated that words used in ordinary
dialects such as 'gavi' etc. are as denotative as chaste words
used in classical Sanskrit Language such as ‘go', etc., are from
eternity. We shall now cast a shadow of doubt on the above896
Nyāyamañjari
rival hypothesis. The objector has put forward a rival hypo-
thesis that words used in ordinary dialects, e. g., gavi, etc. are
denotative. They have logically established it. It is a piece of
illusory knowledge. A critical student of Indian Philosophy who
has examined these hypotheses distinguishes the true hypothe-
sis from the false one.
After this, knowledge which dawns in his mind is true. He
comes to understand that chaste words such as 'go', etc., have
only denotation but words used in common dialect have no
denotation. Through the influence of this knowledge he is re-
lieved of his suspense of judgment. A labourer who carries load
becomes nervous when he comes across too heavy load. If a
portion of it is reduced then he entertains a doubt whether he
will be able to carry the remaining portion or not. Similarly,
the student of philosophy doubts whether words used in common
dialects have denotation or not. Such a doubt is interesting but
not idle. Then he will adopt such lines of thinking as will solve
his doubts. If he follows the indicated lines of thinking then he
will obtain mental satisfaction. The path of argument leads to
the determination of truth. So, we refer to it. Let us now ex-
amine the hypothesis whether one undergoes the same disci-
pline when he learns to use words adopted in ordinary dialects
as he does in the case of words used in the Sanskrit language.
If the use of words employed in common dialects such as gavi,
etc., is learnt in the similar manner then one should conjecture
that they are eternal. Let us now examine whether we have an
opportunity of subscribing to such a hypothesis or not. When
a student is initiated into the Vedic lore the teacher imparts
minute lessons to him. The teacher is very particular about
the correct pronunciation of each Vedic word. He pronounces
each word with its proper accents, nasal sound and vowels.
His disciple exactly repeats it. If he has any slip in his pro-
nunciation, the teacher gives him proper instruction. Unless
and until the student is able to read the Vedas in a proper
manner the teacher does not allow him to leave his residence.
The student also learns the Vedes with rapt attention. A stud-
ent who has received proper instruction will be a teacher. He
will also instruct his student in this manner. The present teach-
er was also a student in his young age. He was also initiatedOn the nature of Chaste words
897
into the Vedic love in this way by another teacher. This teacher
was also taught by another teacher. Jaimini holds that in this
way the study of the Vedas has been continuing from eternal
time. The Naiyãyikas hold that the study of the Vedas has been
in vogue from the day of creation.
In this manner if words like gavi, etc., have been guarded
against deformation like words 'go', etc., and if these words are
also employed to convey their meaning on their own strength
then the former word will certainly share the same dignity with
the latter ones which are held to be eternal. If the above con-
dition is fulfilled then whom shall we blame? But we have
got an alternative hypothesis to suggest. The speaker pronounc-
es the word 'go'. But the listener does not repeat it in the
same manner since his organ of speech does not act properly
owing to his inadvertence, sloth, etc. He tries to pronounce
but actually mispronounces it. Thus the word which is pronounc-
ed becomes deformed. We learn it from our experience.
Hence a doubt arises in our mind. Words which have already
assumed perverted form or will take such form are used in the
dialect of carters. The old uncultured fellows cannot even pro-
perly pronounce these deformed words when they talk to boys
and girls of the cowherd class. Thus the origin of many de-
formed words may be traced to inability to pronounce chaste
words. Thus a doubt arises even in the mind of a person of
keen intellect. Are words like 'go', etc., which are established
from eternity significant and denotative? And are other words
deformed, being mispronounced through inadvertence? Or, do
all words enjoy the same status alike? Now, the objectors may
contend that all words have the same status. If this is their
contention then we point out that even to-day some words, being
mispronounced by ignorant ladies and children, assume perverted
forms. Now we ask "Can they discharge the onerous function
of the chaste words ?" The objectors cannot say to this effect
"let them bear the burden of the chaste words." The reason is
that one is directly aware of the fact that these words have
assumed perverted forms. In other words, the deformation of
chaste words has taken place.
According to reasons stated above, words which are now
used by uncultured ladies and children are considered to beNyayamanjari
debased and owing to their deformation they cannot vie with
chaste words. If deformed words of recent origin do not
enjoy the status of chaste words then we argue "How can
words like 'gavi' etc., which may be explained otherwise,
enjoy the status of chaste words like 'go' etc."
The illustrious teacher Jaimini has also said to this effect.
As it requires a good deal of effort to pronounce a word so
words, being mispronounced, become defective. This defect
amounts to deformation. Sabara, the commentator, has stated
in his commentary that a good deal of effort is required to
pronounce a word properly. A wind springing up in the
region of umbilicus, goes up, increases in bulk in chest, passes
through trachea, dashes against the top of palate and spring-
ing back moves in the mouth and manifests various letters. A
person who intends to pronounce a word may be at fault.
One desires to have a fall on the dry land but falls down on
the swampy ground. One thinks that he will touch once but
touches twice.
898
The Hypothesis that Deformed words are eternal is not tenable
Now, the defenders of the eternality of deformed words
come forward and hold a brief for their hypothesis. They
argue in the following manner. The critics should put forward
direct proofs in order to establish the late growth of unchaste
words spoken by the uncultured people. The origin of words
like gavi etc. is surely traced to inadvertence and such other
defects. Hence they cannot enjoy the same exalted position
as the chaste words, viz., go etc. do.
The critics say in reply that they will give the proper answer
in no time and their wish will be fulfilled. The great thinkers
who hold that deformed words such as gavi etc. have been
current in this country from eternity are asked to solve the
above-mentioned rational doubt. They should ponder over
it. The chaste words ‘hasta', 'pāņi' and 'kara' are synonyms.
Is the word 'gavi' a synonym of the word 'go' in the same
sense? Or, is the word 'gavi' the distorted form of the word
'go' owing to some possible defects either in the reception or
in the pronunciation of the latter one. It is not rational to
think that many synonymous words denote a single object.On the non-eternality of deformed words
899
If the raison d'etre of the said statement is asked, an answer
is as follows. The canon of the philosophy of grammar is this
that a single word denotes a single object. What leads to
formulate the canon is this that if it is accepted then the rela-
tion of denotation holding between a word and its meaning is
easy to establish. Again, one is to face a lot of troubles if the
relation of denotation holds between many words and a single
object. If a word exclusively denotes a single object then a
word and its meaning remain unaltered for ever. They will
never falsify each other. This word denotes only this object.
This object is denoted by this word only. Thus, this canon
is justifiable. But if many words signify a single object then
the object may not be denoted by a particular word since
there are many other words to denote the said object though
the said word does not denote the said object. Hence, if the
hypothesis that many words denote a particular object is
accepted then there is a chance for misrepresentation. Again,
if another hypothesis that a word denotes many meanings is
accepted then a word has a fair chance of misrepresenting its
the
meaning since the said word points to meanings other than the
Hence, any hypothesis which embodies
breach of the above rule may be a menace to the understanding
of the true meaning of a word.
known one.
All the synonyms such as 'hasta', 'kara', 'pāņi' etc. denote a
single object. A few stray cases like this do not illustrate the
violation of the said rule. None of the words such as 'akṣaḥ',
As they are
pādaḥ', 'māsaḥ' etc., comes under any rule.
exceptional cases so one is compelled to admit that a single
word denotes different meanings. This rule is quite accidenal,
But the general rule is easy and straight. It conveys that one
word has got a single denotation only. In other words, a word
stands for a single object. Now, if one admits that the words
"go' 'gavi' and other deformed ones are synonyms then the
above rule does not hold good since every chaste word has its
corresponding deformed words. Hence, it yields place to
another rule. The breach of the general rule is due to some
defects in the speaker such as inadvertence etc., It has been said
before that the deformed words such as gavi etc, do not enjoy900
Nyāyamanjari
the same elevated position in language as the chaste words
such as 'go' etc., do because of their defective origin.
Moreover, the power of denotation belonging to a word is
very subtle. It is neither perceived nor inferred. It is revealed
only by means of presumption. If presumption is too weak to
reveal it, no other source of knowledge can illuminate it.
Again, if presumption is indirectly established then words like
'go' etc., cannot gather sufficient strength from presumption
to communicate their meanings. Thus we see that words such
as 'go' etc., possess the power of denotation by means of which
they convey their meanings such as the real cow etc. The said
power of denotation does not belong to deformed words such
as 'gavi' etc. Why has the age-long tradition of the expert
grammarians been violated by the uncultured rustic? In other
words, why do not the uncultured persons imitate the practice
of the cultured
ones if chaste words are only
competent enough to convey their meanings? An answer to
this question is this :- the use of chaste words has been super-
seded by that of vulgar words just as the communication of
one's intention by means of the winking of an eye and the
signal, given by hands, etc. has yielded place to the use of
words of the lower caste non-Aryans. Does not the power
of denotation belong to the winking of an eye or to words and
sentences, spoken by the lower castes? We stick to the view
that they do not possess the power of denotation. If this is true,
why do they convey their sense? We say that they have got
no innate power of conveying their sense. As they have got
no stable character so the innate power of denotation does not
belong to them. These hints or words convey meanings on
the strength of convention arbitrarily set up by the people who
use them.
The power of denotation as proposed by the
Naiyayikas has a universal significance. This power of denota-
tion has been set up by God and has been in vogue since the
first day of creation. It is similar to the innate power of
denotation advocated by the Mimamsakas. It should not be
compared with the conventional power of denotation the range
of application of which is very limited. The innate power of
denotation or such power as has been imparted by God belongs
only to words like 'go' etc., but not to deformed words suchOn the non-eternality of deformed words
901
as gavi etc. Owing to the similarity of letters belonging to
words 'go' and 'gavi' when the word 'gavi' is pronounced it
revives the memory of the word 'go' and thus conveys the
meaning of the word 'go' recalled in our mind.
How do such persons as are ignorant of words like 'go' etc.,
remember them? Which is the sure means of learning them ?
A special study is the sure way of their access. Which science
is to be studied? The study of grammar is called abhiyoga,
which is necessary for this purpose. One has got repeatedly to
study the science of grammar and closely to observe the
illustrations cited in it. The complete acquisition of the science
of grammar is known as its special study. By such study one
acquires innumerable chaste words which are worthy of being
used by the cultured persons. Such acquisition of chaste words
helps him to detect the nature of unchaste words used by the
uncultured ladies and the majority of rustic people because of
their dissimilarity. But our objector has said that the number
of chaste words is so vast that none can get them by heart by
hundreds of divine years. We do not share the view of our
objector. Tradition says, "The science of grammar which has
been formulated by Pânini and elaborated by the two other
sages of great repute teaches rules well tested by them. These
rules give such a faultless analysis of words that they stand
above all defects such as defects of being too wide or too
narrow."
As the Vedas distinguish virtue from vice, as the
incarnation of God draws distinction between truth and false-
hood, as the codes of Ethics differentiate between good and evil,
as the instructions of Manu and others discriminate between
the edible and non-edible, as an oath points out the difference of
purity from impurity, so grammar shows the distinction between
chaste and unchaste words. Every body is acquainted with
the truth of the above statement. No body can deny its truth.
The truth of the said statement may be easily verified even
today. It is a well-known fact that there is a gulf of difference
between the speech of persons well versed in the science of
grammar and that of other persons such as the uncultured
rustic. Thus owing to the absence of training the employment
of deformed words may owe its existence to ignorance. We
shall make gratuitous assumptions if we hold that the power902
Nyayamanjari
of denotation uniformly belongs to chaste and deformed words.
If we learn by heart the science of grammar, we can easily
discern the difference between chaste and unchaste words.
There is a standing rule that chaste words are denotative but
unchaste words are not. Hence, we are in a position to con-
clude that all charges, levelled against our hypothesis by our
objectors, are refuted. One objection still remains unanswered.
It is this that there is no source of valid knowledge which
points to the chastity of a word.
The chastity of a word is not a perceptible property. There is
no mark which helps to infer it. The authoritative works do not
reveal it. Therefore, the hypothesis of chastity is full of defects.
The chastity of a word is fit to be perceived with the aid of the
authoritative works
There is another verse which contradicts the findings of the
above verse. It says: The chastity of a word is a perceptible
property. There is a mark which points to the existence of
chastity. The authoritative works reveal it. Therefore, the
hypothesis of chastity is not defective,
As we visualise the purity of water not contaminated by a
piece of floating hair etc., so the auditory perception of the
chastity of a word, its proper accent, the actual order of its
constituent letters and such other properties are correctly pre-
sented to our consciousness. This awareness is neither indecisive
nor contradicted by another true judgment nor is produced by
a defective sense-organ, viz, ears. The ascertainment of the truth
of the said auditory perception is nothing but the clear and distinct
auditory perception of a word which is a collection of letters.
When we judge a piece of auditory perception as untrue the
perception possesses a contrary character. The defects which
invalidate its truth have been exactly defined. Hence, we hold
that the chastity or the unchastity of word is directly cognised
by our sense-organ.
The objectors come forward with a pertinent question which
is as follows: If the chastity or the unchastity of a word had
been directly perceived with our ordinary sense-organ then
persons whose intellect has not developed under the tutelage of
the teachers of grammar would have been directly acquainted903
Chastity of a word as a perceptible property
with the said properties (chastity or unchastity) of a word.
But it is a fact that such persons do not perceive the chastity or
unchastity of a word only with their ears. Therefore, the
chastity or unchastity of a word is not a perceptible property.
our
The upholders of the above hypothesis contend that the said
objection does not hold good. The complete statement of our
hypothesis is this that the said property is grasped by our
auditory sense-organ if it receives the aid of instructions from
a sound grammarian. In other words, though our naked ears
cannot detect it yet our trained ears are competent enough to
do it. This is what we admit. Similarly, we cannot deny
that Brāhmaṇahood is perceptible since it is perceived with
eyes which have improved under the instructions
of the Sastras. Some logicians have advanced arguments
in favour of our hypothesis. If one goes up the peak of a
mountain and sees an object below from the top of the moun-
tain, then one cannot say that the said perception has not been
rightly designated. Or, if the truth of determinate perception
is established, perception of objects qualified by words has
Let us cite another well-known
been also proved to be true.
Suppose, a man sees a jack-fruit
parallel case of perception.
tree in front of him for the first time. An experienced man
who is conversant with the name of this tree comes there and
initiates him into its name. He teaches him that the name of
this tree is 'Panasa' (jack-fruit tree). He remembers the word
of the experienced man and sees the tree. His eyes in co-opera-
tion with the memory of the said name produce a piece of
one acquires the
knowledge intimately associated with words in the form
"This is a jack-fruit tree."
relation of denotation holding between a name and the object
named, a piece of verbalised knowledge of the above description
is unavoidable. The author of the Nyâya-sūtra realises that
this piece of word-penetrated knowledge is of course perceptual.
But this is not the only form of perception. In order to give
a clear expression to his view he adds the word 'avyapadeśya'
to the definition of perception which has been recorded in his
The initial perception which arises from the sense-object
sūtra.
contact only is called 'indeterminate perception'. It is not
one communicates his perceptual
word-penetrated. When
Thus when904
Nyāyamañjari
knowledge to others it
others it is always word-penetrated. The
memory of the word (the above name), instructed by an exper-
ienced person, and the eyes jointly produce the second percep-
tion that this is a jack-fruit-tree. This is an instance of visual
perception. This is the account of the above logicians. Simi-
larly, in the present case the auditory sense-organ, accompanied
by the instruction imparted by a person well versed in grammar,
grasps directly the chastity or unchastity of a word. Hence,
the above properties of a word are perceptible but not otherwise.
The above logicians have also cited other ways of determining
Brahmanhood at the sight of a man. In a country where the
moral code is well maintained by the efficient administration
of an influential king the good conduct of a person reveals that
he is a Brahman. A king ably governs a particular country in
accordance with the code of Manu and other distinguished
law-givers. Owing to the personal influence of the king there
are persons who observe the duties of their caste and different
stages of life. Nobody belonging to a lower caste, can pose as
a member of a higher caste, putting on the garb of a member
of a higher caste and adopt a higher profession in that state.
During the reign of such a king if we notice the good conduct
of a particular person, we at once recognise his Brahmanhood.
This recognition is direct. Similarly, when we notice that some
persons have applied themselves to a work, hearing a distinct
word we gather the sense of the word from their activities. We
also remember the rules of grammar and find out the formation
of a word. We find out its root and suffix. In the case of a verb
we notice such an inflesion as represents its tense and number
With regard to the structure of a word we also take into
consideration other points, viz., the dropping of a letter,
the super-addition of a letter, the supersession of a letter
or a syllable by another letter or syllable and such other
points. All these things constitute the infallible sign of
the chastity of a word or a sentence. If the said infallible mark
is present in a word and the word conveys a meaning then we
rightly infer that the word is chaste. The authoritative work,
viz., Vedic and Smrti Literature instructs us to use chaste
words such as madhu (honey) ctc. during the observance of a
sacrificial rite so that the institutor of a sacrifice surely derivesChastity of a word as a perceptible property
905
the result of the said sacrifice, viz. heavenly bliss since the use
of chaste words during the performance of a sacrifice is bene-
ficial to a sacrifice. The Sastras instruct that if a learned
person uses unchaste words during the performance of a rite
then he commits a sin which hinders the completion of a rite,
They also bear evidence to the existence of the language of
the common people who use non-Sanskritic words (unchaste
words).
Now, an objector opposes the above view and holds that if
the nature of unchaste words is previously determined like
kalanja (a kind of fruit or the meat of a dear, killed by a
poisoned arrow) then an injunction or a prohibition has room
for working upon it. But the Sastras say nothing about the
nature of unchaste words. It is not also proper to think that
the nature of unchaste words is implied by an injunction. This
point has been stated before. The upholders of the hypothesis
in question meet this objection. They hold that there is an
element of truth in the above objection. But it is also a truism
that Vedic literature and Dharma Šāstras furnish us with instru-
ctions on virtuous and vicious deceds. From the above state-
ment it is implied that one should use chaste words and avoid
the use of unchaste words. But it is also a bounden duty
for a dutiful man to ascertain the nature of chaste and uncha-
ste words since the injunction or the prohibition presupposes the
definite knowledge of such words. Such knowledge is also
true. It cannot be disregarded since an injunction requires it.
Or another solution of the above problem is possible. Pāṇini
has quoted a passage from the Smṛti Šāstra as an authoritative
one. On the strength of its validity a Vedic injunction which
enjoins the use of chaste words as the basis of the said Smṛti
passage may be assumed.
We have no access to a Vedic injunction which enjoins the
sipping of water before the commencement of a religious deed.
But Smrti works furnish us with this instruction. We postulate
a Vedic injunction as the basis of the instruction, given by the
Smrti works. Therefore, the validity of the hypothetical Vedic
injunction should not be challenged. Therefore, the chastity of a
word comes within the province of the Sastras. A person, skilled
in the use of language, uses unalloyed chaste words. GoodNyayamanjari
speeches, delivered by such a person, consist of the faultless order
of letters. Their style is elegant and vigorous. They command
applause from the learned scholars. They are a class in them-
selves. But the utterances of the rustic people consist of ill-
chosen letters which mar the development of feelings or senti-
ments. They, being very harsh, irritate the mind of the audi-
ence. Everybody has direct experience of difference between
the speech of a learned man and that of a vulgar person. With
the aid of a grammar only we are in a position to ascertain the
purity of the faultless speech of a learned person. Therefore,
the distinction between chaste and unchaste words is not baseless.
The Vedic passages such as "A Brāhmaṇa should not speak the
language of the uncultured people and should not also use
distorted words since a deformed word is as good as a word of
the rustic people", being interpreted, point to the efficacy of
employing chaste words.
906
The objector has raised a point which runs thus: There is
an injunction that one should speak chaste words. It is regu-
lative in its character. There is also a prohibition that one
should not speak unchaste words. Such a prohibition is meaning-
less. Therefore, the said Vedic passage carries no weight.
This point is not forceful. If there is an injunction that one
should drink water and if there is a prohibition that one should
not drink fire then the said prohibition becomes absurd since it
has no scope. But the above prohibition is not of that character.
The objector may argue that the very injunction that one
should use chaste words implies that one should not use un-
chaste words. Therefore such a prohibition is absolutely
unnecessary. The reply to it is as follows. As the non-Aryans
have no status in the society of the Aryans so unchaste words
have no place in the classical language (i.e., Sanskrit Language).
Therefore they are not worthy of being used. But our exper-
ience says that the unchaste words as well convey their sense.
Therefore, the use of unchaste words has a possibility. So the
above prohibition is significant. Though all worldly transact-
ions may be conducted alike by chaste and unchaste words yet
the use of chaste words is conducive to merit. This injunction
stands on the same footing with another injunction that one907
Chastity of a word as a perceptible property
should take his meal, facing the East. These injunctions serve
no worldly interest. Their goal is merit.
the
As a line of distinction has not been drawn between chaste
and unchaste words so one apprehends that it is an impossible
feat to teach all chaste words since one has got to instruct them
one by one. This objection which has been raised before has
been solved. We have elaborately proved that the true nature
of a chaste word is both perceived and inferred. As a chaste
word is recognised so rules may be easily prescribed concerning
chaste words. Thus all sophism which centres round
definition of the chastity of a word stands refuted. We have
said that a word is chaste if it obeys the rules of grammar and
conveys a meaning. The chastity is a universal. It belongs
to all homogeneous words just like the universal of cowness.
Or, it is not a universal. It is the common property of all
chaste words like păcakatva- the common property of all cooks.
Though the chastity of a word is a common properly yet it acts
as a differentia. The net result of this assumption is this that
all our transactions with all chaste words are made by means of
it. The chastity of a word is a common property shared by all
chaste words. Hence, it connotes all homogeneous chaste words.
Or, let expressiveness be equivalent to the chastity of a word.
Let us accept your suggestion. Though your suggestion is
accepted yet the rule, viz., "One should speak chaste words
only" may be prescribed with community. Though an un-
chaste word does not convey a meaning, yet one may suspect
that it has a meaning since on hearing it the basic chaste word
is recalled to mind. This benefit of doubt may accelerate the
The above rule will be fruitful since it
use of unchaste words.
will check the possible use of unchaste words. As the above
rule imposes restriction, it, truly speaking, amounts
negative rule since its main function is to dissuade persons from
Thus a regulative rule is de facto a
using unchaste words.
negative rule (parisamkhyā vidhi). Shall we hold that the
rule in question has double functions? Our solution to this
problem is this that if a rule has double character, no serious
defect defaces it. Let us discuss another objection. If an in-
junctive statement holds out a promise of reward then it is to
be treated as a recommendatory statement since it has no
to aNyayamanjari
independent voice. If one follows a recommendatory state-
ment, he acquires no merit. If one does not follow it, he
commits no sin. . Thus, the rule which governs the use of
chaste words and dissuades one from the use of unchaste words
deserves to be neglected. This is the sum and substance of the
above objection. But it does not stand to reason.
Moreover, an objection has been raised that it is an impossi-
ble feat to instruct all chaste words, one after another, since
chaste and unchaste words have not been properly defined.
This objection has been met since it has been elaborately stated
before that the essence of chaste and unchaste words is directly
cognised or inferred. On the basis of this essential property,
regulative injunctions may be easily framed. Hence all
sophistical arguments centering round the definition of the
chastity of a word have been silenced. The definition of
a chaste word is this. A chaste word is such as obeys the
rules of grammar and is expressive. Thus the chastity of a
word is expressiveness coupled with obedience to the rules of
granımar. This common property behaves like a universal,
e.g., the universal of cowness. It belongs to all individuals
coming under the same class. Or, chastity is not a universal.
But it is a common property like the essence of all cooks
(pacakatva). Though it is not a universal yet it serves the
purpose of a differentia, since the common property of all in-
dividuals belonging to a class is a distinguishing mark. The
net result is that all general statements about chaste words may
be made on the strength of this common property. In other
words, generalisation of all chaste words is possible.
Or, though we agree to your proposal that the chastity of a
word is its expressiveness yet the rule,."One should use chaste
words only" deserves application. An objection may be raised
to this effect that as an unchaste word, being not expressive,
has no chance to be used, what is the utility of the above rule?
Though an unchaste word is not expressive yet the use of such
words is not impossible. Let us take a hypothetical case. On
hearing an unchaste word, a person may remember a chaste
word. He may doubt whether the word conveys a sense or not.
Relying on the benefit of this doubt the use of unchaste words
may be in vogue. In order to do away with such possibilities,
908909
Chastity of a word as a perceptible property
the above rule will be significant. Now, a new difficulty arises,
A regulative injunction has both positive and negative imports.
But in this case the import of the said injunction is truly speak-
ing, negative. Thus it is more of the nature of a parisamkhyā
vidhi than that of a niyama vidhi since its function is mainly
negative. Hence, an injunction is saddled with the functions
of two distinct types of injunctions. The objectors think that
it is objectionable to hold that an injunction discharges two
functions. But our contention is that such functioning on the
part of an injunction is not objectionable.
The Vedic
Let us discuss another objection raised by our opponents.
The purport of their criticism is as follows:-
sentences which speak of the reward or the punishment of an
action are means to an end. They enjoy no independence.
Thus, they are only recommendatory in their character. As
merit or demerit has no connection with rites suggested by
recommendatory sentences so one who employs either chaste
But the
or unchaste words acquires neither merit nor demerit thereby.
Though a re-
This is the sum and substance of the above objection.
above objection does not stand to reason.
commendatory sentence is not an end in itself yet it insists
upon the restricted use of chaste words. Now, .if one follows
it, he acquires merit. But the use of unchaste words is the
violation of an injunction, i.e., of the above rule. Hence, a
person who employs unchaste words commits a sin. The result
is that demerit accrues to him. Now, our opponent may
criticise this solution. He may point out that the recommen-
datory sentence "Juhu is to be made up of leaves" should
have also connection with merit or demerit. In other words,
if one follows the instruction, given by the recommendatory
sentence, he acquires merit and if one does not follow it, he
commits a sin. Our answer to this charge is this that if such a
consequence happens, wherein lies a defect? Let us clarify the
standpoint of the Naiyāyikas. The Naiyãyikas do not accept
the division of the recommendatory sentences into two classes,
viz., fruitful and fruitless. They have also shown that the consti-
tuent words of a recommendatory sentence convey a distinct
meaning and purport and differ from those who believe in the
hypotheses that there are fruitless recommendatory sentences inNyayamanjari
independent voice. If one follows a recommendatory state-
ment, he acquires no merit. If one does not follow it, he
commits no sin. . Thus, the rule which governs the use of
chaste words and dissuades one from the use of unchaste words
deserves to be neglected. This is the sum and substance of the
above objection. But it does not stand to reason.
Moreover, an objection has been raised that it is an impossi-
ble feat to instruct all chaste words, one after another, since
chaste and unchaste words have not been properly defined.
This objection has been met since it has been elaborately stated
before that the essence of chaste and unchaste words is directly
cognised or inferred. On the basis of this essential property,
regulative injunctions may be easily framed. Hence all
sophistical arguments centering round the definition of the
chastity of a word have been silenced. The definition of
a chaste word is this. A chaste word is such as obeys the
rules of grammar and is expressive. Thus the chastity of a
word is expressiveness coupled with obedience to the rules of
grammar. This common property behaves like a universal,
e.g., the universal of cowness. It belongs to all individuals
coming under the same class. Or, chastity is not a universal.
But it is a common property like the essence of all cooks
(păcakatva). Though it is not a universal yet it serves the
purpose of a differentia, since the common property of all in-
dividuals belonging to a class is a distinguishing mark. The
net result is that all general statements about chaste words may
be made on the strength of this common property. In other
words, generalisation of all chaste words is possible.
Or, though we agree to your proposal that the chastity of a
word is its expressiveness yet the rule,."One should use chaste
words only" deserves application. An objection may be raised
to this effect that as an unchaste word, being not expressive,
has no chance to be used, what is the utility of the above rule?
Though an unchaste word is not expressive yet the use of such
words is not impossible. Let us take a hypothetical case.
hearing an unchaste word, a person may remember a chaste
word. He may doubt whether the word conveys a sense or not.
Relying on the benefit of this doubt the use of unchaste words
may be in vogue. In order to do away with such possibilities,
On
908Chastity of a word as a perceptible property
the above rule will be significant. Now, a new difficulty arises,
A regulatíve injunction has both positive and negative imports.
But in this case the import of the said injunction is truly speak-
ing, negative. Thus it is more of the nature of a parisankhyā
vidhi than that of a niyama vidhi since its function is mainly
negative. Hence, an injunction is saddled with the functions
of two distinct types of injunctions. The objectors think that
it is objectionable to hold that an injunction discharges two
functions. But our contention is that such functioning on the
part of an injunction is not objectionable.
Let us discuss another objection raised by our opponents.
The purport of their criticism is as follows - The Vedíc
sentences which speak of the reward or the punishment of an
action are means to an end. They enjoy no independence.
Thus, they are only recommendatory in their character. As
merit or demerit has no connection with rites suggested by
recommendatory sentences so one who employs either chaste
or unchaste words acquires neither merit nor demerit thereby.
This is the sum and substance of the above objection. But the
above objection does not stand to reason. Though a re-
commendatory sentence is not an end in itself yet it insists
upon the restricted use of chaste words. Now, if one follows
it, he acquires merit. But the use of unchaste words is the
violation of an injunction, i.e., of the above rule. Hence, a
person who employs unchaste words commits a sin. The result
is that demerit accrues to him. Now, our opponent may
criticise this solution. He may point out that the recommen-
datory sentence "Juhu is to be made up of leaves" should
have also connection with merit or demerit. In other words,
if one follows the instruction, given by the recommendatory
sentence, he acquires merit and if one does not follow it, he
commits a sin. Our answer to this charge is this that if such a
consequence happens, wherein lies a defect? Let us clarify the
standpoint of the Naiyāyikas. The Naiyāyikas do not accept
the division of the recommendatory sentences into two classes,
viz., fruitful and fruitless. They have also shown that the consti-
tuent words of a recommendatory sentence convey a distinct
meaning and purport and differ from those who believe in the
hypotheses that there are fruitless recommendatory sentences in
909Nyayamanjari
the explanation of these words. This point has been discussed
before. Let us stop here. Hence, the Naiyāyikas hold that recom-
mendatory sentences such as "If a word is properly employed, it
fulfils our desires in the next world" are fruitful. The above re-
commendatory sentence, cited by us, points to the study of the
science of grammar, since if one does not go through grammar,
he can hardly use chaste and correct words. Thus, the purport
of the above sentence is that one should read grammar. It is
virtually an injunction. The other recommendatory sentences
should be interpreted in this light.
910
The opponents have also raised a question, viz., "Why has
not Panini, himself, the author of grammatical sūtras, men-
tioned the utility of the study of grammar". Such an objection
does not land us in difficulty, since the people all over India
from the Himalayan region up to the Cape Comorin know very
well that grammar is ancillary to the Vedas. If the Vedas are
useless then let them who are ignorant of the Vedas be blessed.
All Vedic acts which yield tangible and transcendental result
will be given up. The baser persons who fall outside the pale
of four castes will win a victory over us.
Now, let us turn our attention to the other aspect of the
problem. If the study of the Vedas is fruitful, the Vedas along
with their ancillary sciences serve our purpose. The accessory
sciences have got no distinct utility to materialise. There is no
need of assuming any separate mission which they fulfil. No-
body cares to expect a distinct fruit from the Prayāja sacrifice
since a Prayǎja sacrifice is subordinate to the Darśa-Purņamāsa
sacrifice. As Pāṇini, the author of grammatical sūtras, is aware
of the character of the science of grammar, he has made no
mention of its utility.
But the commentators on the Sūtras of Pāṇini have shown
the principal utility of grammar and other utilities which follow
from it in order to promote the interest of their audience.
Hence, nobody should be taken to task.
Now, the objectors may put questions, viz., "How has
grammar become ancillary to the Vedas? What benefit do the
Vedas derive from grammar? But these are very trifling ques
tions. The questions like the above ones do not stand to reason
since either the Vedas and their ancillary sciences are eternalChastity of a word as a perceptible property
or they have been composed by God. Now, we should prove
how Panini, Pingala, Parāśara, etc., are designated as authors of
several sciences. They are so called because they have compos-
ed them either concisely or elaborately. But really speaking,
the meaning of the Vedas and its knowledge stand on the same
footing with the Vedas. They are either eternal or own their
existence to God. Hence, nobody should be taken to task on
this issue. The sources of knowledge which comprise the Vedas
and their ancillary sciences within them are counted to be
fourteen in number.
911
The sources of knowledge are fourteen in number. They are
as follows: "The four Vedas, six ancillary sciences, Mimāṁsă,
the extensive science of logic, the Purăņas and the codes of
Law (Dharmasastras) constitute the sources of knowledge.
Many sophistical arguments have been put forward against the
refinement of words. They simply exhibit verbosity but do not
stand upon the solid rock of reality. The objectors have said
before, "Which words fall outside the range of chaste words?
What is the refinement of a word ?" In order to avoid all these
problems we do not subscribe to the hypothesis that the science
of grammar owes its existence to the usages of the authoritative
persons. We have already stated that the science of grammar
is co-eternal with the Vedas. Though the science of grammar is
eternal yet it might have been taken up by an ignorant person
in the obscure past and might have been passing through the
circle of ignorant persons. Thus the science of grammar has a
little significance. In order to meet this possible objection we
hold that the science of grammar is based upon the usages of
the cultured persons as the smṛti literature is based upon the
Vedas. This literature prescribes such duties as have been
enjoined by the Vedas and does never prescribe such ones as
have been enjoined by books other than the Vedas. The words
which have been taught by the science of grammar as chaste
ones are seen to be used as such by the cultured persons; just
as the teaching of the medical science that a sick person is
cured of his malady taking myrobalan is corroborated by the
practice of reliable persons. Pâņini has not composed the
science of grammar having learnt it from the cultured persona-
ges. Caraka has not also composed his medical treatise, havingNyayamanjari
ascertained the properties of various substances by means of
experimental method since the beginning of the cultured persons i
cannot be traced out. Thus, the fallacy of a vicious circle is
met. The science of grammar does not originate from the
cultured persons.
912
The objectors have pointed out many incorrect usages of the
cultured persons. They have also referred to a list of unchaste
words which have been used by the ancient sages. With regard
to these illustrations the expert linguists have shown the line
of defence. In order to restrain the unnecessary enlargement of
this volume we cut short all these discussions.
The objectors have found fault with the definitions of a verb
and a non-inflected word and with the rules which govern case-
endings etc. Many erudite scholars have reviewed the said
criticisms and given a fit reply to them. Now, it may be
objected that these reviews may be re-examined and so on, ad
infinitum. In other words, no decision will be arrived at. The
objection does not hold good, since the path which has been
shown by the expert linguists is free from disturbances created
by the thieves in the shape of destructive critics.
If we follow the above line of defence then the other objections
raised by our critics are also met with. The said objections are
as follows: the treatise of grammar is incomplete since it does
not contain a few words such as sobhā, cīrṇa, vareṇya, gaṇeya,
bhrājiṣņu, kāndiśika etc. The science of grammar falls short of
the definitions of memory, doubt, illusion. etc. These defects
have been imagined by some critics. These objections have
been throughly answered by the grammarians themselves in
own works.
their
The Sutra of Brhaspati is no sūtra at all. It is not worth
considering. He has demonstrated his vain scholarship by
advancing a few sophistical arguments which have been manu-
factured by his pure imagination. We need not enter into the
contents of his arguments since they are deliberately
misleading.
In fine, the science of grammar is stainless by its very nature
and is clegant. It cannot be soiled ifone throws the dust of
slander at it.
fEfficacy of Vedic Grammar
The Study of Grammar is Compulsory
The science of grammar should be studied by all since it is
the purest of all sciences and is held in esteem by all persons.
It is a means to four human ends. One who wishes to realise
them should study it. Moreover, one who intends to obtain
mastery over polished language should study it.
Water is purer than the earth. Verses of the Vedas are purer
than water. The great sages have stated that the science of gra-
mmar occupies a similar place among the three Vedas, viz., the
Samaveda, the Yajurveda and the Rgveda.
has also been said to eulogise the science of grammar. The
persons who have sanctified their mouth (tongue) by studying
grammar are gods but not men. They are gods who, having
assumed the forms of human beings, walk on this earth.
It is better to be born as mute whales in the miry deep water
than to be born as men whose speech is not refined by the
study of grammar.
Manu, also, has said in his own work that a scholar who is
well-versed in the science of grammar and a scholar who is well-
up in the Mimāṁså system purify their lineage. He says that
he who can analyse a word, and he who can correctly in-
terpret the Vedic sentences employed in sacrifices, sanctify
their lineage.
913
Puşpadanta has also said to this effect. I have been cursed by
the goddess Durgă. As a result of it my citizenship from the city
af Siva has been cancelled. Wretched as I am I lead the life of
this dirty
a captíve. If I am to be born in the next life on
earth full of miseries then I may see the light of day in such a
place where my ears are filled up with the charming uttera-
nces of grammarians, utterances which are as clean as the flow
of milk-emitting sprays of sweet nectar.
Those who have closely studied the science of grammar and
obtained mastery over refined language may have an easy access
to the Vedic words which have diverse forms. Other persons
also may thoroughly understand the meaning of the Vedas with
the aid of the Vedic lexicon (Nirukta) which is intimately
connected with the Vedas. How is it that the Vedas shall not !
the source of valid knowledge? In other words, is there --914
Nyayamanjari
sense in the objection that the Vedas will remain for ever a
sealed book?
The Vedic collection and the science of grammar do not
mutually depend upon each other. One can independently
learn the science of grammar. If he acquires proficiency in
language he can clearly understand the meaning of the Vedic
texts. Thus, the charge of mutual dependence is answered.
Those who have not swerved an inch from the proper line
of expression and remain devoted to the Vedas have held the
science of grammar in esteem. How can the eternal science of
grammar which has been recognised by Patañjali, the celebrat-
ed teacher, enjoy the same status with the grammar of rustic
words?
The Concluding Portion
The barbarians have an access to a few loopholes. They have
proclaimed loudly the falsity of the eternal Sastras and heaped
contumely on them by means of demonic language. We have
refuted all their charges. The truth of the Vedas remains
unshaken.
In fine, we have discussed the four sources of valid know-
ledge, viz., perception, inference, comparison and verbal testi-
mony in accordance with the traditional point of view. Let
those who will act upon these sources of valid knowledge realise
